
                               1 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE ;
Chase Names Chairman Of Home Mortgage Unit

BYLINE: By Agis Salpukas

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it had named Harry H. Hummer
to the new position of chairman of its Chase Home Mortgage Corporation, its
mortgage banking subsidiary.

A spokesman for Chase said the company wanted to be stronger in the home
mortgage field and had decided to make some executive changes to achieve that
goal.

Donald Vaden, who is 47 and had been president of the mortgage unit, was named
vice chairman. Fred B. Koons, who is 40, was named president of the unit. He had
been executive vice president.

The subsidiary, which is based in Montvale, N.J., and has 25 offices around the
country, has been profitable, according to the Chase spokesman, who asked not to
be identified.

Mr. Hummer, who is 46, has been the chief credit officer for Chase Manhattan
Bank's consumer sector since 1978. He joined Chase in 1966 and worked mainly in
the international sector, serving for a time as country manager for Vietnam.

''We feel providing mortgage services is very important to the consumer,'' Mr.
Hummer said in a telephone interview. ''It is a basic consumer service which we
must supply if we are going to be a major player in the consumer market.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHESTER A. RONNING IS DEAD; VETERAN CANADIAN DIPLOMAT

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


Chester A. Ronning, the Canadian diplomat who carried out a confidential mission
to Hanoi in 1966 in an attempt to get peace talks going between the United
States and North Vietnam, died of pneumonia yesterday. He had celebrated his
90th birthday on Dec. 13.

Mr. Ronning died in the Bethany Nursing Home in Camrose, a small city in the
Canadian province of Alberta, where he had headed the Camrose Lutheran College
before joining Royal Canadian Air Force intelligence in World War II. In 1945 he
joined Canada's foreign service.

Mr. Ronning was made a Companion of the Order of Canada, the country's highest
honor, in 1971 and was awarded the Order of Excellence from Alberta in February.

Born in China of missionary parents and fluent in Chinese, Mr. Ronning was
widely regarded as Canada's leading expert on China.

He was chosen by Canada for the Hanoi mission because he was known to believe,
as he put it, in ''the necessity and importance of fundamental revolutionary
changes in Asia.''

Old Friend of Zhou Enlai


He endorsed what he called ''the aspirations of the people of countries like
Vietnam and China for complete independence'' and was an old friend of Prime
Minister Zhou Enlai of China.

Mr. Ronning, an energetic, blunt- spoken former ambassador with a shock of white
hair, was brought back from recent retirement for the Hanoi mission because, as
he wrote in his 1974 book, ''A Memoir of China in Revolution,'' the American
bombing was ''getting dangerously close to the border of China.''

The bombing had led Canada to fear that China might intervene militarily in the
Vietnam War as it had in Korea. And so in 1966 Mr. Ronning, after obtaining the
approval of the State Department in Washington, flew to Hanoi.

He reported in his book that the Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, gave what seemed
to be a hint over tea. Mr. Ronning asked whether the Prime Minister ''was
implying that the United States need only stop the bombing for informal talks to
begin.''

The Prime Minister's reply was that ''if the United States Government declares
that it will stop all military action and attacks'' on North Vietnamese
territory ''for good, and unconditionally, we will talk.''

'Too Good to Be True'


''I could scarcely believe my ears,'' Mr. Ronning wrote. ''This was too good to
be true.'' He went to Washington and relayed the response to William P. Bundy,
then an Assistant Secretary of State.

Days went by without an answer. It became evident, Mr. Ronning wrote, that the
State Department ''did not consider the proposal sufficiently important to give
it the priority a serious proposal usually receives.''

Eventually, he related, Mr. Bundy passed on an answer ''to the effect that the
United States would stop bombing North Vietnam only if Hanoi would stop
assisting the Vietcong in men and military supplies.''

''It was with a heavy heart,'' Mr. Ronning wrote, that he returned in June to
Hanoi, where the ''reply, as I expected, was an outright refusal even to
consider such an abject, impossible condition.''

It was not until March 31, 1968, that President Johnson - wanting to get the
North Vietnamese to the negotiating table - halted the bombing except in an area
just north of the demilitarized zone. In so doing, Mr. Johnson essentially
accepted the conditions that Mr. Ronning had originally conveyed. Soon
afterward, the President announced that the North Vietnamese had agreed to
negotiate.

Before his Hanoi mission, Mr. Ronning was counselor and charge d'affaires of the
Canadian Embassy in China from 1946 to 1951; head of the American and Far
Eastern Division in the Department of External Affairs from 1951 to 1953;
Ambassador to Norway and Iceland from 1954 to 1957, and High Commissioner, the
equivalent of Ambassador, to India from 1957 to 1964.

Four Periods in China


All told, Mr. Ronning spent four six- year periods in China, as a child, a
teen-ager, a teacher and a diplomat. He was in Nanjing when the Chinese
Nationalist capital fell to the Chinese Communists in 1949. In 1951 he was
directed by Canada to close the embassy and return home.

In April 1971 Mr. Ronning visited China as its Government's guest. He was
invited to tea and to dinner by Prime Minister Zhou, who twitted him for having
left the diplomatic service at the age of 71.

Mr. Zhou, then 73, said with a smile, ''Take me now, why should I retire?''

In 1979 the National Film Board of Canada produced a documentary ''China
Mission: The Chester Ronning Story,'' which was shown on television and in
theaters across the country.

In 1983 the Chinese Government invited him to the country in recognition of his
work in furthering relations between China and Canada. He was honored at a
banquet in the Great Hall of the People, and most of his children joined him in
celebrating his birthday in Fancheng, the city where he was born. The occasion
beame a celebration in which most of the population and officials of the town
joined.

Mr. Ronning's wife, the former Inga Marie Horte, whom he married in 1918, died
in 1967. He is survived by two sisters, Victoria and Hazel; a brother, Talbert;
four daughters, Audrey - whose husband, Seymour Topping, is managing editor of
The New York Times - Kjeryn, Meme and Sylvia; two sons, Alton and Harmon; 24
grandchildren and 14 great-grandchildren.

A funeral service will be conducted at 2 P.M. Friday in the Camrose Lutheran
Church.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chester A. Ronning during a visit to China in 1971

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBELS BATTLE HANOI'S TROOPS FOR 7TH DAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Dec. 31


Artillery and small-arms fire could be heard echoing across the border from
Cambodia today, where non-Communist guerrillas fought Vietnamese troops for a
seventh straight day.

The heaviest fighting was concentrated at the rebel camp of Rithisen, two miles
across the border from this small Thai village. Vietnamese troops overran the
camp on Christmas Day, and guerrillas of the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front have been trying to take it back ever since.

More than 60,000 people opposed to the Government in Phnom Penh lived at
Rithisen. The area is now a battlefield, with ''almost all'' of its buildings
destroyed, the camp's chief civilian administrator, Tu Tun, said in a interview
this morning at an evacuation site called Nern Din Daeng.

At other Cambodian insurgent camps scattered along the Thai border, there was a
atmosphere of tension as the guerrillas - and Thai troops nearby - braced for a
major New Year's offensive by the Vietnamese.

Thai Soldiers Building Bunkers


The Thai soldiers, who are not involved in the fighting but who are vulnerable
to stray shells, were building more sandbagged bunkers along their border
fortifications.

Meanwhile, at hastily contructed civilian refugee centers in Thailand, to which
tens of thousands of Cambodians have fled, there was exhaustion, misery and
hunger.

But there were also small efforts by people who have already spent years in
flight and deprivation to start another new life in another new place. At the
Nern Din Daeng evacuation camp - also known as Red Hill - two boys were getting
haircuts at a barbershop built of bamboo poles and plastic sheeting. Along a
footpath, women were selling bits of fried food.

On Sunday, the Rithisen came under heavy artillery attack, with shells landing
every few minutes. Wounded soldiers were brought out in a nonstop guerrilla
ambulance operation to be treated a makeshift, roadside emergency center run by
medical officers of the International Committtee of the Red Cross.

This morning the roadside center had expanded from the shade of one tree to
three - one tree trunk was marked ''OPD'' to mark the ''outpatient department.''

Under the second tree, two young Cambodians, attached to intravenous bottles
suspended from package-wrapping twine, rested on straw mats. A man with a badly
damaged foot recuperated under the third tree. The sun was hot, the earth
parched and dry, and the undergrowth is lacerating at this time of year.

No Certainty on Casualty Total


Casualties from the fighting are not known with any certainty on either side.
Thai officers told reporters that three Cambodian rebels died today; estimates
ofthe deaths Sunday ranged from under 10 to 30.

Mr. Tu Tun, the former camp president, who is living with the refugee civilians
on the open field of grass, bamboo and scrub trees a few miles north of Nong
Samet at Nern Din Daeng, said in an interview Sunday that he believed ''about
50'' people had died since the fighting began. Hundreds have been wounded.

Today, Chea Sokha, 27 years old, who fled Phnom Penh only four months ago to
join the guerrillas at Rithisen, said he believed that at least a hundred
civilians had died when the attack began on Christmas Day. He said the dead were
near the camp's military training center and the market, two targets hit first
by the Vietnamese.

Tonight, there were reports from guerrillas that the Vietnamese still held the
training center. Mr. Tu Tun said his military commanders had told him that the
guerrillas had retaken two-thirds of the camp.

Fears of New Attack


There were fears that the Vietnamese would exact a higher toll before giving up
the camp, possibly to mount a similar attack on the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front headquarters at Ampil. All civilians have already been
evacuated from that site.

Vietnam and Cambodia have given no reports of casualties or details of the
offensive.

At the Nong Chan camp, south of Nong Samet, which the Vietnamese attacked in
late November, guerrilla forces and civilians have have begun to return, aid
officials say.

A European volunteer, however, said that while the Nong Chan camp had not been
destroyed, as was earlier reported, the retreating Vietnamese had left small
mines in the ceilings and on doors of houses, so that returning residents, eager
to go home, were being killed and wounded.

The camps now under attack by the Vietnamese and their Cambodian allies are
border settlements controlled by one or another of three anti- Phnom Penh
guerrilla groups - the non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front,
the Communist Khmer Rouge, and the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Coalition Is Not United


The three groups are part of an often- uneasy coalition that does not fight in
close alliance. On the contrary, there have been attacks by soldiers of one
group on another. The division is greatest between the two non-Communist groups
and the Khmer Rouge, whom many Cambodians on both sides of the Vietnamese
question oppose.

About 250,000 Cambodians live in the border camps, which are out of the reach of
most Western aid officials because the people in them, technically Cambodians
living in Cambodia, are not considered refugees. The United Nations Border
Relief Operation, however, has provided the camps' civilians with food,
education and other social services.

Two months ago, Mr. Tu Tun took a reporter to lunch at Rithisen's Women's
Center, where the walls were decorated with nutritional charts and food had been
prepared by women learning the rudiments of a healthy, hygenic kitchen.

The people in the border settlements are not like the refugees living in
established centers in Thailand, awaiting resettlement abroad.

Thailand allows the residents of the border camps to move back and forth into
its territory only temporarily.

Many Have Fled Before


Some of the people camped at the Nern Din Daeng have fled Rithisen with every
Vietnamese dry-season offensive since the early 1980's.

In his small shelter of plastic and matting today, Keo Vong Rath, a gentle,
41-year-old man who has made this exodus three times, was trying to feed his
three small sons. Their mother had died of cancer a week before the Vietnamese
hit Rithisen.

He said when the shells began to fall at 5 A.M. on Christmas Day, he put his
three boys - ages 1, 3 and 10 - on his bicycle and fled. Holding the children,
he said, he could take little else.

Asked why the Vietnamese, who open a dry-season offensive against the rebels
every winter, were hitting the Khmer Liberation Front hardest and leaving the
Khmer Rouge, Vietnam's older enemy, more or less alone, Mr. Tu Tun said, ''They
want to teach a good lesson to anyone who would support us, here or anywhere in
the world.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Cambodia; photo of Cambodian rebels

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WITH 'WILLY,' METCALFE TAKES A NEW DIRECTION



BYLINE:
By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 835 words


In December 1980, after a loner named Mark David Chapman shot the rock star John
Lennon to death, a play began to take shape in Stephen Metcalfe's mind. A few
months later, after John W. Hinckley Jr. tried to assassinate President Reagan,
Mr. Metcalfe started to write. And now, nearly four years later, the resulting
play, ''The Incredibly Famous Willy Rivers'' has opened to favorable notices at
the WPA Theater.

''The Incredibly Famous Willy Rivers'' is at one level a play about
rock-and-roll; the title character is a star musician who achieved his greatest
fame by being shot and wounded by a fan during a televised concert. On the eve
of his comeback concert, Willy Rivers begins to realize that he is a captive of
his own public image. But Mr. Metcalfe says that rock-and- roll is only the
canvas for a broader meditation on the American obsession with fame - in music,
politics, television and violent crime.

''I was never trying to make a statement about rock-and-roll,'' Mr. Metcalfe
said in an interview in his Upper West Side neighborhood last week. ''I think I
used rock-and-roll more as the vehicle. There was a small scene that we cut
during rehearsals that was a very definite analogy between the shooting of Willy
and the assassination attempt on Reagan. We cut the line because it didn't work,
but I felt strongly that the analogy was an element I wanted in the play. You
could say it's about 'The Incredibly Famous Ronald Reagan.' ''

'We're Not Friends'


Willy Rivers himself is both a coddled manchild - who refuses to go onstage
without his favorite jacket - and a sympathetic figure who realizes he has no
true friends. Mr. Metcalfe has surrounded Rivers with variations on the theme of
glitz: a country musician who is really from Marblehead, Mass.; a calculating
reggae star; a diabolical talk-show host; the star of shoot-'em-up television
movies; the assailant, and various managers and groupies. As the television star
says to Willy Rivers at one point: ''We're not friends. We're just sort of
famous together.''

''Most people, even as they idolize show-business people, don't realize what
drives someone to do it,'' Mr. Metcalfe said. ''Now, I remember wanting to be in
a rock band. My brother played guitar, and I played drums - drove our mother
insane. But I've never understood what makes someone want to be a politician, a
power broker. Maybe it's altruism, but so often you find out it's something
worse.''

The same question, in a sense, goes to the assailant, who explains at one point
that he shot Willy because it was such an easy way to become famous. In a
psychiatric hospital, the man receives both death threats and letters from a fan
club. ''I thought long and hard,'' Mr. Metcalfe said, ''about what would, what
could, make me commit that kind of crime.''

Kaleidoscopic Style


''The Incredibly Famous Willy Rivers'' represents not only Mr. Metcalfe's
best-received play to date; but in its kaleidoscopic, stream-of-consciousness
style, it also departs from the naturalism of such earlier works as ''Vikings''
(about a family of Danish-American builders), ''Half a Lifetime'' (set at a
weekly poker night) and ''Strange Snow'' (about two Vietnam War veterans).

''I made a conscious decision to take that additional step,'' Mr. Metcalfe said.
''My own instincts - the things I like in theater - are in a very naturalistic
vein. I like 'kitchen-sink drama.' The best way to get to me is through the
stomach, not the head. But I did want to go in a different direction with 'Willy
Rivers.' I didn't want to be hemmed in.

''In the past,'' he went on, ''I was always concerned about the size of the
cast, so a theater could afford to put it on. This time, I said the hell with
it. I'm going to have characters all over the place. I didn't worry about the
set. I wrote kind of like an actor doing an improv. Once I established the
character in my head, one thing seemed to flow from another.''

First Work at WPA


Mr. Metcalfe wrote the play fitfully over four years, although he did the bulk
of the work in late 1983 and early 1984. He said he first offered ''Willy
Rivers'' to the Manhattan Theater Club, which had produced two of his
full-length plays and a one-act work, ''and they liked it but weren't really
sold on it.''

''Willy Rivers'' is his first work at the WPA, an Off Off Broadway theater at
Fifth Avenue and 19th Street.

At the age of 31, Mr. Metcalfe has only recently been able to support himself by
his writing. He worked as a squash teacher and a bartender after coming to New
York in 1976, having attended the graduate program in acting at Boston
University. But in the last several years, he has written and sold a screenplay,
been hired by film companies to rewrite two screenplays by other writers, and
won public and private playwrighting grants.

''I started out in New York writing plays for basement theaters downtown,'' Mr.
Metcalfe said. ''At least the WPA is on the second floor.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Stephen Metcalfe

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 2, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SAID TO PUT MIG-23'S IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 1


Thailand's National Security Council chief says the Soviet Union has stationed
14 MIG-23 fighter-interceptors at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, the first such
advanced planes to be based in the region.

The official, Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri, Secretary General of the
National Security Council, told the publisher of The Bangkok Post, an
English-language paper, in an interview published today that Thailand was
concerned that the Soviet Union might be tempted to use the planes in Cambodia
to support Vietnamese forces in their attacks on rebels trying to overthrow the
Phnom Penh Government.

Fighting between the Vietnamese and three Cambodian rebel factions has been
going on since mid-November, when Hanoi and its Cambodian allies began to attack
rebel camps in what has become an annual dry-season offensive. The fighting
increased last week when the Vietnamese overran the largest camp of the Khmer
Peoples National Liberation Front at Rithisen, just inside Cambodia near the
Thai border. Rebels are now trying to retake it.

A Subject for Arms Talks


Squadron Leader Prasong said in his interview with Theh Chongkhadikij, who is
considered among the most influential journalists in Thailand, that the United
States should consider what he called ''a burgeoning Soviet presence in
Vietnam'' when it begins arms- reduction talks with Moscow.

Vietnamese officials say no Soviet forces are permanently based in Cam Ranh Bay.
The installation, they say, is used only as a port of call by Moscow.

Hanoi has repeatedly said it does not intend to threaten Thailand through its
operations against Cambodian rebels. The Vietnamese, however, accuse the Thais
of collaborating with Peking in backing Khmer Rouge guerrillas who have been
fighting in Cambodia since Hanoi overthrew their Government six years ago.

Thai and Vietnamese troops occasionally clash on the Cambodian border. In the
last few days stray Vietnamese shells aimed at rebel troops have fallen in Thai
territory.

Hanoi has also accused Thailand along with China of supporting rebellion in
Vietnam itself. Peking and Bangkok have denied the charge.

Thailand's armed forces, which would like to buy American F-16 aircraft, may
revive pressure both here and in the United States if the Soviet Union is seen
to be raising the level of weapons in the region.

The F-16 request is scheduled to come up when the new Congress meets this month.


 8th Day of Combat

NONG SAMET, Thailand, Jan. 1 (AP) - Vietnamese gunners poured artillery and tank
fire on Cambodian guerrillas today, a day after Thai and Vietnamese troops
clashed. A Thai Army officer predicted heavy fighting would persist for months.

It was the eighth day of combat in and around rebel camps in Cambodia. Hundreds
of Cambodians and Vietnamese have been reported killed or wounded in the
offensive, but independent verification of the reports has been impossible.

The guerrillas said about 20 Cambodians were killed and 40 wounded Monday night
and today by Vietnamese artillery and tank fire on positions near Rithisen.

Mea Saphien, a 20-year-old guerrilla among those trying to retake Rithisen,
said: ''We had to retreat from the shelling. They rained hundreds of rounds on
us. We can see the pith helmets of the Vietnamese all over the place.''

Col. Chainarong Nunphakdee, deputy commander of Thailand's task force in the
region, told reporters after touring the area that no respite was likely until
the beginning of the rainy season, which generally comes by May.

2 Thai-Vietnamese Skirmishes


The Vietnamese prefer to fight in the dry season, when their tanks and heavy
equipment are most effective. The rebels have been most successful in assaults
during the monsoon, which favors the guerrillas' hit-and-run tactics. The
guerrillas have no artillery.

After a lull Monday, skirmishing resumed in the night at Rithisen. Much of the
rebel camp near the Thai border has been controlled by Vietnamese units since an
assault on Dec. 25 drove some 62,000 civilian residents into Thailand.

Two Thai-Vietnamese skirmishes were reported Monday. A Thai ranger patrol was
ambushed at midday in Buriram Province, Thailand, and Maj. Gen. Aroon Srivuthai
said six Thais were wounded. He said Thai troops had secured the border area by
late today and the Vietnamese had pulled back.

Also Monday, Thai soldiers used mortars to attack a lightly armed Vietnamese
patrol near the Thai border town of Klong Luek, according to a Thai officer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thai officer and his men

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 2, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DOW STOOPS TO CALM CONGRESS AND PUBLIC OPINION

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 1


Events in the nation's capital can have a profound impact on a big, powerful and
aloof corporation even when such events have little to do directly with laws and
regulations.

The Dow Chemical Company discovered this fact the hard way nearly two years ago
when evidence presented to a Congressional investigative subcommittee indicated
that the company had used political influence to weaken an Environmental
Protection Agency report on possible contamination of Dow's headquarters plant
by the highly toxic substance, dioxin. The intense publicity that followed, much
of it portraying the company as a corporate giant throwing its weight around
with little concern for the public good, took company executives aback.

Now, according to its chairman, Robert W. Lundeen, Dow is embarked on a
campaign, using some of the best talent in the company, to improve the company's
image. That image, he said, should reflect a company that is genuinely concerned
with the environment and with public health and takes seriously its
responsibilities to comply with the laws to safeguard the public from the
hazards of toxic chemicals.

Run by 'Smalltown Boys'


In the past, Mr. Lundeen said in a recent interview, the company really did not
care much what the public or the Government thought about it.  He said Dow was
run by ''smalltown boys from Texas and Michigan'' who worked their way up
through the ranks and believed that if the company obeyed the law, was a good
citizen of the communities in which it operated and made a profit, it did not
have to worry about outside opinion.

Most of the chemical products made by the company are sold to other chemical
companies and processors rather than directly to the public, so the public's
view of the company seemed irrelevant.

''We were pretty independent and pretty self-confident,'' the Dow executive
said.

Outside critics reached harsher judgments, some contending that Dow was an
arrogant, irresponsible corporate citizen whose activities harmed public health
and the environment.

Napalm and Agent Orange


Dow came under attack by activists in the 1960's for producing napalm that was
used for firebombing in Vietnam. (Mr. Lundeen said he was not part of the
decision to produce napalm but would have supported it had he been a ranking
executive at the time.) The company was also a target of protests for the
production of Agent Orange, the defoliant, also used in Vietnam, that is
suspected of causing cancer and other disease in soldiers and others who were
exposed to it.

Through it all, Dow seemed impervious to criticism, taking hard-nosed positions
on the specific issues and insisting that the critics did not know what they
were talking about. It also played a leading role in the chemical industry's
efforts to resist Federal regulation, particularly in the fight to block passage
of a Federal law requiring that inactive toxic waste sites be cleaned up with
the aid of a tax imposed on chemicals. The law was enacted in 1980 after a
number of chemical companies, including Du Pont, broke ranks with Dow to support
the legislation.

''But we continued to do our thing and said it was good enough,'' Mr. Lundeen
said.

Dow's shell of indifference was shattered, however, after its activities came
under scrutiny by a House investigative subcommittee that was looking into
reports that the Environmental Protection Agency was mismanaging the toxic waste
programs and showing favoritism to chemical companies and other businesses.

Into the White Hot Glare


The investigators presented testimony that Dow had withheld information from the
E.P.A. about dioxin contamination at its headquarters plant in Midland, Mich.,
and that Dow had been allowed by the agency's political leadership to edit and
delete references to dioxin, a highly toxic byproduct of chemical production,
from a report prepared by E.P.A. investigators.

The hearings thrust Dow into the white hot glare of attention by Congress, news
outlets and the public.

''All those awful things said about Dow and dioxin, stuff I never even heard
of,'' Mr. Lundeen said. ''You've heard about how you get the attention of a mule
by hitting it on the head with a two-by-four? Well those hearings were the
two-by-four that hit Dow over the head.''

The company said pressure to delete material from the dioxin report had come
from Washington, not Dow, and that there was no health problem in the Midland
area. Nevertheless, Dow suddenly discovered that unpopularity and lack of public
trust was bad for business.

Of Reputations and Dollar Signs


''We found that if we were perceived as not running our business in the public
interest, the public will get back at us with restrictive regulations and
laws,'' Mr. Lundeen said.  ''That is not good for business.'' Moreover, Dow's
future lies in selling more and more of its products directly to the public and,
therefore, the good will of the public is becoming increasingly important, he
said.

''Our reputation has a real dollar sign on it,'' he added.

One manifestation of Dow's new approach is that it now supports legislation to
extend and enlarge the fund for cleaning up toxic waste dumps. The five-year
program, the Superfund, is due to expire in 1985.

''We simply found that trying to block Superfund was like trying to hold back
the tide with your arm,'' Mr. Lundeen said. He added, however, that Dow and
other chemical companies would like to see some changes in the program,
including a tax on chemical wastes as well as basic chemical products.

Mr. Lundeen made it clear that while Dow was working earnestly to achieve a
better public image, it had no intention of making any substantive changes in
its operating practices, its products or its approach to the environment and
public health. He said it would not make such changes because it already
conducted itself in exemplary fashion.

Running 'Very Good Shops'


''We are not changing our standards, our principles, the way we take care of our
communities and our workers,'' he said, and he insisted that Dow had ''conducted
itself well even without rules and regulations.'' He said the company had long
handled its toxic wastes first by recovering the materials, then, if that did
not work, rendering the materials chemically inert or incinerating them to make
them harmless.

In the interview, which was held just after the Union Carbide chemical disaster
that killed thousands in Bhopal, India, Mr. Lundeen contended, ''Generally
speaking, the big chemical companies, in Europe as well as America, run very
good shops.''

''There is no substantial hazard at all from the chemical industry,'' he said.
''They are safe to work in and safe for neighborhoods.''

But because the events in Washington focused attention on chemical
manufacturers, Mr. Lundeen said, ''the good old days'' in which the Dow company
could snap its fingers at public opinion ''are gone forever.'' He sounded a bit
wistful.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Lundeen

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE SHELL CAMBODIA FOES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 245 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Jan. 2


Vietnamese troops hammered Cambodian rebel positions along the Thai-Cambodian
border today with a 40-minute artillery and mortar attack, and some fighting was
reported in the Rithisen camp.

But reports from guerrillas at the front said the attacking Vietnamese held all
key positions in the camp and that only small-scale skirmishes occurred today.
The International Red Cross said it treated 19 wounded guerrillas on the Thai
side of the border today.

In Bangkok, a Thai Foreign Ministry official said his country would protest to
the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar over a Vietnamese
intrusion Monday in which six Thai rangers were wounded. The complaint will be
forwarded to New York as soon as the details are compiled, the official said.

The Vietnamese, who have been fighting Cambodian guerrilla groups opposed to the
Phnom Penh Government installed by Hanoi, attacked the Rithisen camp on Dec. 25
and seized a major part of the camp.

Vietnamese Artillery Barrage


Today's major action was the Vietnamese artillery and mortar barrage on lines of
the 423d Battalion of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, guerrilla
officers said.

Claims and counterclaims in the border battle cannot be independently verified,
since reporters are not allowed in the war zone.

''This is the worst fighting I've ever been in,'' said one guerrilla as he
climbed on a truck to return to his unit inside Rithisen Camp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: FAMILY STRIFE IN 'HOME FRONT'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


CARROLL O'CONNOR has bounced back fast and well from ''Brothers,'' the vanity
production that sputtered out after a single performance last season. In James
Duff's ''Home Front,'' the new play at the Royale, the star is relaxed and
giving; he's acting - not hyperventilating. But if this time Mr. O'Connor has
admirably left behind the irascible Archie Bunker, his role is still that of an
embattled paterfamilias and his script is still a would- be theatrical
equivalent of ''All in the Family.'' True, ''Home Front'' is far superior to
''Brothers'' - what isn't? - yet television it remains.

Much like Norman Lear, Mr. Duff has tried to revivify old formulas (sitcom and
melodrama) with a social conscience. His play contains slick, professionally
polished scenes and jokes, and it tells the serious, if shopworn, tale of an
embittered Vietnam veteran's homecoming. The enterprise might succeed on its own
terms, were Mr. Duff's wit and conscience as sharp as Mr. Lear's. They're not.
Far from matching the best of ''All in the Family,'' let alone such biting
Vietnam-veteran plays as ''Sticks and Bones'' and ''Fifth of July,'' ''Home
Front'' at times recalls Broadway's last domestic sitcom, ''Alone Together.''
Once again parents and children are squabbling incessantly in a suburban living
room. If the ostensible topic of debate is ''the war,'' Mr. Duff so trivializes
the Vietnam era that everyone might just as well be arguing over the car keys.

The setting is the Dallas-Fort Worth area in 1973, where the 23-year- old
veteran, Jeremy (Christopher Fields), has joined his relatives for a terminally
ironic Thanksgiving. Once a go-getter, the disconsolate young man would now
rather clean his pistol and watch reruns of ''Gilligan's Island'' than seek
employment. Dad, Mom (Frances Sternhagen) and Sis (Linda Cook) try to cheer
Jeremy up, but to no avail. Let the others tell the sulky, sneering protagonist
''I love you!'' - as they do with rhythmic regularity - and he will inevitably
respond with ''I hate you!'' and ''Shut up!''

Jeremy also threatens to skip town, and, whatever the play's contrary
intentions, we can't wait for him to clear out. As written and acted, the hero
is an unsympathetic lout whose alternately vicious and self-pitying behavior has
little convincing connection to Vietnam. His few speeches recounting wartime
experiences sound vague and phony - as if he were dredging up second-hand
incidents from movies like ''Coming Home'' and ''The Deer Hunter'' rather than
his own authentic nightmares.


Worse, Jeremy's objections to the war are neither moral nor ideological. His
major gripe is not with the Government but with his parents, who refused to foot
the bill for a draft- fleeing journey to Canada when he was 19. Given the many
Americans who successfully resisted Vietnam duty as a matter of principle and
without the aid of parental cash - and the many others who served and suffered -
how are we supposed to care about the spoiled, empty-headed, unscarred Jeremy?

For all its anti-war rhetoric, ''Home Front'' remains simply an adolescent
anti-Mom-and-Dad play. The author's anger, however genuine, is juvenile, not
righteous - as typified by his hero's inane attempt to rationalize Vietnam
atrocities as a form of symbolic patricide. The biggest villain - and dominant
character - is the mother. An insufferable, self- martyring nag who's forever
enforcing old-time family values, Jeremy's Mom is apparently meant to represent
those Americans who blindly supported the war. In Miss Sternhagen's screechy
snapdragon performance - which is equally overbearing in its pursuit of cheap
laughs and cheap tears - she comes across as a grotesque caricature of every
nettlesome Tennessee Williams heroine.

The director who permitted this fine actress to spin out of control is Michael
Attenborough. He inherited the initial London production of ''Home Front'' (then
titled ''The War at Home'') last spring, following the death of its intended
director, Alan Schneider. Though some English directors can handle American
material, Mr. Attenborough doesn't appear to be one of them. He does nothing to
root Mr. Duff's Middle American buffoons in reality; even the set and costumes
look like a patronizing Londoner's fantasy of Texan vulgarity. Nor has Mr.
Attenborough negotiated the jarring mood-shift of a play whose Act I wisecracks
give way to fisticuffs and preposterous gun-waving after intermission.

What the director mainly does is frame the action with a cliched image - Jeremy
sitting catatonically on the front porch. It's to the credit of both Mr.
O'Connor and Miss Cook that they fare so well with so little assistance. While
the daughter amounts to no more than a clownish nitwit, Miss Cook eventually
invests her with feeling and self-respect. The gentle and reflective Mr.
O'Connor brings credibility to the father, who, in the tradition of pre-Lear
sitcoms, works hard at an unidentified career and usually (if not always) knows
best. It's in further keeping with the play's television prototypes that Dad's
sagest advice is reserved for the final fadeout. Not without reason does Mr.
O'Connor lower the curtain on ''Home Front'' by asking one and all to ''forget
and go on.''



Vietnam Veteran

HOME FRONT, by James Duff; directed by Michael Attenborough; sets by Sue
Plummer; adapted for Broadway by Frank J. Boros; costumes by John Falabella;
lighting by Ken Billington; associate producer, Peter Jedlin. Presented by
Richard Barr, Charles Woodward and David Bixler. At the Royale Theatre, 242 West
45th Street. BobCarroll O'Connor MaurineFrances Sternhagen JeremyChristopher
Fields KarenLinda Cook


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Carroll O'Connor

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABC'S ''20/20'' LOOKS AT CHILD ABUSE

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


ABC's ''20/20'' examines depravity tonight. The program is solemn, but not
serious, and it pretends to a dignity it does not really have. How does one
sexually abuse a small child? Brainwash the child first, and just possibly you
can get away with it. ''20/20'' is giving us titillation disguised as a
pseudo-intellectual pursuit. The program will be seen on Channel 7 at 10 P.M.

Last June, ''20/20'' reported on the Virginia McMartin Pre-School, a private
nursery school in the Los Angeles suburb of Manhattan Beach. The founder of the
school, three members of her family and three teachers had been indicted on 208
counts of child abuse. It was a horrifying story. Apparently, the abuse had been
going on for years.


''A lot of you wrote us, asking the same question,'' Hugh Downs says,
introducing the report tonight. ''If it did happen, how could such a thing have
remained a secret for so long?''

Thus ''20/20'' supplies an answer. ''If the children's allegations are true,''
Mr. Downs says, ''it appears that they may also have been the victims of
behavior modification - in effect, brainwashed into silence.''

As proof, Tom Jarriel interviews Lieut. Col. James N. Rowe, once a prisoner of
war in Vietnam. Colonel Rowe explains that brainwashing is an attempt to
''either destroy or alter faiths, beliefs, loyalties, standards and values.''

In fact, it is also a process applied to adult prisoners, presumably
incarcerated for long periods of time. Its aim is to make them politically
acquiescent. ''20/20,'' however, knows an explanation when it hears one, and no
matter that the children in California were of pre-school age, or that ideology
wasn't a question. Sin plays better on television when it can be explained.

At the same time, ''20/20'' hedges. It says it isn't sure whether the teachers
''simply stumbled'' into brainwashing, or whether they did it ''intentionally.''
There is sanctimony here. ''20/20'' observes the pieties by referring to
''charges'' and ''allegations.'' It doesn't quite pronounce the teachers guilty,
but if they're not, then why are we watching the program?

As it is, we have the best of both worlds here. Maybe the teachers didn't do
what they're accused of doing, but if they did, this is how they did it.
Brainwashing - cunning, complex, cruel - fits in. ''20/20'' makes it simple,
even to giving us graphics. Thus we see a drawing of a head. Words appear on the
brain: fear, isolation, torture and so on.

The words describe the eight similarities ''20/20'' has found between
brainwashing and what may, but then again may not, have happened at the nursery
school. Meanwhile, prurience and pop psychology are both satisfied. A child
explains the torture by saying that his wrist was twisted. He also says he
performed oral sex.

One curiosity here is that KABC, the Los Angeles station owned and operated by
ABC, has refused to show tonight's program, apparently, because three of the
children in the case appear on camera. This is a praiseworthy reason; at the
same time, the station's fears may be misplaced.

Electronic wizardry masks the children's voices, and they are filmed in a way
that makes them unidentifiable. One child, for example, sits in a chair, back to
the camera, wearing a hooded sweatshirt. He, or she, scarcely looks like a
child, only a small hunched figure. This raises a question: Why is the child on
television at all? Surely it's not because it's the only way we can get
information on the case. The Los Angeles District Attorney's office has been
awash with information. The child is there for visual entertaiment. That's not a
serious reason.


Meanwhile, ''20/20'' interviews a parent of one of the children. The parent,
also disguised, says that the children watched the teachers having sex.
''20/20'' cuts then to Colonel Rowe. He says that this ''takes a child into an
area which is taboo in the home,'' and that ''it distorts the very relationship
that the child has with his parents.'' This is certainly true, but Colonel Rowe
is supposed to be a brainwashing expert, not a pediatrician or psychiatrist.
''20/20,'' intent on its argument, finds support where it will.

The segment, produced by Peter W. Kunhardt, will be followed by a report on the
legal difficulties of prosecuting child molestors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BUDDHIST SHRINE REBUILT AFTER VETERANS' ARSON

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass., Jan. 2


With the help of Vietnam veterans from across the country, a new, larger temple
has risen from the ashes of a Buddhist shrine that was burned on New Year's Eve,
1983, by three angry veterans of the war.

''We've made a good start,'' Linda Albright, caretaker of the destroyed shrine,
said recently. ''The siding and the roof are on.''

She said the congregation of the Mahasiddha Nyingmapa Center in rural Hawley
holds no grudges against the three veterans who said they burned the shrine to
protest the lack of mental-health facilities for men who served in Vietnam.

''We're sort of happy the veterans got the publicity they sought,'' she said.
''Their plight is probably worse than ours.''

No one was injured in the fire. Vietnam veterans from Hawaii to Maine raised
more than $10,000 to help the Tibetan monks and their 30 followers rebuild the
structure. During the summer, local veterans groups sent volunteer work crews to
the site.

Richard Papineau, 36 years old, a former marine and the last of the three
veterans to be sentenced in the fire, pleaded guilty last week and was placed in
a Veterans Administration mental-health treatment program.

He was sentenced to a suspended three- to five-year prison term on the condition
he receive eight months of in-patient psychological counseling at the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Bedford.

Mr. Papineau received the Bronze Star after carrying a wounded fellow marine to
safety, despite being wounded in the face and head, when his unit was trapped on
a hill in the A Shau Valley June 4, 1967. Within 12 hours, 85 percent of his
company were killed or wounded, and Mr. Papineau was found 18 days after the
battle wandering aimlessly through the countryside. He was discharged from the
Marines for ''acute anxiety neurosis.''

In May, two other veterans, Donald E. Taylor, 37, of West Hawley, and Roland F.
Voudren, 34, of Millers Falls, pleaded guilty and were given suspended one-year
prison sentences and placed on probation on condition they continue hospital
treatment for combat-related mental problems.

In telephone calls to local newspapers and television stations after the blaze
at the shrine, one of the men said that the three combat veterans burned the
temple while on a weekend pass from the Veterans Administration hospital in an
attempt to pressure the Administration to provide more treatment for Vietnam
veterans suffering from combat-related mental problems.

During the last year a second 20- bed unit has been established in a Brockton
Veterans Administration hospital to supplement the single 19- bed post-combat
stress ward, which has a nine-month waiting list, that had been available for
troubled Vietnam veterans in New England, said Richard Carlsen. Mr. Carlsen is
past president of the local chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America and a
lawyer who represented Mr. Voudren and Mr. Taylor.

However, Mr. Carlsen said, ''The real answer lies with the Federal budget and
with the proposed budget cuts I am not optimistic.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA PLANS MORE MANPOWER CUTS IN THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 3


China's highest- ranking officer was quoted today as saying that that there
would be new manpower cuts in the armed forces.

The reductions, according to Yang Dezhi, Chief of the General Staff, are aimed
at cutting military outlays and enhancing the economic program put into effect
by the Government of the country's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping.

The planned reductions would come atop earlier personnel cuts that provoked
resistance within senior ranks of the army. Western experts have estimated that
in the late 1970's, China's armed forces had a total manpower of about 4.5
million. More recent calculations have placed the figure at several hundred
thousand less.

Earlier this week, the authorities disclosed the retirement of 40 high-ranking
general staff officers, the largest such departure in many years. The
retirements followed insistent demands from Mr. Deng that older officers give
way to ''younger and more competent'' men. Before that, there had been many
forced retirements at middle and lower levels of the officer corps.

To Cut Noncombat Personnel


The additional reductions were foreshadowed by the Chief of the General Staff in
a front-page interview in today's issue of the official English-language
newspaper, China Daily. He said the armed forces should ''further streamline''
and ''reduce noncombatant personnel'' to ease the burden on the state budget and
to free men for the civilian economy.

The announcement was one of a series in recent weeks that have indicated an
increasing momentum behind efforts to revitalize the economy and other sectors.
Despite resistance within the Communist Party and at upper levels of the army,
Mr. Deng and his associates have pressed radical changes in industrial policy,
challenged the universal validity of Marxist ideology and promised new freedoms
to writers.

The moves have posed a major challenge to a military hierarchy composed mainly
of officers who served in the Communist guerrilla armies before 1949. By
reducing the manpower levels, pensioning off many of the more old-guard officers
and insisting that priority be given to the modernization of weapons and battle
training, Mr. Deng has reduced the enormous political influence military
commanders wielded under Mao Zedong.

Mr. Deng, who holds ultimate authority over the military through his
chairmanship of the military commissions of the party and the Government, has
also insisted that the military budget be held down. The official figure rose to
more than 22 billion yuan in 1979, the year of China's brief war with Vietnam,
but has slipped back since then to under 18 billion yuan, about $6.4 billion at
current rates of exchange. With important costs hidden in nonmilitary
appropriations, real expenditures are be much higher.

Long-Term Growth Seen


Mr. Yang, the general staff chief, seemed to acknowledge the discontent that
further manpower and budget reductions were likely to cause by saying the cuts
would serve the military's long-term interests in economic growth, which in turn
would make more money available for military modernization.

Mr. Yang, who is 74 years old, is a former infantry commander who was chief of
the Wuhan military region in central China when Mr. Deng, then Chief of the
General Staff, appointed a successor in 1980. Other Deng proteges have been
moved into key positions alongside Mr. Yang, but holdovers from the Mao era
remain in positions of crucial importance. Among these is Li Desheng, commander
of the powerful northeastern military region, who has retained full membership
in the party Politburo even though he advanced rapidly during the Cultural
Revolution, when Mr. Deng and many of his current associates were purged.

Under Mao, the military became a semiautonomous political and economic force. It
ran its own schools, farms, factories and hospitals, and had effective control
of vast areas of the country. During the Cultural Revolution beginning in the
late 1960's its officers left their barracks to take control of wide areas of
civil administration.

Under Mr. Deng, extension of military influence over civilian life has been
reversed. Important sections of the armed forces have been disbanded. A powerful
guard force has been turned into an arm of the police, and the army railway
corps has been handed over to the civilian rail network. Other parts of the
military have been pushed into more participation in civilian projects.

Cites 1,100 Civilian Projects


Mr. Yang gave several examples in the interview. He said the 1,100 civilian
projects in which the military took part last year included construction of a
port and airfield at Shengli, site of a major oilfield. He said the engineer
corps had helped build civilian airfields at Dalian and Haikou, two major ports.

Troops had been assigned, he said, to help in the expansion of the country's
tourist amenities. There has also been extensive military assistance in the
development of agriculture.

There have been signs in recent months that not all members of the high command
are enthusiastic about such tasks. Speeches by senior generals have spoken of
the importance of giving ''careful consideration'' to any reforms that undermine
the country's defense and especially to measures that reduce the number of men
available for purely military tasks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS JURY IS TOLD OF OFFICER'S LETTERS CITING 'LIES' ABOUT ENEMY STRENGTH

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words


The jury in the trial of Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS
was shown a series of letters yesterday in which an intelligence analyst in
South Vietnam wrote to his wife in 1968 that ''outright lies'' and ''truly
gargantuan falsehoods'' were involved in estimates of enemy strength.

The letters, from Comdr. James Meacham of the Navy, were introduced by David
Boies, the lawyer for CBS, as part of a wide-ranging effort to show the network
used reliable material in preparing its 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy:
A Vietnam Deception,'' that is the subject of the $120 million suit.

As he read from the 10 letters - which Commander Meacham had consistently told
CBS did not portray any ''faking of intelligence'' - Mr. Boies asked George
Crile, the producer of the documentary, over and over whether he had depended on
them.

Each time Mr. Crile said he had, and went on to explain what he regarded as
their significance. He said the letters - portions of which were used in the
documentary - demonstrated Commander Meacham's contemporaneous ''admissions''
and acknowledgment of the ''perversion of a responsibility to properly inform
the country as to the nature of the enemy we were fighting.''

Called as 'Hostile Witness'

Mr. Crile - who also told the jury of the many books, Congressional reports and
other materials he relied upon while researching the program in 1981, as well as
of the intelligence officers of the ''highest integrity'' with whom he had
spoken - was called in December as a ''hostile witness'' by Dan M. Burt, the
lawyer for General Westmoreland. Yesterday, Mr. Boies completed his
cross-examination of the producer before Judge Pierre N. Leval in Federal
District Court in Manhattan, and Mr. Burt is expected to follow today with
questions on re-direct.

Commander Meacham, who is now military correspondent of The Economist, the
British publication, served in South Vietnam from mid-1967 to mid- 1968, when he
was 37 years old. He retired from the Navy in 1973.

Virtually every day when he was in Vietnam - where General Westmoreland
commanded American forces from January 1964 to June 1968 - Commander Meacham
wrote to his wife, Dorothy, in Charleston, S.C. Most of his letters dealt with
such matters as his living accommodations, his adventures as an amateur
photographer and his children's well-being.

Some of the letters, however, contained stark comments on the progress of the
war. And, in 1980, the commander gave them to Samuel A. Adams, a former Central
Intelligence Agency analyst who was writing a book on a dispute between the
C.I.A. and the military over enemy strength during the war. In 1981, Mr. Adams
became a paid consultant to CBS for the documentary, and both he and Mr. Crile
are defendants in the trial.

'No One Would Believe It'

In a March 20, 1968, letter containing a reference to Senator Robert F. Kennedy,
then an aspirant for the Democratic nomination for President, Commander Meacham
wrote:

''I never thought I would consider voting for Bobby, either, but one can have no
small comprehension of the mismanagement of this goddam war unless he has seen
the outright lies and the machinations'' of General Westmoreland's command.

''I'm not talking about confusion and inefficiency, which to a certain extent
are products of all wars,'' he wrote, ''but about muddle-headed thinking,
cover-your-ass orders, lies and outright foolishness on the very highest levels.
The crime is that you couldn't tell anyone even if you wanted to - no one would
believe it.''

In a letter the next day, the commander sounded the same theme:

''We had a crash project to prepare a briefing for the press on enemy strength
as of 29 Feb - complete with viewgraphs. Got it at about 4 - due at noon
tomorrow. Anyhow I stayed until about 8 and wrote it and the graphics birds are
working on the slides - they have a night shift anyway. I have never in my life
assembled such a pack of truly gargantuan falsehoods. The reporters will think
we are putting on a horse and dog show when we try to sell them this crap.''

Just before he finished his tour in Vietnam, Commander Meacham wrote that he
hoped ''it comes out after I am gone, because the roof may fall in.''

''I can't say more,'' he continued. ''I'll explain when the war's over.''

He said in other letters at that time that he had written a memorandum and had a
talk with a superior and ''let him know the truth about the doctoring of the
strength figures. Now my conscience is clear.''

He wrote, too, that ''the types'' from the Defense Intelligence Agency, the
intelligence arm of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were investigating the situation
because they had ''smelled a rat,'' but that they ''don't really know where to
look for it. They know we've been falsifying the figures, but can't figure out
which ones and how.''

Matters of 'Interpretation'

In 1981, when Mr. Crile and Mr. Adams brought up the letters with Commander
Meacham during an interview in London, the commander said they did not reflect
lies, but matters of intelligence ''interpretation.''

In unbroadcast CBS film shown earlier to the jury, Mr. Crile then asked whether
Commander Meacham had not been ''saying that you were manipulating figures to
come out with preconceived notions as to what the estimates should be? Faking
intelligence?''

''No, no, I'm not saying that at all,'' said the commander. ''We certainly
weren't faking any intelligence. Nobody that I have any connection with ever
faked any intelligence.''

But what, Mr. Crile persisted, ''could be clearer'' than the letters? ''You're
not producing honest intelligence reports.''

''Well, there isn't such a thing as an honest intelligence report, there's my
view and somebody else's,'' Commander Meacham replied. ''We quite clearly didn't
agree with the figures that we were having to use, but it's not a question of
honesty or dishonesty.''

In a pretrial affidavit, the commander said the ''exaggerated rhetoric'' of his
letters resulted from his having been ''bored'' with his job. ''I never intended
that the harsh language in those letters be taken literally,'' he said. But in
another affidavit, his wife, from whom he is divorced, said he saved the letters
because they might be ''of historical importance.''

Commander Meacham appeared briefly on the documentary, confirming a statement
that he had been asked by his superiors to ''tamper with'' data in a military
computer that held statistics on enemy strength after the Tet offensive of
January 1968. But in an unused part of the interview, he told Mr. Crile the
episode was considerably more complicated.

The documentary charged a ''conspiracy'' at the highest levels of military
intelligence in Saigon to minimize the size of the enemy to make it appear that
America was winning the war.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS defamed him by saying that, for political
and public-relations reasons, he imposed an arbitrary ceiling of 300,000 on
estimates of enemy strength, partly by suppressing reports by his intelligence
officers.

Although the computer incident involving Commander Meacham occurred after Tet,
the broadcast maintained that much ''faking'' of intelligence took place before
the attack.

And yesterday Mr. Crile testified that he had been told in 1981 by former
intelligence officers that, had their reports been allowed to ''go forward'' to
policymakers in Washington and the public, the ''shock'' of the Tet offensive
would have been tempered.

Mr. Adams, who contributed what Mr. Crile has described as ''exhaustive
research'' to the documentary, is expected to testify within a week as the first
witness for CBS. Yesterday Mr. Crile called Mr. Adams a man of ''great
competence and even brilliance in terms of analytic ability'' and a person of
''extraordinary integrity.''

The producer also said it was ''almost unprecedented'' in television to have
obtained the cooperation - as he said he and Mr. Adams had - of former
intelligence officers who had ''held major positions of trust'' and who were
''making admissions against their own interests'' about ''official misconduct''
they had participated in, or witnessed, in Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMPUTER SEEKS LOST FRIENDS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


A grandmother in Arkansas is looking for the niece she has not seen in years to
tell her she is an heir. A 21- year-old woman in New York wants to find the pen
pal she shared secrets with when they were 12. And two men who traveled to the
Vietnam Memorial in Washington did not find the name of their commanding officer
in Vietnam, who they thought was dead. Now they are looking for him.

They turned to Friend Finders, an organization begun in November as ''a lost and
found for friends.'' Friend Finders has set up a computer to try to match the
searchers with the missing.

Herbert Farmer, a real estate investor in Anchorage, had the idea for the
organization when he became frustrated trying to find friends he made as a
prisoner in World War II. So he turned to his friend Larry Pedersen, a family
budget consultant in Anchorage. Mr. Pedersen, now the president of Friend
Finders, said: ''Herb called me last February and said he had a neat idea I
might be interested in. I haven't been able to put this idea down since.''

So far, Mr. Farmer has spent $300,000 to purchase a computer with a capacity of
200 million names and to rent an office in Poulsbo, Wash., from which Mr.
Pedersen is operating.

''You figure you've got friends you'll never lose track of,'' Mr. Pedersen said.
''But as the years go by, there are fewer Christmas cards. We found everybody we
talked to could think of a friend they've lost an address to.''

Those who search for someone through Friend Finders are asked to give the name
of the missing friend, nicknames, date of birth, places he or she lived and, if
married, the spouse's name. The information is stored in the computer.

Anyone who simply wants to register with Friend Finders can do so at no charge.
If a caller wishes to search for someone, the fee is $5 a year; people who have
initiated a search will be asked each year if they want the search to continue,
and will be charged the annual fee once more, Mr. Pedersen said. An additional
$5 will be charged if the person is found. The organization is still waiting for
the computer to match a searcher with a friend.

''First we verify it's a friendly caller,'' Mr. Pedersen said. ''We don't want
any bill collectors.'' He said the caller's word is taken on this point.

''Then,'' he added, ''through the process of elimination the computer zeroes it
down to the right person. If it doesn't find a match, we'll keep trying. We're
betting on a match any day now.''

If a match is made, both the searcher and the person he or she is seeking will
be notified. The searcher will be given the telephone number only if the other
party approves, Mr. Pedersen said.

All calls are kept confidential, he said. ''It's like an unlisted phone number
that's only open to your friends,'' he added. He declined to say how many names
had been entered in the computer so far.

Anita Pacquette of Poulsbo, who works in the office answering the phone, said:
''When people call, they're always astonished it doesn't cost more. They say,
'I've been looking for this person for years, and I finally found a way to find
them.' ''

Friend Finders can be reached at 1-800-346-3377 from 10 A.M. to 10 P.M Eastern
time. In Washington the number is 800-422-2514. A brochure may be obtained by
writing Friend Finders, 314 Lloyd Building, Seattle, Wash. 98101.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. R.E. CUSHMAN, EX-MARINE HEAD, DIES

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


Gen. Robert E. Cushman Jr., a former Commandant of the Marine Corps and deputy
director of the Central Intelligence Agency, died Wednesday at his home in Fort
Washington, Md., apparently of a heart attack, a Pentagon spokesman said. He was
70 years old.

Although he was decorated as a hero in World War II and, in Vietnam, was awarded
the largest troop command ever held by a Marine officer, General Cushman's
career was most influenced by his relationship with a civilian - Richard M.
Nixon.

President Nixon, who General Cushman had served as an adviser in the 1950's,
passed over more senior officers to nominate General Cushman as Commandant of
the Marine Corps in November 1971. And it was his association with the Nixon
Administration that drew General Cushman into the growing storm of Watergate in
1973, when it was disclosed that the general had initially approved C.I.A.
assistance for the burglary of the office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist in
1971. Mr. Ellsberg was a former national security aide who released the Pentagon
Papers to the press.

Joined Marines in 1935

Robert Everton Cushman Jr. was born in St. Paul, Minn., on Dec. 24, 1914. He
went to public schools there and then attended the Naval Academy, where he
finished 10th in his class of 442 and was commissioned a second lieutenant in
the Marine Corps in 1935.

After serving as a platoon commander in Shanghai for two years, he was commander
of the marine detachment aboard the battleship Pennsylvania when it was attacked
at Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941.

In World War II he led his battalion repeatedly into combat in the Pacific,
earning the Bronze Star with a Combat ''V'' on Bougainville, and the Legion of
Merit with Combat ''V'' during the Iwo Jima campaign. As a 29-year-old
lieutenant colonel on Guam, he earned the Navy Cross, the nation's second
highest medal, for moving to the front of his crumbling battalion and setting up
a defense against a Japanese attack.

General Cushman served in numerous posts in Europe and the United States, before
becoming chief adviser on national security affairs to Vice President Nixon. He
was promoted to brigadier general in 1958.

He was sent to Vietnam in April 1967 and by June was promoted to lieutenant
general in charge of the Third Marine Amphibious Force and I Corps, commanding
162,000 Army and Marine troops in the northernmost provinces. No other Marine
officer had ever commanded so many battlefront troops.

During his Vietnam command General Cushman stressed troop mobility and the use
of helicopters.

Named to C.I.A. Position

In 1969, shortly after President Nixon came to office, General Cushman was
appointed deputy director of the C.I.A. It was in that role that he was asked by
John Ehrlichman, the White House Chief Assistant for Domestic Affairs, to
provide assistance for what turned out to be the burglary of Dr. Ellsberg's
psychiatrist.

Although the C.I.A. later refused to lend assistance to the White House unit
that carried out the burglary, General Cushman was called to testify before
Congressional committees investigating Watergate.

At a Senate Watergate Committee hearing on Aug. 2, 1973, a transcript was
released of a recorded conversation between General Cushman and E.  Howard Hunt,
who helped engineer the burglary. Mr. Hunt asked for ''alias documentation'' and
disguises. The general said he thought the agency could assist him.

As Commandant of the Marine Corps from 1972 to 1975, General Cushman resisted
the movement by other services to provide a more relaxed, less military image
after Vietnam. Recruitment was still aimed at those seeking to join a tough,
elite military service.

He also acted to end voluntary segregation of Marine facilities where blacks and
whites chose to bunk and congregate along racial lines.

General Cushman is survived by his wife, Audrey Boyce Cushman, and two children,
Robert Ed and Mrs. Bernard Cauley.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen Robert E. Cushman Jr.

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words


WORD is that Lily Tomlin is headed for Broadway, via the Santa Fe Theater
Festival, where she will try out a one- woman show called ''Works in Progress .
. . No Costumes, No Scenery, No Props, No Refunds.'' That seems to take care of
credits, other than Jane Wagner, who is apparently set for directorial chores.
For anyone riding into the sunset, Jan. 16 to Feb. 3 are Miss Tomlin's dates in
New Mexico. The festival there has also lined up Don Meredith and Frank Gifford
for 11 performances in May to benefit the festival. The redoubtable duo will
temporarily forsake football for the indoor sport known as bickering. They'll
play the leads in ''The Odd Couple.''


In some fields it's called hype, but let's give theater the benefit of the doubt
and call it enthusiasm. ''Believe it or not,'' says the announcement, here is a
new play combining ''suspense, murder and comedy,'' a Tony award-winning lead,
and mirabile dictu, preview tickets priced at just $7.50 because ''the producers
feel that if the public is going to gamble on an untested work, then the price
should be commensurate with that gamble.''

The producers are Norma and David Langworthy who have had no previous Broadway
experience, the play is called ''Cliffhanger,'' and previews start Jan. 29 at
the Lamb's Theater. The playwright, James Yaffe, is a professor and the action
is set in a small college town, but mum's the word on anything else or they may
have to change the title.

So who's the Tony award-winning lead? Henderson Forsythe, who was the sheriff in
''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas,'' and who will play the professor. Lenka
Peterson will play the professor's wife and David McKenna, whose production of
''Jekyll and Hyde'' was at La Mama E.T.C., will direct.


The five-woman revue ''A . . . My Name Is Alice'' will play its 350th
performance Jan. 13 at the Top of the Gate at 160 Bleecker Street. That same
night, on a different wavelength, the two-part ''Agamemnon'' and
''Elektra/Orestes'' opens at the City Stage Company (136 East 13th Street),
which has bounced back from its financial difficulties. Moli ere's ''George
Dandin'' is scheduled for March.


The time is 1968 and the newlywed husband is shipped off to Vietnam, but not
before he and his bride have forsworn any fooling around with the opposite sex.
A year later he returns, calls out ''Honey I'm home,'' and discovers that his
wife has, indeed, kept her bargain - she's living with another woman. Julie
Goldsmith Gilbert's tale of a marriage that might be described as ''advanced
modern'' opens Jan. 22 at Theater Off Park, 28 East 35th Street. It's directed
by Albert Harris. The name of the new play is - what else? - ''Honey I'm Home.''


Jay O. Sanders is a physically impressive man who usually plays strong, decisive
men on stage. His current role, as ''The Incredibly Famous Willy Rivers,'' is a
departure. Willy Rivers, a rock singer who has survived an assassination attempt
and is about to make a comeback, is anything but assured. He is depressed,
drifting and, as Mr. Sanders describes him, very much ''a reflecting
character.''

Mr. Sanders is not a depressed person. Why should he be? He's 31 years old, has
just returned from an exchange stint with the Royal Court Theater in London,
where he won critical acclaim. He's drifting no more than any other actor who is
not certain of what comes next. But his goals are clearly defined and indicate
the reflective qualities in his own nature, qualities perhaps inherited from
parents who spent a good part of their lives with international peace groups.

''I'd like to play classic roles and search for the immediacy in them, while
finding the classic qualities in new roles,'' he said.

Eventually, Mr. Sanders, who had a leading part in the television series
''AfterMASH,'' would like to do more film work and ''delve into the most
interesting characters in every medium.'' At the moment, he's happy with the
stage.

''No matter what's been worked out in advance, in the end you're the one who's
out there,'' he said. ''In films and television, the person cutting the tape has
the final say.''

Mr. Sanders, who has been invited by Actors Equity to take part in discussions
about exchanges to be held today between American actors and members of the
Royal Shakespeare Company, said he enjoyed the exchange process with the British
theater, but that it did not detract from his commitment to help develop
American plays.

''There's a passion to it beyond money,'' he said. Which, considering his
current salary of $125 a week, is very likely true.


A new year brings a lot of hope, but hope doesn't pay bills, even in a
make-believe world. Which is why you might consider casting some bread on
theatrical waters, especially when it can return in the form of everything from
a tax deduction, disco dancing and champagne to food and celebrity-gazing. Next
Friday, the five-year-old Eccentric Circles Theater is holding a $25 a person
benefit at 158 West 23d Street (242-9249) from 8 P.M. to midnight. The theater
is dedicated to producing plays written and directed by women and in addition to
a buffet dinner, bar and dancing, there will be the presentation of an award to
Geraldine Fitzgerald.

Joseph Papp will be the host at a Jan. 14 benefit for Mabou Mines, the
experimental troupe that is out to raise $225,000 to match a National Endowment
for the Arts grant. Tickets are $10, $100 and $500 and, of course, each of them
buys something different. A call to 473-0559 tells you what.


Some think that kids are people, others think that kids may eventually be
people, but everyone knows it's never too early to start them in the right
direction. In this case, the right direction might be Symphony Space, at
Broadway and 95th Street, where the Paper Bag Players season opens Jan. 12. This
leading theater company for children will present ''Everybody, Everybody''
through Jan. 27, followed by ''I Won't Take a Bath.'' When, how much and other
questions can be directed to 362-0431.


It takes a special kind of mind to come up with 20 ''playlets and songlets''
that revolve around a single prop, and when that prop is a crate, even offbeat
minds might boggle. But Shel Silverstein, the cartoonist and playwright, whose
book ''A Light in the Attic'' has been on The New York Times best- seller list
for more than 100 weeks, isn't the boggling type. His latest zaniness, called
''The Crate,'' opens Feb. 11 at the Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d
Street.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS DEFY HOUSE LEADERS; PRICE LOSES POST

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


In a surprise jolt to the seniority system, House Democrats defied their leaders
today and ousted 80-year-old Representative Melvin Price as chairman of the
Armed Services Committee.

In his place they chose Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, a relatively
junior member of the panel who has been a sharp critic of Pentagon policies.

The dramatic move means House Democrats are likely to take a more combative
attitude toward President Reagan's military policies, demanding greater cuts in
Pentagon spending and more serious efforts to reach arms control agreements with
the Soviet Union.



Impatience and Frustration

The vote also points up the growing impatience and frustration of younger
Democrats, who are now moving into leadership posts and feel their party must
modernize its message to the electorate.

The Democrats also chose new leaders for two committees where the previous
chairmen were barred by law from continuing in the job.

At the Budget Committee, the new leader is William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania,
who succeeds James R. Jones of Oklahoma. The Committee on Standards and Official
Conduct, widely known as the ethics committee, will be headed by Julian C. Dixon
of California, who replaces Louis Stokes of Ohio. Both new chairmen are members
of the Black Caucus.



O'Neill Plea Unsuccessful

The Democrats re-elected, with minimal dissent, all other returning committee
chairmen from the previous Congress.

Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who began his final term as Speaker
Thursday, failed to sway his colleagues with an impassioned plea to retain Mr.
Price, the second most senior Democrat in the House, as the head of the Armed
Services Committee.

It was also symbolic that his replacement was Mr. Aspin, who, at 46, is the
first chairman of the Armed Services Committee whose major military experience
was in the Vietnam War, not World War II.

Mr. Price was first elected to Congress in 1944, while still on active duty with
the Army. Mr. Aspin was elected in 1970, after spending his military service as
an aide to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara in the late 60's.

To many of his colleagues, Mr. Aspin's experience at the Pentagon, and his
acknowledged expertise in military matters, gives him both the background and
the credibility to take on the military over policy matters. As one senior
Democrat from the Middle West explained his vote: ''I have the sense that the
committee is now very much under the control and dominance of the Pentagon. Les
is not awed by the Pentagon, he's prepared to stand up to the Pentagon.''

One immediate result of Mr. Aspin's election could be tougher sledding for the
MX missile, which narrowly survived in Congress last year and faces a series of
critical votes in March. In recent years, Mr. Aspin has been part of a group of
moderates Democrats who supported limited financing for the huge weapon. But in
exchange, he contended, the Democrats were able to push the Reagan
Administration toward a more open and flexible posture on arms control talks.

Missile Issue Mentioned

Several lawmakers reported that in campaigning for the Armed Services post, Mr.
Aspin told his colleagues that since arms talks were to begin in Geneva shortly,
he no longer felt obligated to back the MX. Mr. Aspin, in a brief meeting with
reporters after the vote, declined to comment on the MX issue.

Today's action marked only the fifth time in the last 60 years that an incumbent
chairman has been deposed by the House. The last rebellion occurred in 1975,
when a large freshman class elected after the Watergate scandals spurred the
ouster of three senior chairmen: F. Edward Hebert of Armed Services, W. R. Poage
of Agriculture, and Wright Patman of Banking.

In 1967, the House removed Adam Clayton Powell of Harlem from the chairmanship
of the Education and Labor Committee after he was accused of using Government
funds for personal travel and other expenses.

Today's fight took place in two stages. The party's Steering and Policy
Committee had recommended that Mr. Price stay as chairman, and all House
Democrats first voted on whether to accept that recommendation.

Argument for Seniority System

In this first debate, Mr. O'Neill made a strong argument in favor of retaining
the seniority system, and was backed up by other members of the leadership.

However, the Democrats voted to reject Mr. Price by a vote of 121 to 118.

At that point, the Steering and Policy panel met again and recommended that the
job go to Charles E. Bennett of Florida, the next-ranking Democrat and a veteran
of 35 years in the House. But under the rules, any other committee member could
then be nominated as well, and Mr. Aspin was put forward. In the second round of
voting, Mr. Aspin defeated Mr. Bennett by a vote of 125 to 103.

Mr. Aspin is only the seventh-ranking Democrat on the committee, but the four
other Democrats between Mr. Bennett and Mr. Aspin declined to run, and supported
the seniority system.

One of the Democrats who outranks Mr. Aspin, Samuel S. Stratton of upstate New
York, expressed bitterness after the vote and said, ''It tells the American
people that Democratic members of the House are antidefense.''

Factor of Price's Age

One large factor in the balloting was that Mr. Price has grown frail and infirm
in recent years, and to many members, he seems physically incapable of handling
such a demanding job. As a result, they argued, the committee has been run by
William L. Dickenson of Alabama, the senior Republican and a strong Pentagon
supporter.

Mr. Bennett, 74, also has health problems. But the primary criticism directed
against him is that he is part of an older generation, which joined the Armed
Services Committee in the first place because they generally supported the
military, and now defer to Pentagon requests without serious questioning.

Speaking of the senior members of the committee, one West Coast liberal said:
''They are all so client-oriented. They just don't understand modern technology,
they don't understand arms control. They're still fighting World War II.''

But probably the strongest motive behind the voting today was political. After
watching President Reagan sweep to victory, many Democrats came back to
Washington feeling deeply frustrated about the party's failure to capitalize on
military and arms control issues in the campaign.

'Expression of Frustration'

''There is a real feeling that we have been impotent in providing alternatives
on defense policy,'' said Representative Leon E. Panetta of California. ''This
was an expression of that frustration.''

Mr. Panetta captured the euphoria of many younger Democrats today when he said
Mr. Aspin's election was ''bad news for Cap Weinberger and bad news for the
Defense Department.''

In addition, he added, today's vote ''shows the potential for change'' in party
leadership, and should serve as a warning to those who are aiming to move up in
the ranks after Mr. O'Neill retires at the end of next year.

''Clearly members are willing to make waves,'' he said. ''We made waves today.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Les Aspin

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER DEFENDS USE OF LETTERS AT LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words


George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS documentary on the Vietnam War,
defended in court yesterday his reliance on letters in which an intelligence
analyst had written his wife in 1968 of the ''outright lies'' and ''doctoring''
of estimates of enemy strength.

The author of the letters, Comdr. James Meacham of the Navy, had repeatedly told
Mr. Crile during preparation of the broadcast that, despite the language in his
letters to his wife, he was unaware of any ''faking'' of statistics during his
service in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968.

But Mr. Crile testified that the commander, now the military correspondent of
The Economist, a British publication, furnished the letters on his own
initiative and never denied that ''their words meant what they conventionally
mean to anyone who speaks the English language.''

After nine days of testimony, Mr. Crile completed his first appearance at the
trial of a $120 million libel suit brought against CBS by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland. The trial, now in its 12th week, is being conducted by Judge
Pierre N. Leval in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Crile, who is also a defendant in the case and was called as a ''hostile
witness'' by General Westmoreland's lawyers, was chiefly responsible for the
1982 CBS Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' He
is expected to testify again when CBS begins presenting its evidence late next
week.

This round of the producer's testimony ended much as it began, with Dan M. Burt,
the general's principal lawyer, questioning Mr. Crile's objectivity and fairness
and the witness expounding on the many sources he drew on in making the
documentary.

Letters Read to Jury

The letters from Commander Meacham, some of which were read to the jury on
Thursday during Mr. Crile's cross-examination by David Boies, the lawyer for
CBS, are regarded as important evidence in support of the broadcast. The
program, which included references to the letters, charged that senior officers
in General Westmoreland's command had ''suppressed and altered critical
intelligence on the enemy'' during the war.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt read the jury excerpts from unused portions of an on- camera
interview of Commander Meacham by Mr. Crile in London in 1981.

Time and again Commander Meacham, who retired from the Navy in 1973, said
neither he nor anyone he had worked with in Vietnam had ''falsified''
intelligence on the size of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces. It was all a
''long, complicated story,'' he said, in which officers had had differences of
''judgment'' and ''interpretation.''

''I mean,'' the commander said at one point, ''you're trying to get me to say
that we all falsified intelligence. I'm not going to say it because I don't have
any sense of having done that.''

''What do you have a sense of having done?,'' Mr. Crile asked.

''I don't know how to answer,'' the commander said.

Gave Letters to C.I.A. Analyst

Yesterday, Mr. Crile first offered to explain why he had not included any of
these or similar passages in the documentary, but Mr. Burt did not give him a
chance.

Q. You didn't include them because you wanted people to believe that Commander
Meacham unequivocably supported the letters, isn't that correct, sir?

A. No, that's not true. He never disavowed anything in those letters.

Mr. Crile said the commander had given the letters in 1980 to Samuel A. Adams, a
former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who later became a consultant for the
CBS broadcast and is also a defendant in this case. He did so, Mr. Crile said,
because he thought they were ''the best place'' to find a record of his views in
1968.

Mr. Crile said the commander - who is not expected to testify at the trial -
simply decided by 1981 that he did not want to ''say uncle'' on American
television. ''He didn't want to go on national TV. Of course, it was
embarrassing for him.''

The 39-year old producer suggested that, for a fuller appreciation of Commander
Meacham's views in 1968, Mr. Burt ''might want to read'' other parts of the
interview. ''They're informative,'' he remarked.

Judge Instructs Jury

On Thursday, Judge Leval instructed the jury that the letters were being
admitted into evidence only with regard to the defendants' ''state of mind''
during their research for the documemtary, and not for the truth of their
contents.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS libeled him by saying that he had
deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the
true size and nature of the enemy in the year before the Tet offensive of
January 1968.

The broadcast said that, to show America was winning the war, the general
imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 of reports of enemy size, partly by
ordering the deletion of the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the official
military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

To prevail in his suit, the general must prove that statements on the program
were both false and made with knowledge of their falsity or with ''reckless
diregard'' for whether they were true.

Relied on Congressional Report

Before he left the stand, Mr. Crile said that he had relied heavily on the
report of a House Select Committee on Intelligence that concluded in 1975 that
''the numbers game'' in 1967 ''prevented the intelligence community, perhaps the
President, and certainly members of Congress, from judging the real changes in
Vietnam over time.''

A key witness before the committee had been Mr. Adams, who was a C.I.A.
specialist on Vietnam in 1967 and who, along with some intelligence colleagues,
believed that the military's new estimates of enemy strength were half what they
should have been.

Mr. Crile also cited an interview he conducted with George Allen, another C.I.A.
Vietnam expert, in which Mr. Allen said that a C.I.A. decision in 1967 to drop
the agency's opposition to the military's new figures was ''strictly a political
issue.''

But Mr. Burt showed the witness a statement by Mr. Allen before the House
Committee in which he said he was ''able to accept the final agreed upon
figures'' with the military.

Q. You were aware of that passage at the time you made the broadcast, were you
not, sir?

A. I was knowledgeable about it.

But Mr. Crile said Mr. Allen had been ''restricted'' by the C.I.A. in what he
should say because the agency ''did not want to pick a fight with the military''
in 1975. ''Mr. Allen was placed in a troubling dilemma,'' he said.

Mr. Crile also noted that, after the Tet offensive, the C.I.A. reversed what he
called its ''cave-in'' and argued for an enemy strength total of half a million.

The trial will resume on Monday with General Westmoreland's last witness, Ira
Klein, the film editor for much of the documentary, scheduled to take the stand.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI COMMUTES SENTENCE FOR 2 IN TREASON CASE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 4


Two of five men condemned to death in a highly publicized subversion trial in
Vietnam have had their sentences commuted to life imprisonment, Vietnam's
official press agency reported.

The death sentences were handed down Dec. 18 at the end of the trial in Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon. A total of 21 men were tried on charges of seeking
to overthrow the Vietnamese Government with Chinese backing. Apart from the 5
men sentenced to death, 3 were sentenced to life imprisonment and the rest got
terms ranging from 8 to 20 years. The trial was reported to be the biggest
espionage and treason trial since the capture of South Vietnam in 1975.

Statements made in court indicate that the five convicted men, said to be linked
to a Vietnamese exile group based in France, may have managed to draw a few
local Vietnamese officials into their plot. One such official was reported to
have committed suicide when his complicity became known.

2 Claim French Citizenship


The two men whose death sentences were commuted Thursday, Mai Van Hanh, 56 years
old, and Huynh Vinh Sanh, 63, both claim French nationality. France regards Mr.
Hanh, a former pilot accused of being the ringleader of the plot, as a French
citizen; Paris has not ruled on Mr. Sanh's claim. French diplomats in Vietnam
were not permitted to visit the men.

Prime Minister Laurent Fabius and the French Ambassador in Hanoi had appealed
for clemency for all five of the condemned. No mention was made in the statement
Thursday of the other three men, Tran Van Ba, 39; Le Quoc Quan, 43, and Ho Thi
Bach, 48.

Several men accused of leading the plot, including Mr. Hanh, were reported to
have arrived in Vietnam in September. They were seized and brought to trial with
other prisoners who had been held for several years on subversion charges.

Nearly 100 other people were reported to be awaiting trial on similar offenses.

In Hanoi, Vietnamese officials have said that evidence emerging from this trial
played a part in the decision to pull back from their plan to release to the
United States the inmates of the ''re-education'' camps. They say they fear the
exiles would join subversive groups abroad working against Hanoi.

Vietnam has also said that at least one of the plotters who received a death
sentence, Mr. Ba, a former student leader, had made contact with American
diplomats in Bangkok. The United States has denied the accusation.

According to Hanoi's investigations, the plot had reached surprisingly serious
proportions. Vietnam has said the plotters intended to begin a campaign of
terrorism in several cities early this year, while at the same time ''encircling
the towns'' through subversion in the countryside.

Seen as a Warning


Diplomats in Hanoi, interviewed just after the trial, said they doubted there
was a significant subversive movement in Vietnam. But they said there continued
to be dissatisfaction in the south centered around Ho Chi Minh City, and that
Hanoi appeared to be serving notice on would-be rebels.

Some Vietnamese exiles who have fled the southern part of the country and are
now in holding centers along the Thai-Cambodian border say there is an armed
underground, but they have no reliable evidence of its size.

The accused, court documents said, had intended to open prison camps and arm the
inmates, many of them former South Vietnamese officers.

Several religious figures, including a leader of the Cao Dai sect, were singled
out at the trial and in the collected evidence as participants or sympathizers.
This has been interpreted as a warning to religious groups not to take part in
dissident activities.



Vietnam Announces Cease-Fire


BANGKOK, Jan. 4 (Reuters) - Vietnam will observe a 41-day cease-fire along its
border with China to mark 35 years of diplomatic relations between them and to
celebrate the Lunar New Year, the Vietnam News Agency said today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gilbert Collard and Sophie and Clara Van Hanh

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GOETZ: A PRIVATE MAN IN A PUBLIC DEBATE



BYLINE:
By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2964 words


To his admirers, Bernhard Hugo Goetz is a personable, scholarly, self- reliant
man who cares about his neighbors and his community, despises hoodlums and has
long been frustrated by what he sees as a drift toward criminal anarchy.

To his detractors, he is a captive of naive idealism, a profoundly introverted
and secretive man whose friendliness falls short of real friendships and whose
outspoken views on crime mask a darker personality obsessed by irrational fears.

The emerging picture of Mr. Goetz is a kaleidoscope of clashing opinions
reflecting the harshness, if not the scope, of the debate over vigilantism and
public safety that has arisen since he shot four youths who harassed him on a
Manhattan subway train Dec. 22.

Interviews with relatives, acquaintances, former teachers and others in recent
days have drawn the portrait of an inward-looking, socially awkward man who was
raised in small-town comfort and educated in private schools, who divorced once,
succeeded in his own electronics business, but was frustrated in his efforts to
fight drugs, crime and filth in the city.

It is also a picture of a lonely 37-year-old man who has sustained two major
traumas in his life - criminal charges against his father, and a 1981 mugging
that shattered his faith in the administration of justice.

''He's a young professional person, that's about the best way to describe him,''
said Ludwig Goetz Jr., a cousin in Florida, who noted that Bernhard had never
been in trouble with the law. ''He's not a vigilante. He's a person who tends to
mind his own business.''

Some of Mr. Goetz's neighbors at 55 West 14th Street, however, spoke negatively
of him. They described what they called strange behavior and erratic moods; one
said Mr. Goetz would engage him in animated conversation one day and ignore him
the next. None of these people would speak for attribution.

Another neighbor had a sharply different impression.

''This building is his family,'' said Scott Sedita, who lives down the hall from
Mr. Goetz. ''He had a feeling of hopelessness of crime all around. He became
discouraged that things weren't getting better.'' Mr. Sedita said he believed
that Mr. Goetz's mugging by three thugs in 1981 was a turning point in his life.
''He was pushed around and beaten pretty badly,'' he said, and afterward became
''a scared individual, vulnerable and fragile.

''As far as Bernie was concerned,'' he added, ''it was equivalent to a woman
being raped.''

Bernhard Hugo Goetz was born at Kew Gardens Hospital in Queens on Nov. 7, 1947,
the youngest of four children of Bernhard Willard and Gertrude Goetz. His mother
was Jewish; his father, a Lutheran, had immigrated to New York in 1928 from
Osnabr"uck, in northwestern Germany.

Young Bernhard, a studious child nicknamed Bu (pronounced Boo), had a brother,
George, now a Detroit resident, and two sisters, Bernice Goetz, of Winter Park,
Fla., and Barbara Weinstein, of Woodside, Calif.

Although his father had been trained as a scientist and engineer in Germany, he
turned to business here. He attended New York University and went to work for a
bookbinding company in Queens. In a few years, he owned the company, Mutual
Specialty Products, which made picture frames and albums for weddings and bar
mitzvahs.

In the early 1940's, Mr. Goetz bought a 300-acre dairy farm near Clinton, N.Y.,
in Dutchess County, and for some years he ran the bookbinding company during the
week and the farm on weekends. In 1949, when Bernhard was 2, the family moved to
the farm.

Soon, however, they moved to nearby Rhinebeck. In 1960, Mr. Goetz bought the
Silver Lake Dairy, an eight-county distributorship that the family still owns. A
few years later, he moved the bookbinding company to Rhinebeck.

In Rhinebeck, the family built three red-brick homes on Wynkoop Lane, living in
one and renting the others. By the 1950's, his father became a major property
owner in Rhinebeck.

Young Bernhard was a good student at Rhinebeck Central School, one who preferred
science to sports and never got into trouble.

''He would rather do research on sun spots than play with the rest of the
boys,'' his sister Bernice recalled. She said he was also very close to both his
parents.

Early Years at Home and Abroad

In 1960, a serious trauma confronted the family. On Feb. 23, the elder Mr. Goetz
was indicted on 18 counts of ''moral wrongdoing.'' He was accused of molesting
two 15-year-old boys at the Clinton farm on Jan. 6, 8 and 10.

A jury found Mr. Goetz guilty of eight counts and he was sentenced to six months
in jail. He appealed, and three years later the Court of Appeals, the state's
highest court, ordered a new trial. At that point, Mr. Goetz agreed to plead
guilty to a single charge of disorderly conduct.

Yesterday, Ludwig Goetz, speaking for the family, denied that the father had
done anything wrong, and said that the boys had lied and tried to blackmail him.
He also charged that the Dutchess County District Attorney at the time was
biased because his brother and Mr. Goetz had been opponents for a seat on the
local school board.

But the case, widely discussed in the small towns of Dutchess County, took a
heavy toll in the family. Children teased and bullied young Bernhard about his
father.

Ludwig Goetz said that to ease their anguish, in 1960 the family sent Bernice
and 13-year-old Bernhard to a private boarding school in Switzerland, the
Institut auf dem Rosenberg at St. Gallen, near Lake Constance.

New Home in Florida

There, Bernhard spent his four high school years in an Alpine setting of
equestrian and ski trails and flower-decked homes in a medieval cathedral town,

Bernhard and Bernice joined a group of British, American and other
English-speaking students, according to the school principal, Otto Gademann. He
said the school, which charges $12,000 a year, separates its 580 students into
Italian-, German- and English-speaking groups for college preparatory courses.

In 1963, the family moved to Orlando, Fla. There, in what would become one of
the fastest-growing areas of the nation in the 1960's and 1970's, Mr. Goetz
developed a tract of 1,100 homes in what came to be known as Park Manor.

The homes, in a semirural area east of Orlando, were sold for prices ranging
from $75,000 to $90,000. The family, which made millions of dollars, continues
to operate the development company; Bernice Goetz is the manager.

Address Found on Receipts


The Goetz home, a four-bedroom, one-story structure of stone and brick at 9967
Gronau Court - an address found on some of the fugitive's receipts between the
time of the shootings and his surrender - is at the end of a cul- de-sac in Park
Manor. There is a pool in the backyard, and the neatly kept property overlooks a
lake.

It was to this home that Bernhard moved when he left Switzerland in 1964, and it
was here that he stopped on his frequent visits to Florida later in life.

His father, the family said, spent much of his fortune over the last two and a
half years battling an illness that the family declined to identify. Mr. Goetz
died last September at the age of 78, leaving an estate of unknown size to be
divided equally among his children. His wife had died in 1977.

In 1965, Bernhard enrolled at New York University. He majored in nuclear
engineering and graduated with a bachelor of science degree in 1970.

'He Wasn't a Loner'


''I remember him as a good student, one of the better ones by far, a really nice
fellow,'' said Raphael F. Aronson, a former professor of nuclear engineering at
the university's now-defunct Bronx campus. ''He was friendly, personable, the
kind of student we like to have. He was intellectually inquisitive. He wasn't a
loner. He had friends.''

After graduation, Mr. Goetz returned to Orlando and worked in the early 1970's
with his father in the development company. According to Bernice, he avoided the
military draft during the Vietnam War by feigning mental illness and seeking
psychiatric aid.

In 1971, he married a woman named Elizabeth. They lived in Orlando for about
four years until they were divorced. They had no children.

When the marriage ended in 1975, Mr. Goetz moved to New York, rented an
apartment at 211 Thompson Street in Greenwich Village and, with the aid of a
lawyer, William Friedman of Hempstead, L.I., incorporated his business, the
Electrical Calibration Laboratory Inc.

Starting a Successful Business

Mr. Goetz, the company's president and sole employee, ran the business out of
his apartment but traveled widely in his work, which involved testing, repairing
and maintaining electrical equipment for manufacturing companies here and across
the country.

The business is technical and the equipment highly sophisticated. For example, a
manufacturer who wanted to sell cable to the Consolidated Edison Company would
need to conduct various tests to insure that the cable was working properly
before it was delivered and buried or otherwise installed; Mr. Goetz's job was
to insure that the manufacturer's testing equipment was working properly. He did
not test the cable itself.

Traveling to factories across the country on appointments scheduled weeks or
months in advance, he calibrated, repaired and tested a wide range of testing
equipment.

To do this, Mr. Goetz had to buy - and sometimes assemble from separately
purchased parts - his own electrical testing equipment, much of which he
obtained from suppliers in lower Manhattan or at auctions in Queens, Brooklyn
and Harlem.

Because such equipment purchases were often cash-and-carry, he frequently
traveled with large sums of money - $2,000 to $4,000, sometimes as much as
$6,000, he told a hearing officer when he applied for a pistol permit in 1982.
Cash, withdrawn as needed from his bank accounts, enabled him to buy bargains on
the spot, he said.

Once, he said, he got a $20,000 piece of equipment for $3,788; on another
occasion, he said, he got a $4,000 item for $302. On the way home, or traveling
to and from jobs, he said, he sometimes had to carry pieces of equipment worth
$15,000 to $20,000.

''I started with nothing five years ago, and today I have somewhere between
$150,000 and $200,000 worth of equipment,'' Mr. Goetz told the hearing officer.

''He was a genius,'' said Josh Kates, owner of Trans-Am Electronics at 383 Canal
Street, who said Mr. Goetz had been fixing and buying his equipment for years.
''He did stuff few guys could do.''

A Quiet Pride

Describing himself to acquaintances as a consultant to utilities, Mr. Goetz
sometimes let it be known that he was one of only five or six such experts in
the country. He seemed to take a quiet pride in his accomplishments.

In April 1977, with business thriving, he moved into a one-bedroom apartment on
the 14th floor front of the 21- story, white-brick building at 55 West 14th
Street. A few years ago, apparently bothered by street noise, he moved to his
current apartment, a slightly larger one-bedroom flat on the ninth floor in the
rear, with a small terrace. His rent is about $650 a month, and he has continued
to work out of his apartment.

The building, which has 238 apartments, is one of two high-rise apartment
buildings set amid a tawdry clutter of bargain clothing stores, furniture
outlets and cut-rate electronic shops on 14th Street between Fifth Avenue and
the Avenue of the Americas. It has uniformed doormen and a concierge and a
canopy jutting out over the sidewalk.

Some tenants and employees recall Mr. Goetz as shy and awkward but given to
moments of great intensity when involved in community affairs or the building's
tenant organization. Sometimes, he passed time chatting with the doormen or
other employees.

Headed Tenants' Group


Tenants said he wrote petitions to the police over what he called inadequate
police protection, growing drug abuse and illegal peddlers on the block.

He joined FAB 14 (For a Better 14th Street), and once donated $300 to the
organization when it ran out of money to pay a private carter to empty the trash
containers it had installed on the street.  A few years ago he served as head of
his building's tenants' committee, which is now defunct.

''I like him, I trust him, I admire him,'' said Allan Horwitz, the publisher of
TV News magazine and a fellow tenant. He said Mr. Goetz sometimes took his
children to Washington Square Park, and last July 4 took them to the roof to see
fireworks.

''He never seemed to be highly emotional,'' Mr. Horwitz said. ''I would think
people who don't know him might think he's an oddball. I think he's a very
stable person. I have never seen him get aroused. I have never seen him yell.''



The Aftermath of a Mugging

If there was a turning point in Mr. Goetz's life in recent years, it was the
mugging.

He was not badly hurt - he suffered a torn cartilage in his chest - but the
episode, and in particular the way he and a suspect were treated in the courts
and by the police, appear to have left him with deep emotional scars.

It happened about 2:30 P.M. on Jan. 26, 1981, in a subway station on Canal
Street. Mr. Goetz had just bought equipment valued at $800 to $1,000 at a nearby
store and he was taking it home, he recalled at the hearing in 1982 on his
application for a pistol permit.

''Three fellows jumped me,'' he said, ''and I ran. They took - they took the
items I was carrying. I ran out of the subway station up the steps. They came
after me. Fortunately for myself, a police officer was on the street. He
apprehended one of the perpetrators. The other two took the things I was
carrying, put them down and ran away. They were very clever.''

Later, he amplified his remarks: ''The arresting officer saw him strike me,
knock me down, and he ran into me, knocking me into a plate-glass window, which
fortunately didn't break. But the door handle hit me in the chest and it tore
cartilage and connecting tissue in my chest.

''Two of the perpetrators saw the police officer and they ran. The third one
continued to beat me. He didn't see him. The police officer nabbed him.''

Detained for 6 Hours


Painful as the injury was, it was the aftermath of the mugging that appeared to
bother Mr. Goetz most.

The apprehended suspect, 16-year- old Fred Clarke of Brooklyn, was taken to
Criminal Court. ''He was kept for 2 hours and 35 minutes,'' Mr. Goetz recalled.
''Now, I was there in the Criminal Court Building for 6 hours and 5 minutes,
along with the police officer who made the arrest.

''And I feel sorry for him,'' Mr. Goetz added, referring to the officer.

A doorman at Mr. Goetz's apartment building also recalled the day. ''He came
back all shook up,'' he said. ''His coat was a mess. All he could say was, 'Do
you believe this? I spent all this time there and this guy walked out in two and
a half hours.' ''

Three weeks later, Mr. Goetz said, he spotted the man who had mugged him mugging
a couple on the street with another man.

At some point before his case was adjudicated, Mr. Goetz said, the arrested man
filed a cross complaint accusing him of starting the incident. ''I think it's
kind of ridiculous,'' he said, ''to consider that someone, let's say in my
position, carrying things, would start up with three blacks alone, in the subway
system.''

Nevertheless, as a result of the cross complaint, the matter was turned over to
a noncriminal mediation process, which is sometimes used to resolve nonviolent
disputes involving conflicting claims.

Sgt. Joseph Charleman, who conducted the pistol-permit hearing, referred at the
hearing to a document about the mediation and described the process in a way
that suggested little satisfaction for an aggrieved person. ''You go over there
and shake hands with all the guys and all of them go home,'' he said. ''That's
what it amounts to.''

Sentenced to 6 Months


Apparently agreeing that the process seemed useless, Mr. Goetz said: ''You
cannot ask me to defend New York City's incompetence, which is exactly what that
piece of paper represents.''

The matter, however, was not concluded through mediation. Mr. Clarke later
pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor, was sentenced to six months in jail and served
four months.

Citing the mugging and his frequent need to carry large sums of cash, Mr. Goetz
applied for a pistol permit later in 1981, but was turned down on the ground
that he had failed to show sufficient need. His appeal of that decision to
Sergeant Charleman also was rejected.

''He was physically hurt,'' his neighbor, Mr. Horwitz, recalled. ''He was beaten
to a certain extent. Then he was hurt a second time when the police did nothing
about it.''

The police believe that Mr. Goetz, blocked from owning a legal weapon, went to
Florida, where it was not difficult to buy the chrome-plated, .38-caliber
revolver used in the subway shootings.

Florida Gun Laws


Florida does not require that gun sales be reported to the authorities. And
while dealers are not supposed to sell to out-of-state buyers, disreputable
dealers often do.

It is unclear when Mr. Goetz bought the gun. It may have been on one of several
trips to Orlando to visit his family in 1982 or 1983. Or he may have bought it
last September, when he flew down for his father's funeral.

Hardly anyone knew about the gun. But Mr. Horwitz's children evidently did.
Eight-year-old Aaron told him so. ''I know my children knew he had a gun,'' Mr.
Horwitz said.  ''I don't think Bernie ever expected to use the gun.''

The police say that precisely when Mr. Goetz began carrying his gun is unclear,
but he had it in his waistband on the afternoon of Dec. 22, as he rode the No. 2
IRT express south toward Chambers Street and the crisis of his life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernhard Goetz as he was taken to Criminal Courts Building in
Manhatten for araignment; Photo of Josh Kates, employee of Goetz

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS SAY VIETNAM APPEARS TO DIG IN

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 607 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 5


Officials of the Cambodian rebel group under attack by Vietnam say that
Vietnamese troops appear to be digging in for a long stay along the border of
Thailand and Cambodia.

The rebel officials said the Vietnamese, along with Cambodian troops loyal to
the Phnom Penh Government, appeared to be seeking to keep the forces of the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front from returning to some abandoned border
settlements as quickly as they had done after previous Vietnamese assaults.

''This is a major change in tactics,'' a spokesman for the front said in an
interview today. ''The Vietnamese seem to be coming to the border to stay.''

Officials said rebels trying to return in late November to the Nong Chan camp,
the first to be attacked, had dug up ''more than a thousand mines'' apparently
planted by the Vietnamese and Cambodian loyalist forces. Penn Thal, spokesman
for the front, and Vora Huy Kanthoul, a member of its administrative staff in
Bangkok, said the mines were small antipersonnel devices, designed to maim.

Mr. Penn Thal, the son of a former Cambodian Prime Minister, Penn Nouth, said
the mining of the camps, particularly civilian areas, might cause officials to
delay indefinitely the return of noncombatants to their former homes. More than
100,000 civilians have fled to sanctuary in Thailand.

The rebel officials said six of seven guerrilla camps had been evacuated, in
some cases only of civilian noncombatants, in other cases of both noncombatants
and guerrillas.

The evacuation of resident noncombatants from the Liberation Front headquarters
at Ampil was completed Friday. Rebel forces there have been preparing for what
some said they feared might be an attack Monday by Vietnamese troops supported
by aircraft.



Attack Failed Last Spring

The Vietnamese and their Cambodian allies failed to take Ampil in fighting last
spring. In that attack, near the end of the last dry season, some small planes
were used, officials of the front say.

Liberation Front officials say helicopter gunships have also been used against
rebel teams that had infiltrated the area around Tonle Sap, the great lake in
northwest Cambodia where Vietnamese fishermen have been reported to be settling.

The dry-season offensive along the border - an annual event since Vietnamese
forces invaded Cambodia in late December 1978 and on Jan. 7, 1979 established
the present Government of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh - began early this year
because the rainy season was unusually short in the area along the Thai border.
The attacks could go on until early next summer, when rains begin again.

According to Mr. Vora Huy Kant houl, 109 people are known to have died since the
Vietnamese attacks began in November. The largest number, 55, was registered at
Nong Chan camp. Eleven dead were reported at Baksei camp; four deaths at Obok,
and 38 at Rithisen camp.



Camp Heavily Mined

The camp at Sokh Sann, south of the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet, has been
considered too dangerous to reoccupy since last spring's assault. The hilly
campsite of four linked villages was heavily mined, officials say. Before the
Vietnamese attack, it had been considered a model camp with a strong civilian
administration, the rebels say.

After the final evacuation of Ampil, only two camps remain unaffected: Dangrek
and Sam Lor, both within 12 to 15 miles of Ampil.

At Dangrek there is also a holdng center for Vietnamese who have escaped
overland through Cambodia and are seeking asylum in the West. Relief officials
are fearful of what could happen to those people if Vietnamese troops should
overrun that area.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A REBEL CAMP A CAMBODIA AWAITS ATTACK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: AMPIL, Cambodia, Jan. 5


Building bunkers is a life-or-death preoccupation in this embattled Cambodian
guerrilla camp, where a major Vietnamese attack has been predicted for weeks. No
one here is any more than an easy dash and dive from the underground shelters
built for protection against Vietnamese artillery.

To the east of Ampil are entrenched units of Vietnam's Fifth Division, more than
2,000 men by guerrilla estimates, with their long-range howitzers trained on
this most important of non-Communist Cambodian resistance bases.

Vietnamese guns, some with a range of up to 19 miles, devastated the refugee
camp of Rithisen, another stronghold of the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, on Dec. 25. The salvos turned the camp's flimsy bamboo and thatch
structures into an inferno. Except for the bunkers, the buildings here in Ampil
are also mostly of thatch and bamboo.

''We will not fight to the last man, but we are going to inflict the maximum
casualties on the Vietnamese,'' said Gen. Dien Del, a tough, well-regarded
leader who once served the United States-backed Government of Marshal Lon Nol in
Cambodia against the Communist Khmer Rouge forces.

3 Groups Oppose the Vietnamese


Now he is vice president of the Liberation Front, one of three major Cambodian
groups fighting the Vietnamese occupation troops and the pro-Hanoi Government in
Phnom Penh, the capital. The front's forces number about 12,000 men and it is
now allied with the Khmer Rouge.

Some continue to predict a Vietnamese attack on Ampil. The 50-year-old general
said he did not indulge in guesswork. He said he believed the Vietnamese were
moving with caution, aware that the Liberation Front was even better prepared
this time than last April when, to the surprise of many, the guerrillas
withstood a major assault against Ampil.

China, General Dien Del said, has kept up its deliveries of rifles, ammunition,
mortars, recoilless rifles and antitank mines. As he spoke, an aide brought in a
B-40 rocket-propelled grenade and laid it on the table next to the general's
iced beer and a United States Army manual on Soviet Army operations. The general
beamed happily.

''It's a special new B-40,'' he said. ''Very powerful against tanks.''

Gauze Masks Being Prepared


Other preparations were taking place. Behind General Dien Del's pleasant house a
half-dozen women were sewing straps onto simple gauze masks. The general said
that the Vietnamese were using an unknown, nonle thal but powerful battlefield
gas at Rithisen camp, where fighting has continued since the Dec. 25 attack.

How many masks were being made, the general was asked. ''About 5,000,'' he
responded with a laugh, alluding to the generally accepted estimate of the
number of Ampil's defenders.

Most of these guerrillas are dug in along the defense lines at Ampil, which hugs
the Thai frontier as do other Cambodian rebel bases.

Normally visitors here are quickly surrounded by playful children, but the
camp's bustling civilian population of 23,500 fled recently after shelling by
the Vietnamese.

They pitched a ramshackle encampment inside Thailand, huddling along the eastern
edge of a Thai-built antitank ditch and ready to bolt across it if an attack
came. Many were reported to have moved farther inside Thailand to a camp run by
the United Nations.

Relief Agencies Provide Food


The red dust of the dry season has settled over the makeshift tents of the
refugees from Ampil. Dirty toddlers play in fetid pools of water. Adults haul
rice bags and tins of cooking oil, distributed by international relief agencies,
to their homes of blue plastic sheeting and bamboo poles.

Some civilians venture back into Ampil each day but most of their simple houses
are deserted, their vegetable gardens untended. A bicycle repairman is still
plying his trade at one intersection while a barber gave a haircut to a
guerrilla in jungle fatigues at his open-air shop.

Ampil is the headquarters of the Liberation Front and a well-organized guerrilla
town. But most of its centers are now barely functioning or are closed.

The Liberation Front military school is still open, with a class of 257 officer
candidates and aspiring noncommissioned officers. But most of the cadets were
out for the day digging bunkers.

The school was set up by General Dien Del, who returned as a refugee from France
in 1979 - just after the Vietnamese invasion and overthrow of the Khmer Rouge -
to become the prime architect of the Liberation Front army.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
RESPECTED CRITIC OF MILITARY: LESLIE ASPIN JR.

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


On the face of it, Les Aspin is a radical departure from the procession of
Congressmen who have overseen the military from the chair of the House Armed
Services Committee.  He won his Congressional seat as an antiwar liberal and
made his name in Washington by cranking out weekly press releases criticizing
the Pentagon brass as living in high style. He commutes to work in a decidedly
unofficial-looking Gremlin, accompanied by his sheepdog Junket, a refugee from a
Wisconsin dog pound.

But Representative Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat chosen Friday as chairman of
the Armed Services Committee, has made converts of many who once took him
lightly.

Although he made his reputation as a needler of the Pentagon, Mr. Aspin has
gained widespread respect on Capitol Hill and in the Pentagon in the last two
years as a serious military thinker and zestful political strategist who does
not automatically fit into any ideological camp.

Behind the man of many whimsical press releases is a man with a doctoral degree
in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an insider's
knowledge of the Defense Department, which he acquired as a systems analyst
under Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara.

Emergence as Power Broker


The event that did the most to transform his public image from gadfly to power
broker came in 1983, when Mr. Aspin, to the horror of liberal colleagues,
negotiated a compromise that saved the MX missile from congressionally mandated
extinction.

Although Mr. Aspin did not think much of the huge new nuclear missile, he
supported it in exchange for Administration promises to pursue arms control
negotiations with the Soviet Union and to develop a smaller, mobile missile for
the 1990's.

However, in Wisconsin last summer, a majority of the delegates to his party's
state convention voted to censure him for his role as defender of the MX.

Many House Democrats who bitterly fought him on that issue, however, voted to
give him the chairmanship over more senior Democrats. They said Mr. Aspin was
the one more likely to hold up the Defense Department to scrutiny and less
likely to be intimidated by Pentagon pressure.

Leslie Aspin Jr. was born July 21, 1938, in Milwaukee, the son of a Yorkshireman
who had immigrated to Wisconsin by way of Canada.

In Washington, Representative Aspin, a hulking figure with an irreverent wit,
often entertains politicians, academics and reporters at a Georgetown home that
reflects the rumpled look of its owner. He is divorced and has no children.

Economist at the Pentagon


Mr. Aspin earned degrees from Yale, Oxford and M.I.T. He joined the Reserve
Officer Training Corps at Yale, and performed his Army service as a Pentagon
economist in the last two years of the Johnson Administration, an assignment
that included trips to study the inflationary economy of South Vietnam.

He understudied for Congress as an aide in the office of Senator William
Proxmire of Wisconsin, the originator of the ''Golden Fleece'' award for what
Mr. Proxmire views as official misconduct.

When he won his House seat in 1970, riding the crest of opposition to the war in
Vietnam, Mr. Aspin quickly put his mimeograph to work, chastising the Pentagon
on issues ranging from its subsidized officers' dining halls to its poison gas
experiments with beagles.

''Anything that was beneath Proxmire's attention went to Les's staff,'' recalled
Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., who was occasionally the butt of those press
releases. In 1973 a volley of Aspin press releases derided General Haig, then
commander of United States forces in Europe, because his dog Duncan had been
transported around Europe on military aircraft. General Haig, pleading ignorance
of his dog's free travel, reimbursed the Government.

'Never Took Him Lightly'


Nonetheless, General Haig said Friday of Mr. Aspin: ''I never took him lightly.
He's an individual in whom I have the utmost respect, not only for his
intellectual prowess, which is considerable, but for his strength of
character.''

Among Mr. Aspin's more serious assaults on the military establishment, one that
now seems particularly relevant came in 1975, when he helped organize the ouster
of F. Edward Hebert as chairman of Armed Services. The Louisiana Congressman was
the last in a line of autocratic Southern conservatives to command the panel.

Two years ago Mr. Aspin became chairman of the Subcommittee on Military
Personnel and Compensation. In that role he has crusaded for changes in the
military pension system, which he argues costs too much and entices experienced
officers to retire too early.

When Mr. Aspin was assigned to head that subcommittee, a Pentagon official who
worked as a Defense Department lobbyist recalled, ''Everybody said, 'Oh, my God,
we're in trouble.' ''

''Once he got in the chair, however,'' the official added, ''he really did a
pretty professional job. We might not agree with him, but he's got our respect.
He will be fair and hard.''

The MX missile debate provoked a more widespread reassessment of Mr. Aspin.
Critics said the deal he negotiated with the Reagan Administration was pragmatic
to the point of cynicism. Mr. Aspin countered that it served two good purposes:
giving the Russians a bipartisan show of American will and goading the
Adminstration toward more flexible arms policies.

In his campaign for the Armed Services chairmanship, Mr. Aspin gave some
colleagues the impression he might back away from the MX. But Warren Nelson, a
longtime Aspin aide who now works for the Armed Services Committee, said today
that he expected the new chairman to continue his support of the MX, at least in
the short term, so that the United States could bargain from strength at arms
control talks with the Soviet Union.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Leslie Aspin Jr.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A 'CORIOLANUS' THAT MIXES MODERNISM AND TRADITION



BYLINE:
By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE LONDON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 8, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


It's an encounter easier to imagine

occurring on the modern Via

Veneto or outside some fashion

house in Milan than in the narrow

streets of ancient Rome. In comes Ian McKellen's Coriolanus, exquisitely
accoutered in white overcoat, white suit, white shoes and blue tie and shirt, to
confront several dozen members of the National Theater audience, who have been
specially corralled onstage. ''What would you have, you curs?'' he asks this ad
hoc lynch mob, which the night I was there included a young lady with a Gucci
handbag, a beaming professorial type in tweed, and some puzzled-looking Japanese
tourists; and answer comes there none.

Peter Hall is the director of this ''Coriolanus,'' as he is of the National
itself, a theater that has been making much public noise of late about its
financial problems. Was this improbable Roman rabble, one wondered, actually his
demonstration to the powers-that-be that he couldn't afford even a scattering of
walk-ons, let alone the multitudes recorded by critics and historians of the
past? In one 19th-century production of Shakespeare's play, for instance, no
less than 200 plebeians ''fluctuated to and fro as their violent assent or
dissent impelled them, with a loud and overwhelming suddenness and one- minded
ponderosity, truly fearful to think of encountering.''

Mr. Hall's counterparts spent the evening in forlorn transit between the stage,
where they milled sheepishly about, and some specially erected benches at its
sides and back, from which they wanly bleated ''it shall be so'' to Coriolanus's
banishment from Rome. You'd find more violent dissent, suddenness and
ponderosity among the shoppers at a bargain counter.

But there's more to the production than this pointed reminder of the National's
penury, or gesture toward ''audience participation,'' or whatever it may be.
There is, above all, Ian McKellen, that brilliant yet exasperating actor. With
him, classical style can sometimes become classical affectation. He abandons
straight, standard English for a strange regional accent in which stretched-out
vowels melodiously throb, then soar or swoop into little cadenzas all their own.
The mere word ''boy'' can become almost an aria in itself, a long euphonious
whinny of ''boohayaheeah.'' It's true that Coriolanus is a pretty narcissistic
character, and therefore that some degree of vocal preciosity can be justified,
perhaps especially here. You wouldn't expect him to react with brusque
monosyllables when his great enemy has just provoked him to a suicidal display
of hubris and rage. All the same, ''boohay'' would surely be sufficient.



Happily, the musical decoration can't conceal that the performance has a tune,
and one that's strong and true. Coriolanus, you'll probably recall, is a
disconcerting blend of romantic thug and heroic brat. His exploits in war win
him a popular acclaim he despises; he's exiled for his mandarin politics and
personal arrogance; and Rome and the Roman plebs are saved from his vengeance
only by the intercession of his mother Volumnia, the one human creature who awes
him. On the face of it, the part wouldn't seem altogether suited to Mr.
McKellen, an actor not noted for martial machismo. Yet he's surprisingly
effective even as a killing- machine, with his blood-streaked torso and grim
relish for the fray. And when it comes to expressing pride, disdain and
contempt, he verges on the astonishing. Is there another living actor who can
sneer quite like him?

It is done in the most relaxed way. He saunters across the stage, one hand in a
pocket and the other casually holding the sword he likes to keep poised on his
shoulder, and he smiles, always he smiles. Up go his lips, almost to the sides
of his nose, in a fastidious smirk; then out they spread in a big, knowing,
dangerous grin; and from between them there pours something it would be absurdly
inadequate to describe as sarcasm. Call it rather emotional acid, burning and
biting even when lightly applied. Is there another living actor paradoxical
enough to give us so much fussy mannerism one moment - and so much forceful
matter the next?

Mr. Hall has been paradoxical, too. At any rate, he has played odd Einsteinian
games with Rome's space- time continuum, presenting us with a place where
weapons of war are sometimes broadswords and sometimes bullets, and command is
exercised by men in pin-striped suits, men in togas, and (for variety) men in
pin- striped suits and togas. And the quality of supporting performance is as
unpredictable as the costume department, extending from the barely adequate to
the very good, a category most memorably filled by Irene Worth's majestically
unruffled Volumnia, a lady with the kind of absolute confidence that inspires
absolute meekness in others. For a moment in her final encounter with her son it
looks as if she may not get her way, and you can sense her hurt, pique and sheer
bafflement; but of course it passes. There is a long, long pause, and Mr.
McKellen stretches out his hand to her, with a helpless gurgle of ''Mother,
mother, what have you done?'' Formidable fellow though he is, he never stood a
chance with Miss Worth.



The reason ''Doonesbury'' failed on Broadway last year was perhaps that it tried
too hard to succeed. How much better if the songs and the cozy plot had been
ditched, and Garry Trudeau's published cartoons been presented as a more or less
unconnected series of revue sketches! That's what a writer called Harry Ditson
has done with and for Jules Feiffer at the prestigious Lyric Theater in the West
London borough of Hammersmith, and the result is not only entertaining but
enlightening. ''Feiffer's America,'' as it's called, presents us with a
political consciousness in anguished evolution; from skepticism to fury to
despair to a sort of eye-rubbing disbelief as history throws up what the
caricaturist regards as yet another disastrous President, yet another calamitous
era.

Mr. Feiffer himself provides a pithy linking commentary. He grumbles at
Eisenhower (''the economy prospered, the attention span died''), he mildly
sneers at Kennedy (''acted out a style of charged glamour''), he rages at
Johnson (''the first terrorist to the American Dream''), he shrugs off Ford
(''filled space like a vacuum''), he blinks at Reagan (''presides over two
countries: the U.S., about which he is ignorant, and Movie America, about which
he is expert'').

But the real interest of the evening is, of course, that it gives flesh to
nearly 30 years of inky rumination and two-dimensional parody: the 1950's
defense expert who suggests a ''Mr. and Mrs. Mutation Contest'' to reconcile the
American public to the Bomb; the 1960's hippie who screams, occupies buildings
and calls people pigs in ''an attempt to humanize this brutalized society''; the
one- legged 1970's veteran who can't forgive those who refused to serve their
country - ''John Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon''; the 1980's
President who breezes in with ''Hi, pal! More guns, less butter, phooey on the
poor, have a nice day,'' and leaves his critics saying ''What a neat guy.''

Perhaps we hear too little from Mr. Feiffer the witty analyst of raveled psyches
and self-conscious relationships. Perhaps we see too much of the celebrated
Feiffer dancer, though that particular objection is hard to sustain when her
rapture and her disillusion are both embodied by the hardly less celebrated Lynn
Seymour. Perhaps the evening as a whole would seem more predictable to Americans
than to the English, too much a case of revisiting Vietnam and treading
Watergate. But at least the show brings the author of ''Little Murders'' and
''God Bless'' back to the stage, and in a similarly disenchanted and rancorous
mood.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ian McKellen

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INFLATION GETS BACK TO NORMAL

BYLINE: By Gordon Williams;
 By GORDON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3621 words


Gordon Williams is business correspondent for ABC News, and author of several
books on investments and finance.




It was Friday the 13th, July 1984 - the day when

inflation died in the collective mind of Wall

Street.

After a steady five-month rise, interest rates plunged that hot humid day,
finishing the week down a half percentage point and triggering a bond market
recovery that is still in progress.

In the weeks before that, fears of worsening inflation were widespread. The
economy had grown at a sizzling pace in the first half of the year, and
economists warned repeatedly that the United States could not sustain such
heated growth without an outbreak of new inflation. The slowdown in the economy
that began at midyear did little to eradicate the worries. Most analysts assumed
that the Federal Reserve, fearing a recession in an election year, would loosen
its rein on the money supply and drive interest rates down in an effort to spur
the economy on to faster growth.

Instead, the Fed let interest rates go higher and higher as the summer unfolded
- in effect, using the nation's inflationary expectations to defeat inflationary
expectations. And the tactic worked.

''It suddenly dawned on people that that was the way the Fed was going to run
policy,'' said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Shearson Lehman/American Express,
referring to the fall in rates during the second week of July. And Irwin
Kellner, chief economist at the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, added:
''People stopped looking at forecasts of higher inflation and started looking at
reality.''

In the half year since then, inflation has continued on its moderating course,
and has dropped to lower levels. Raw material prices, measured by the Commodity
Research Bureau's Futures Price Index of 27 commodities, have fallen 14 percent.
And as the year ended, inflation, by all measures, was almost at a virtual
standstill.

Even the public seems finally convinced that inflation is whipped. According to
the latest attitude survey from the Survey Research Center at the University of
Michigan, consumers who, five years ago, expected inflation to run at 12
percent, expected a rise of just 4.4 percent for the next year when they were
polled last fall. That may be one reason, some say, for this Christmas's
disappointing retail sales. Buyers, for the first time in years, were not in a
rush to beat tomorrow's higher prices.

And economists, too, have put aside their gloom over prices. For the first time
in a long time, there is broad agreement in the profession that the high and
volatile inflation that plagued the American economy in the late 1960's and
throughout the 1970's has been purged and will not return for years to come.
Most crystal balls put inflation for the rest of the decade within a range of 3
to 6 percent - still high historically, but a sharp improvement over the
double-digit levels of the 1970's.

''Barring bad luck on the oil price front, the days of double-digit inflation
won't be seen again through the remainder of this decade, at least,'' said David
Blitzer, chief economist for the Standard & Poor's Corporation. Added David
Jones, chief economist at Aubrey G. Lanston & Company: ''It looks like inflation
is down for the count as far as the foreseeable future is concerned.''

And James Tobin, a Nobel economist and Yale University professor, echoes the
same optimism: ''Inflation is in pretty good shape to continue at rates around
what we have now.''

The victory over inflation is much more than a victory over the price indexes.
For if the new consensus is correct, the American economy has returned in the
1980's to a state of economic normalcy not seen since the mid-1960's. If so,
policy makers in the second Reagan Administration - without the persistent
nightmare of high inflation hanging over their heads and limiting their policy
options - can hope to achieve more consistent growth, lower unemployment and
higher productivity than their predecessors managed to achieve. In the past,
high or rising inflation often forced the White House or the Fed to scrap even
moderate growth policies for fear that they might generate shortages and
inefficiencies that would worsen inflation.

''The cycle has carried us away from the economy of the 1970's back to the
economy of the 50's and 60's,'' said Mr. Kellner, of Manufacturers Hanover. Of
course, there were recessions in the 1950's and inflation ballooned in the
late-1960's - but both problems were more moderate in the earlier postwar period
than in recent years. In the two decades from 1950 to 1970, yearly growth
averaged 4 percent and inflation about half that. Few expect that record to be
repeated. But many economists now predict far better performance in the years
ahead than the 2.5 percent growth and 6.5 percent inflation averaged from 1970
to 1983.

Beneath the new optimism, there are still worries, of course. Even Professor
Tobin, who thinks things ''are pretty much back to a kind of normal''
established in the early 1960's, says the Government cannot maintain such an
economy indefinitely, given the very loose fiscal policy of the Reagan
Administration and the very tight monetary policy of the Federal Reserve. ''The
distortions are immense,'' he said.

Still the Yale economist says it could be a decade before these distortions,
caused primarily by the huge



 budget deficit, begin to cause critical problems for the economy. For now, he
says there is no reason that the real gross national product cannot grow at
about 5 percent a year throughout the mid-1980's and then settle to 3 percent
annual growth rate.

Another caution is raised by Henry Kaufman, chief economist at Salomon Brothers.
He refuses to proclaim victory over inflation because America's gains have come
when other industrial economies are still weak and putting little pressure on
limited world supplies of commodities and manufactured goods. ''You're seeing
only the first part of an economic cycle of expansion,'' he said. ''All this
progress against inflation must be tested in a more normal global setting.''

Mr. Kaufman, who had been a prominent voice last year in warning against higher
inflation, now expects only modest inflation this year and for the time being
and he says that the new ceiling for inflation is in the high single-digits. In
early 1980, the Consumer Price Index rose at a 15 percent annual rate.

Judging from talks with economists, the defanging of inflation was the result of
five separate, but interrelated, developments:


*

Tight monetary policy.  Mr. Jones of Aubrey G. Lanston, gives the Federal
Reserve Board fully 75 percent of the credit for turning inflation and
inflationary expectations around. ''The Fed squeezed money growth more
aggressively than anyone expected,'' Mr. Jones said. Beginning with October
1979, the Fed began targeting growth in the money supply instead of interest
rates. Since then the Fed's relentless anti-inflation policies have impressed
even its critics. The Fed under chairman Paul A. Volcker, has been willing to
risk the displeasure of the White House, to drive the nation through
back-to-back recessions (January through July 1980 and July 1981 through
November 1982) and to risk another slowdown in an election year in its
determination to use restrictive monetary policy to root out inflation.


*

The strong dollar.  The dollar, after dropping throughout the 1970's, has risen
40 percent against other key currencies since 1980, according to the Morgan
Guaranty Trust Company. Though the high dollar has pushed up the price of
American goods abroad, the United States currency has also struck a blow at
inflation by making foreign goods relatively inexpensive in this country.
Consequently, domestic producers have not been able to raise prices. Since
business cannot raise profits by raising prices, it must become more productive,
which has produced a surge of new capital investment. (The dollar's rise has had
adverse consequences, as well, such as higher unemployment and business failures
in America's export industries.)


*

Slumping commodity prices.  Demand for raw materials has greatly diminished and
commodity prices have dropped sharply in the wake of America's back-to-back
recessions, the relative weakness of other major world economies and the waning
of inflation worldwide. The Commodity Reseach Bureau's Index of Futures Prices
rose 82.5 percent between August 1977 and November 1980, but has fallen 28
percent since 1980, with half the decline in the past six months. A major
contributor to the lower prices has been oil, which has dropped from an official
OPEC level of $34 a barrel in 1981, to $29 currently. And outside of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the drop is even greater. ''The
oil shocks are now going in our favor,'' said Professor Tobin, who sees such
things as the lower commodity prices creating a ''fine opportunity for the kind
of expansion that we had in the 1960's.''


*

Stable employment costs.  Eight million Americans are still trying to find a
job. Such unemployment inevitably puts a damper on wage demands, especially in
manufacturing where wage gains historically have been largest. Moreover, the
Reagan Administration's hard hand with the striking air traffic controllers'
union sparked a new, almost anti-union mood in some quarters, helping generate
increased resistance to union wage demands - and not just in trouble industries
like autos and steel. The average first-year wage gains in new contracts
negotiated in 1984 was 2.5 percent, compared with 9.5 percent in 1980. At the
same time, unit labor costs for all businesses rose by an average 10 percent a
year in the late 1970's, but by less than 1 percent in 1983 and 1984. Viewed
either way, there has been a dramatic drop in whatever upward pressure wages may
exert on prices.


*

Excess capacity.  For all the strength of the two-year-old recovery, there is
still slack in the economy. In the late 1970's, industry ran at more than 85
percent of capacity - high enough to put inefficient and outmoded plants into
operation and exert upward pressure on prices. This time round, factory use
peaked last summer at less than 83 percent of capacity, and is now around 81.5
percent.

When all the factors are added together, economists generally expect no worse
inflation this year than the 4.3 percent now anticipated for the Consumer Price
Index for 1984 - only half the inflation that the experts had predicted for 1985
as recently as last summer. Retail food prices are expected to rise by only 2
percent in 1985, compared with 4 percent in 1984, according to Agriculture
Department forecasts. The American Gas Association expects stable natural gas
prices; not just this winter, but through the end of the decade.

As for growth in 1985, economists anticipate 3 to 4 percent real growth for the
year. That would be well below the 6.5 percent growth of 1984, but last year's
figure was the fastest spurt in the gross national product since the boom of
1955. And the outlook for 1985 would split the difference between last year's
torrid first half and its sluggish second half, marking a very normal third year
of recovery.

 As for what happens after 1985, if the economy stays on its normal track, there
are some clues from the record of the 1950's and 1960's. Growth in the 1950's
was marred by periodic recessions, as the Federal Reserve battled to keep
inflation under the 3 percent mark - considered a devastatingly high level at
that time.

Some economists fear a similar pattern in the 1980's if the Fed, under chairman
Volcker, overemphasizes keeping inflation and inflationary expectations under
complete control. ''The risk now is that the Fed eases too little, as in the
1970's, it eased too much,'' said Edward Yardeni, director of economics at
Prudential-Bache Securities.

But even stop-go growth patterns of the 1950's would be an improvement over the
inflation-prone, erratic 1970's, economists say. For all its flaws, the
low-inflationary economy of the 1950's and 1960's provided a climate for the
smooth functioning of the capital markets, which in turn fueled industrial
growth.

What might can go wrong in the coming years? The obvious answer would be the
same sort of external shocks and poorly conceived policies that produced the
inflation of the 1970's.

It is now widely believed that inflation was actually kicked off by the decline
in the value of the dollar that began in the the 1960's, accelerated with
floating exchange rates after 1971 and lasted until 1980. That drop raised the
cost of imports as America's hunger for foreign goods became intense.

The dollar's slide coincided with the inflationary consequences of the huge
budget deficits the United States ran in financing both the Vietnam War and the
Great Society social programs. Next came the explosion of pent-up inflation
after the Nixon Administration removed wage-price controls in 1973. That was
also the year that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries quadrupled
the price of oil and a series of worldwide agricultural mishaps drove food
prices into an upward spiral.

Through it all, many now say, the Federal Reserve created money too lavishly.
The money supply grew, for example, by 2.8 percent a year between 1960 and 1964,
to finance 4 percent real economic growth, compared with an increase of 7
percent a year between 1975 and 1979, to finance 3.5 percent growth.

Looking ahead, the rate of inflation is likely to pick up somewhat when the
dollar finally begins to fall and when commodity prices stop dropping. But for a
replay of double-digit inflation, analysts say, the economy would have to be
swept by a series of shocks, comparable in magnitude to OPEC's price increases
of the 70's or the Vietnam War effort. And, it would require that the Federal
Reserve compound everything by again keeping money too easy for too long.

The last point is a touchy one for there are still some skeptics who think the
Fed might return to its old easy money ways. Mr. Kaufman, for one, fears that
the Fed will not continue its tight monetary policy if doing so threatens
seriously to push the economy into another recession. ''The world cannot afford
a recession in the United States,'' just as Europe and the developing countries
are experiencing the beginning of a recovery, said Mr. Kaufman.

Other economists worry about the Fed caving in to White House pressure and
creating more money to finance the mammoth Federal deficit. ''Inflation is not
just an economic phenomenon, but a political one,'' said Mr. Sinai of Shearson
Lehman. In that light, recent comments from Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan
that the White House might want to bring the Federal Reserve more under its
control, sent a chill through the financial community. Such control would mean
that the White House could regulate monetary policy to help finance the debt
spewed forth by its loose fiscal policy, a situation that would almost surely
lead to higher inflation.

Economists would worry even more if Mr. Volcker quit as Fed chairman before his
term ends in 1987. But the betting now in Washington is that the Fed chairman
will not leave his post until real progress is made toward cutting the budget
deficit.

Despite major gains against inflation, the economy of the 1980's will not be an
exact duplicate of the economy of the 1950's and 1960's, before double- digit
inflation reared its head.

 The policy goal in the earlier period was ''4 and 4'' - 4 percent economic
growth, and 4 percent unemployment, with inflation averaging about 2 percent.
Unemployment is higher than that these days - in the vicinity of 7 percent. And
inflation, though diminished, is higher, too. The hope in the years ahead is to
keep unemployment on a declining path and to keep inflation from repeating the
violent swings that marked its course in the 70's.

 Productivity, which lagged so badly in the 1970's, seems to be on an upward
path again, gaining historic norms of around 3 percent a year, according to The
Conference Board. Between 1973 and 1982, productivity showed virtually no gain
at all.

The major problem ahead remains interest rates, which are still very high
compared with the levels that seldom exceeded 4 percent in the 1950's and early
1960's. Rates are high compared with the current level of inflation, too. Given
4 percent inflation, history would suggest that the prime rate should be between
7 and 8 percent, against the current 10 3/4 percent level. A dramatic
breakthough on cutting the budget deficit would probably knock rates down
quickly. But the odds are against any such progress soon, indicating that rates
will keep drifting slowly lower as the perception spreads that inflation has
been conquered.

Economists are loath to say it aloud, but many say privately that another
recession in 1985 - as painful as it would be in terms of lost production and
lost jobs - would have a beneficial impact on interest rates, bringing them a
lot closer to where they should be. ''It's irresistible to think what one more
dose of mild recession would do,'' said one Wall Street economist.

Though most Americans are enjoying the slowing of inflation - known as
disinflation - some are having a hard time living with it - from depositors
whose money market accounts are yielding less than in the late 1970's, to
borrowers who find they cannot pay back loans in deeply deflated dollars, to
businesses whose profits are squeezed because they cannot raise prices or
appreciate the value of their inventories. For many corporations competing with
cheap imports, the switch to a lower-inflation world has brought devastating
competition.

Deflation - an actual drop in prices - has also taken a toll in some sectors.
Among the most visible victims are those who profited most from high inflation -
speculators in gold, silver, diamonds and other tangible assets, including oil.

The erosion in the value of oil, was a prime factor in the $765 million
write-off by Texaco against its fourth- quarter earnings. Many companies sought
hedges against inflation by investing in natural resources, and nearly all have
seen the value of those assets dwindle. The nation's farmers are perhaps the
most graphic example of deflationary pain. The dollar value of ''good'' Middle
Western farmland fell 10 percent last year, and some 17 percent in Iowa.

Still, it was never likely that inflation and inflationary expectations could be
broken without casualties. If deflation hurts some people, inflation hurt
everyone.




LOW INFLATION:BOLSTERING STOCKS AND BONDS


Last week's drop in gold prices to below $300 an ounce - a two-and-a-half year
low - provides perhaps the best illustration of how the investment climate has
changed with lower inflation. Since 1982's second half, tangible investments
such as gold, silver, real estate and collectibles have lost much of their
speculative appeal, while financial assets like stocks and bonds have generally
appreciated, even considering the stock market's recent doldrums. If price
stability persists, experts say, financial assets will continue to rise in
value.

The logic is straightforward. When the general price level rises, the price of
tangibles nearly always keeps pace because investors view hard goods as a store
of real value.

But investors view stocks and bonds differently. Bond prices often fall because
inflation brings higher interest rates. Stock prices also fall during inflation
because companies cannot always pass increased costs on to customers, and
profits are squeezed.

Even when companies can raise their prices and maintain profits, investors often
remain skeptical of stocks, since prices overall have risen and the companies
may be no better off. So as inflation gives way to stable prices, stocks and
bonds should come more into favor.

''It doesn't mean you will not be able to make money off a well-selected piece
of real estate or a well-selected coin,'' said Robert Salomon, a managing
director of Salomon Brothers Inc. ''But it does mean that, at least for now, you
should get better relative value in financial assets.''

If financial assets do rise in value, it would mark a complete reversal from
conditions in the mid- 1970's, when inflation and interest rates soared, and
stocks and bonds took a beating. At that time, the tangible asset called the
single-family home became the vehicle through which thousands of Americans got
rich overnight. Big money was also made on commodities and collectibles such as
paintings and antiques.

For the most part, however, the markets already reflect the new reality of lower
inflation - financial assets have boomed in the past two years. Dean Witter
Reynolds Inc. says that since August 1982, the return on stocks as measured by
the capital gains and dividends on shares in the Standard & Poor's 500 stock
index has been 81.7 percent. The return on a 30-year Government bond has been
45.8 percent, considering both interest and price appreciation.

The median price on existing single-family homes, meanwhile, has risen a meager
4.5 percent - to $72,000 - while the price of gold has dropped 7.7 percent. Dean
Witter, in fact, sees prices on tangibles holding basically steady this year,
but it says the Dow Jones industrial average, which closed Friday at 1,184.96,
could exceed 1,350 by mid-year.

''After adjusting for lower inflation, the financial assets will offer a whale
of a return,'' predicted John D. Connolly, chairman of the investment policy
committee at Dean Witter.

Eric Berg

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of David Jones, James Tobin and Irwin Kellner; Graph: Annual
rate of change in the Consumer Price Index, all urban consumers; Graph: Aveage
annual trade-weighted value of the dollar; Graph: Commodities; Graph: Capacity
utilization for all industry; Graph: Average first-year wage increases for newly
negotiated contracts

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A COMMON ENEMY UNITES HOSTILE FACTIONS IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


''It happened so fast they didn't have time to grab their shoes,'' said a nurse
treating the lacerated feet of Cambodians who fled to sanctuary in Thailand as
Vietnamese artillery bombarded their camp late last month.

For a decade, hundreds of thousands of Cambodians have been running, first from
the brutal Khmer Rouge regime that terrorized Cambodia from 1975 to 1978, taking
millions of lives, and then from the Vietnamese, who six years ago this week
overthrew the Khmer Rouge and installed the Heng Samrin Government in Phnom
Penh. Last week, they were running again - some for the fourth or fifth time -
as Vietnamese and Cambodian Government troops opened their annual dry-season
offensive against the persistent rebellion based along the Thai border.

In Hanoi and Phnom Penh, officials said in recent interviews that this rebellion
would be put down ''in five to 10 years.'' To Vietnamese veterans of half a
century of fighting, that evidently does not seem long. Cambodians, meanwhile,
will continue to crisscross the border, fleeing and returning and fleeing again.

Cambodia's catastrophic civil war is a tangled web of conflicts within
conflicts, linked to great-power politics. This is not an East-West conflict but
an East-East struggle between the Soviet Union and China for influence in
Southeast Asia and the Pacific. It is further complicated by Vietnam's regional
ambitions and strategic perceptions, particularly of Cambodia as a crucial
geographic ''splint'' that some believe could one day prevent a north- south
Vietnamese fracture. ''Just look at the map of Vietnam,'' a diplomat in Hanoi
explained.

On the surface, the three Cambodian guerrilla armies are united in a loose
coalition to overthrow Heng Samrin and drive out the Vietnamese, traditional
enemies of the Khmer people. But under the trappings of unity, the coalition -
which holds Cambodia's United Nations seat and is recognized as the Government
by countries such as Yugoslavia, Egypt, Malaysia and Pakistan - is an unworkable
alliance born of expediency and international compromise.

The faction headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the coalition president, and a
second grouping - a union of splinter groups led by the 73-year-old former Prime
Minister, Son Sann - are anti-Communist or at least neutral in ideology. The
third and strongest faction is the remnant Communist Khmer Rouge army still
believed to be under the direction of Pol Pot. The three factions maintain
separate armies and separate civilian support systems and fight separate wars.
There is much mutual suspicion. The non-Communists share a loathing for the
Khmer Rouge, whose atrocities have not been forgiven. Khmer Rouge soldiers are
routinely shot at if seen around an allied camp, a member of Son Sann's Khmer
Peoples National Liberation Front said recently at the big Rithisen camp.  Many
Cambodians, as well as members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
Western diplomats, find Pol Pot offensive and would like to see him go if the
coalition is ever to have a governing role in Phnom Penh. The stumbling block is
Peking.  A Pol Pot Ploy?  For the Chinese, who regularly talk about ''teaching
Vietnam a lesson,'' Pol Pot is their most potent weapon. Though Vietnamese
attacks have been largely concentrated on the large, easy targets of the Son
Sann group's camps, it is the Khmer Rouge, residents of Phnom Penh say, who are
most dangerous. Khmer Rouge guerrillas are reported to be striking throughout
Cambodia against the forces of Heng Samrin and the 160,000 to 180,000 Vietnamese
troops.  China seems preoccupied with what it sees as Vietnamese treachery and
Soviet opportunism. ''We gave the Vietnamese so much in their fight against the
Americans, when we were a poor country and had so little,'' a Chinese official
said recently in Peking. ''And all the time the Russians were working to turn
them against us.'' Vietnam and its Soviet backers, who provide more than $1
billion a year in military and other aid and who are reportedly stationing
advanced Soviet weapons, ships and planes in Vietnam, are conducting a sharp
propaganda campaign against China. Thailand, through which Chinese weapons for
the Khmer Rouge and other rebels flow, is berated too. Vietnam also accuses
China of continuing attacks along their common border, and has offered
substantial evidence that Peking is financing and training subversives inside
Vietnam.

Vietnam has suggested that talks on Cambodia might be possible if the other
parties renounced Pol Pot. Negotiations would appear to be to Vietnam's
advantage, since the non-Communist Southeast Asian nations as well as Japan and
the United States have told Vietnam, one of Asia's poorest countries, that the
development aid it needs is contingent on military withdrawal from Cambodia. But
Representative Stephen Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House Foreign
Affairs subcommittee on Asia, said recently, after several days of talks in
Hanoi and Phnom Penh, that Vietnam appeared to be using the possibility of
negotiations as a ploy to divide the West and the Asean countries from China.

Hun Sen, Cambodia's Foreign Minister and himself a former Khmer Rouge brigade
commander who says he broke with Pol Pot in 1977, told Mr. Solarz and
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat and member of Mr.
Solarz's subcommittee, that there would be no contacts with Prince Sihanouk or
Son Sann until ''Pol Pot was eliminated militarily and politically,'' and
Thailand had ''ceased to be a sanctuary'' for rebels. Mr. Hun Sen called on the
United States to use its leverage with the Chinese and Thais to cut support for
Pol Pot.

Asean politicians, too, say they would like to see the Americans more actively
involved in seeking ways to break the Cambodian deadlock. But Southeast Asians
know well, a Singaporean politician said recently, that this is part of the
world America would rather forget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Map

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3442 words


FICTION

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By Frank Tuohy. (William Abrhams/Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $19.95.)

The stories of Frank Tuohy travel widely - the settings vary from Latin America
to Eastern Europe to Japan. At their most moving, they show the bewilderment of
clashing cultures, the way the collision of sharp edges helps mark the walls of
one's prisons - prisons of custom, of language, of status, of religions. One
needn't go abroad, of course, to find oneself imprisoned. ''Live Bait'' the very
fine work that concludes this collection of 36 stories published over a period
of 20 years, is among the most moving of many excellent tales. Set in Mr.
Tuohy's native England, it delineates the almost unnoticeable, yet disfiguring,
marks of class as the torments of a young boy, a scholarship student at a once
''good'' preparatory school, are compounded by the inexplicable actions of
adults and the depredations of an ineffective child molester. (Few experiences
can be more isolating than that of a child, lost in the foreign land of adults,
where the attacks are without explanation, and there is no one who can
understand one's cries.) What is most poignant in these stories is the sense of
what is left out or concealed by the restrictions of age, class, race, culture
and religion, the self that isn't quite accounted for, that is necessarily
unknown to the world that deals only in those categories. In ''The Broken
Bridge,'' a Western teacher in Japan weeps for a Japanese student who is
unintentionally humiliated by an American director - asked by the director to
kiss another male student during the performance of an Arthur Miller play, he
commits suicide. The clash of cultures, the failure of one to imagine the other,
is here fatal. But only in fiction is one truly seen, the losses tallied, the
self revealed as more than the prisons that enclose it. In Mr. Tuohy's stories
the characters are imagined, and known - if only to the reader - even as we see
them surrounded by that unbridgeable solitude that society makes around all of
us.- Jay Cantor

THE STATE OF STONY LONESOME. By Jessamyn West. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$12.95.)

The historian Frederick Jackson Turner once said that the American frontier was
not a place but rather a spirit - ''of determination, of endurance, of
independence, of individualism, of optimism.'' Jessamyn West's works embody this
spirit. In ''The State of Stony Lonesome,'' as in her other books, readers find
characters they would be proud to call friends: Ginerva Chalmers, a vibrant -
yet proper - teen-ager; her uncle Zen, whom she secretly loves; her delicate,
obstinate mother, Birdeen; even Sarah Loomis, the ''blowsy'' mistress of the
local post office - and of uncle Zen. They inhabit a lush, moral Valencia,
Calif., and their meetings, partings, sentiments and conflicts are as revealing
of place and time as fiction has a right to be. The structure is plain. On the
eve of Ginerva's marriage to a young, suitable man, Zen invites her to ''walk
the memory'' of their relationship. They do so in a series of simple, evocative
flashbacks. The themes of an unspoken attraction, a girl's coming of age,
California life in the early 1920's, will be familiar to Miss West's fans, as
will the economy of voice, rectitude of detail and stylistic grace with which
they are, for the most part, handled. Although Zen and Ginerva recall characters
from ''Cress Delahanty,'' both seem as fresh and juicy as the local Yorba Linda
oranges. Yet the framing story is curiously out of focus. When the ''Come, walk
memory'' tone appears at the beginning and end, the narrative stutters, the
beautifully rendered landscape withers and the reader longs for the
straightforward action of Zane Grey. With this one prominent exception, ''The
State of Stony Lonesome'' is quietly effective, even though, compared with Miss
West's 19 earlier frontier books, it is a relatively minor outpost.- Jacqueline
Austin.

RUSSIAN SPRING.  By Dennis Jones. (Beaufort, $15.95.)

While there has not exactly been a rash of thrillers written from the viewpoint
of a Soviet character, those that have appeared - ''Gorky Park,'' for one - have
usually managed to capture the melancholic, tension- fraught atmosphere of the
Kremlin. Joining their ranks is Dennis Jones's ''Russian Spring,'' which moves
deftly between the war in Afghanistan and a power struggle among the commissars
in the back room. The all-too-human protagonist is Andrei Mikhailov, a colonel
in both the Russian Army and the K.G.B., whose bitter experiences in Afghanistan
lead him to betray military secrets to the C.I.A. and the Afgan rebels.
Ironically, this deception jeopardizes a new Secretary General, Mikhailov's
uncle, who wants to end the war and put ''a human face on socialism'' - policies
that do not sit well with the hard-liners. A small war between the army and the
K.G.B. ensues, and Mr. Jones makes it seem as inevitable as it is gripping.
Parallels here between Afghanistan and Vietnam are hardly accidental. The
military bungling, the decimation of the civilian population, the discrimination
encountered by non-Slav troops are soberly related. Moreover, the author's
rendering of Russia's moral and political landscape tempts one to judge this
thriller by standards that ordinarily apply to serious fiction. Perhaps Mr.
Jones could have probed more deeply into Mikhailov's motives and into his
relationship with his C.I.A. control. But these are sins of omission, not
commission. Mr. Jones's readers can rejoice in the conspicuous absence of
overcooked dialogue and ludicrous metaphors as well as in the exploration of new
terrain. I know of only one other thriller centered around Afghanistan - Gerald
Seymour's ''In Honor Bound.'' That was almost as good as ''Russian Spring.'' -
Arthur Krystal

THE NOTEBOOK OF GISMONDO CAVALLETTI.  By R. M. Lamming. (Atheneum, $11.95.)

This story of 16th-century self-doubt was awarded the 1983 David Higham prize
for first fiction in England. Gismondo Cavalletti is a peasant boy plucked from
a meager existence by a childless merchant, Piero Sassoli. Gismondo is raised as
a son and all is well until Sassoli's wife dies during the birth of a son. His
place thus usurped, Gismondo has his uncertain station further brought into
question by an unsightly growth that appears on his face and becomes worse by
the year. The son, Gabriello, takes pleasure at Gismondo's expense, one
Christmas giving him a fine and expensive gift, a mirror that is a constant
reminder of his obvious flaw. The novel is in the form of a notebook in which
Gismondo examines himself, his society, his religion, his brushes with Leonardo
da Vinci and Michelangelo. Most of all, however, his notebook - and this novel -
is an expression of well-reasoned insecurity. Given an important and dangerous
mission by Piero, Gismondo wonders, ''If I don't return and his money's lost,
will he know it's because I'm dead? . . . Or will he think I've made off with
his gold, and curse me?'' Gismondo's lack of station, lack of love, appears on
every page. He searches in each gesture and conversation for some expression of
fatherly love from the man who took him in, yet knows that ''Piero Sassoli never
forgets where he found me. No more than I do.'' ''The Notebook of Gismondo
Cavalletti'' is a somewhat intriguing look at 16th-century Italy, the bounds of
class, the superstitions of religion and the jealousies and fears that transcend
time and place. Yet, although the novel has high literary aspirations, it
ultimately falters under the weight of its own symbolism.- Karen Ray

* DOORKNOB FIVE TWO. By Fredric Arnold. (S. E. Maxwell, Los Angeles, $14.95.)

The 71st Fighter Squadron flew against the Luftwaffe around the Mediterranean
Theater of Operations during what Studs Terkel calls ''The Good War.'' In radio
code of the time (which the enemy seemed to have figured out), the squadron was
known as Doorknob Five Two, hence the title of Fredric Arnold's autobiographical
novel. The overdramatized tale - Mr. Arnold must have been much cooler in the
air than he is at his typewriter - recounts the author's adventures as a young
pilot in North Africa and Sicily. In half a year, he becomes an ace and squadron
leader, pushing his P-38 to the limit during the furious 40's when the Air Corps
was still part of the Army. At 23, he is promoted to major. In his big scene
reminiscent of the dawn patrols of post-World War I movies, he is shot down,
captured by the Italians and turned over to the Germans. Because he wears a
helmet decorated with a Jewish star, the interrogating officer asks him,
''Jude?'' But in the chivalric tradition between airmen on both sides, the
American pilot's religion is ignored and he is treated as a fellow officer by
his German captors. He manages to escape without being shipped to the Third
Reich. And he reports that some of his own group members are anti-Semitic. One
tells him, ''Just remember, for a Jewish boy we treated you like a real
American.'' Mr. Arnold's novel underscores the ironies of battling the
discrimination on the ground and the Messerschmitts in the air.- Herbert Mitgang

CHAINS. By Douglas Scott. (David & Charles, $16.95.)

If you overlook sentences such as ''anger surged in his befuddled brain,'' which
nobody wants to wave from his topmast, ''Chains'' is a maritime adventure story
of more than ordinary interest. Set during World War II in Europe, it's one of
the few accounts I know of espionage at sea, among the convoy lanes. The British
protagonist, Captain Chisholm, loses his boat in a U-boat attack, is captured,
mistreated and finally interned in a seemingly benign S S ''mental hospital'' in
France with an American and some Canadian survivors of the disastrous Allied
raid on the French coastal city of Dieppe. Chisholm's captors have devised a
plan to allow him and one of their own men, disguised as a captured Canadian
serviceman, to escape across the English Channel. Not knowing that the escape is
a setup, Chisholm convinces the local French Resistance leaders to participate
in the getaway. Then, while he and the counterfeit Canadian are being rescued
from the icy Channel waters by a British trawler, the French underground members
are rounded up and murdered by the Germans. To disentangle all the loose ends of
the Nazi apparatus, stretching from the mental hospital in France to England and
the British fleet, requires combined intelligence work by Britain, Canada and
the United States. And, as the story unfolds, we discover that the German's
intent is to discover where and when the Allies plan to invade Europe;
meanwhile, the Allies are looking for ''spooks'' who have infiltrated their
invasion fleet to Sicily. This sort of adventure fiction seems very authentic at
times; it takes you very far away from yourself, back to a Britain of wet
sidewalks, blitzed buildings, sandbagged nightclubs, rationed foods and high
ideals. ''Chains'' is written with flat-out melodrama and rather too much
exposition, but it catches you up, nevertheless, in the plight of its innocent
dupe, Chisholm.- Richard Elman

NONFICTION

SPAIN: A Nation Comes of Age. By Robert Graham. (St. Martin's, $14.95.)

The Iberian Peninsula is a very different place than it was a little over 10
years ago. Portugal, which underwent a revolution in 1974, and Spain, which
witnessed the death of Francisco Franco in 1975, have entered the political
mainstream in Western Europe by demolishing authoritarianism with an ease that
surprised democrats as much as it gladdened them. But the countries' struggles
to overcome economic and social problems still give their democracies an
uncertain quality. Robert Graham, who observed Spain from 1977 to 1982 as a
correspondent for London's Financial Times, furnishes a useful, if rather dry,
analysis of how Spain managed to change, along with warnings about problems to
come as the country's backward industries face the competition of the Common
Market. He notes other burdensome legacies, particularly Madrid's uneasy
relations with the provinces, relations that still sometimes lead to violence,
as in the case of the Basques. Spain has been fortunate in finding leadership at
the right time. King Juan Carlos gets well-deserved credit for piloting Spain
through some tight spots; his unsuspected strength of character proved more than
a match for the nostalgic generals whose 1981 coup tried to pull Spain back into
the past. Mr. Graham also credits the leadership of Prime Minister Felipe
Gonzalez. But Mr. Graham has written more for specialists than general readers.
Largely absent are the human touches that would have made King Juan Carlos and
Mr. Gonzalez come alive and made this important story warmer and more
entertaining. - Henry Giniger

INSCRUTABLE EARTH: Explorations Into the Science of Earh. By Ronald B. Parker.
(Scribners, $14.95.)

''The last time my wife emptied our laundry basket,'' Ronald B. Parker writes
near the end of ''Inscrutable Earth,'' ''she discoverd a dead mouse in the
bottom, beneath the clothes. . . . I being a geologist . . . assumed that the
mouse had fallen in and been covered by an accumulation of dirty laundry.'' With
such homely anecdotes as this, Mr. Parker, the author of ''The Sheep Book'' and
the founder of the journal Contributions to Geology, introduces the puzzles,
both large and small, that engage earth scientists - the age and composition of
the earth, the reigns and demises of various plant and animal species, the
origins of precious metals. He raises these subjects with such disarming
simplicity and humor that it is surprising when, like a geologist patiently
chipping away at rock strata, he details the layers of research that have led to
our present understanding of the planet. He follows the work of geologists who
measure the tiny amounts of strontium in the bones of extinct animals and that
of oceanographers who, like accountants, ''balance the inputs and outputs of
salt to and from the ocean.'' Although Mr. Parker espouses a theory of ''gradual
catastrophism'' - the idea that abrupt geologic events are the result of a slow
building up of energy, tension and pressure - he is not for the most part a
theorist with a long view. Instead, he revels in the minutiae of the earth. -
Sarah Boxer

LIVING IT UP: A Guide to the Named Apartment Houses of New York.  By Thomas E.
Norton and Jerry E. Patterson. (Atheneum, $25.)

There are four Majestic apartment houses in Manhattan. At the best known, a
twin- towered skyscraper on Central Park West, there is a legend that part of
the Lindbergh ransom is stashed there. Among the carpenters who worked on the
Majestic in the early 1930's was Bruno Richard Hauptmann, later executed for the
kidnap-murder of Charles A. Lindbergh's baby. Curious tales like this save
''Living It Up'' from being an arid inventory of almost 2,000 buildings. So do
the names, some of which read as if they were conjugated - Roma, Romana,
Romanza, Romeyn; York, York House, York Manor, York River House, York Row,
Yorkgate, Yorkshire, Yorkshire House, Yorkshire Towers, Yorkville Towers. ''On
the whole,'' the authors conclude, ''New York City, judging by its apartment
house names, is an Anglo-Saxon kingdom with Scottish possessions.'' There are
even streets that can be judged by an absence of names. While Riverside Drive
has 82 named buildings (including the Master Apartments, commemorating the
Tibetan masters of theosophy), Fifth Avenue has only 12 - ''The street address
confers sufficient distinction in the minds of New Yorkers.'' Thomas E. Norton,
the author of ''One Hundred Years of Collecting in America,'' and Jerry E.
Patterson, the author of ''The City of New York: A History Illustrated From the
Collections of the Museum of the City of New York,'' sometimes miss the mark. In
the entry for the Bolivar on Central Park West, they give a thumbnail sketch of
Simon Bolivar without mentioning that his statue once stood across the street on
top of Summit Rock. At other times, they supplement etymology with their own
commentary. About the Sans Souci on West 95th Street, they write, ''Without Care
seems to be the motto of some of the present-day tenants.'' - David W. Dunlap

THE EXPANSION OF INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY. Edited by Hedley Bull and Adam Watson.
(Oxford University, $39.95.)

With a few exceptions, the contributors to ''The Expansion of International
Society'' - edited by Hedley Bull, the Montague Burton Professor of
International Relations at the University of Oxford, and Adam Watson, a visiting
professor at the University of Virginia's Center for Advanced Studies - argue
that Europe's 19th-century expansionism came about because Asian and African
states were unable to ''provide domestic law and order.'' In the long (and
seemingly interminable) debate over the motivations for imperialism, the book is
the latest entry on the anti-Marxist side. When it reaches the modern era,
however, a somewhat different theme emerges, one highlighted by Ali Mazrui's
essay, ''Africa Entrapped.'' Mr. Mazrui, a professor of political science and
Afro-American studies at the University of Michigan, sees capitalism as the
primary force behind the world order; even those third world countries that
adopt Communism, including the most militant ones like Cuba and Vietnam, wind up
obeying capitalism's rules for getting hold of hard currency. As a whole, the
essays convey the impression that Europe took up the white man's burden mostly
out of disinterested motives, remained imperialist long enough to transmit the
standards of Western civilization but lost its nerve after World War II.
Everything that followed was bad, including the Soviet presence in Africa and
the degradation of the idea of an international society. Some essays here offer
other ways of understanding the world. Unhappily, they are swallowed up by the
editors' militant defense of Europe's world mission. - Lloyd Gardner

WINTERING. By Diana Kappel-Smith. (Little, Brown, $15.95.)

Through one winter, Diana Kappel-Smith searched for life in the woods and hills
of New England, eager to learn where the rich and bountiful life of summer goes
and how it manages to cope. ''Wintering'' is both an account of a personal
journey and a gifted naturalist's chronicle of the season. It is sometimes
powerful and always intriguing - a celebration of the tenacity of life, its
resiliency and resurgence. Mrs. Kappel- Smith, whose first book this is, spent
her first winter in New England 12 years ago after moving to Vermont, where she
and her sister bought a small farm. She wanted to cut her own wood and tend
animals. But soon she began to let the chores go, bought a pair of snowshoes and
traveled deeper and deeper into the Vermont hills, eager to understand better
how the natural world survives the bitter cold and darkness. Mrs. Kappel- Smith
is perceptive and ever questioning as she investigates what becomes of plants,
insects, fish, woodchucks and squirrels. Along the way, she also discovers that
the season brings a wintering of the human spirit as well, and her handling of
her own emotions and reactions during the winter is as fascinating as her
reports on the natural world. - Harry Middleton

THE FOUCAULT READER. Edited by Paul Rabinow. (Pantheon, Cloth, $19.95. Paper,
$9.95.)

This excellent selection of well-translated essays, book excerpts and interviews
by one of France's leading postwar philosophers and the self-proclaimed
archeologist of modern civilization lacks only the general survey it might have
had if it had been conceived after Michel Foucault's death last year. ''The
Foucault Reader'' includes the most important sections of ''Madness and
Civilization,'' ''Power/Knowledge,'' ''The History of Sexuality'' and
''Discipline and Punish.'' Paul Rabinow, a professor of anthropology at the
University of California, Berkeley, has sensibly arranged essays on such
subjects as Nietzsche, truth, power, sex, politics and health. The three
previously unpublished interviews are especially valuable and provide candid
discussions of such topics as the sexuality of the ancient Greeks, politics,
architecture and the history of ideas. Mr. Rabinow's interpretive introduction
would have been better if it had presented Foucault's major ideas in a more
accessible fashion and explained his significance in French letters rather than
entering into a dialogue with the complex and sometimes impenetrable work
itself. Not for beginners, ''The Foucault Reader'' nonetheless provides ample
material for interested readers. - Jodi Daynard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE ANTI-COMMUNIST GROUPS GAIN MEMBERS IN U.S.

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


An anti-Communist resistance movement that provoked complaints from the Hanoi
Government in late December has been rapidly gaining adherents among Vietnamese
refugees in America, though many of them question its effectiveness.

The movement's goal is the overthrow of the Communist regime in Vietnam. It is
made up of a number of groups, the largest of which, the National United Front
for the Liberation of Vietnam, is headed by Hoang Co Minh. Mr. Minh, a former
admiral in the South Vietnamese Navy who escaped from Saigon when it fell to the
Communists in 1975, worked as a house painter in Washington until he became head
of the group.

Mr. Minh, who bears a remarkable resemblance to Ho Chi Minh, the late Communist
leader, though they are not related, travels frequently to Thailand on behalf of
the group. There, according to knowledgeable Vietnamese refugees, he has
established a small guerrilla base on the border with Laos.

Recent refugees also say that the front has set up a clandestine radio
transmitter in Thailand whose broadcasts can be heard in southern Vietnam.

Front Said to Have 100 Chapters

Refugees say the front has established 100 chapters in the United States, where
there are about 450,000 Vietnamese, the largest concentration in Orange County,
Calif. Its total membership has not been determined.  Many Vietnamese
housewives, college students and factory workers, the group says, volunteer to
sell copies of its magazine, The Resistance, or to solicit contributions.

It was apparently the National United Front that prompted Hanoi's complaint to
two visiting United States Congressmen, Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat
who is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific
Affairs, and Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat and a member of the
subcommittee. Officials of the Vietnam Foreign Ministry told the two Americans
that unless Washington promised to curtail anti-Vietnamese activity by refugees
in the United States, Hanoi might not agree to release the 10,000 inmates
remaining in its ''re-education'' camps.

Refugees Dispute Strength

It is unclear why Hanoi chose to complain to the two Congressmen about
Vietnamese exiles in America. Some refugees here suspect that the front has not
been very successful in infiltrating Vietnam.

The front, which first became active in 1982, says it has 10,000 fighters inside
Vietnam. But Le Thi Anh, the Washington representative of a Vietnamese
resistance group based in France, said that when she was in Thailand last spring
to seek help for her organization the front had only about 60 troops camped near
Savannakhet, in central Laos just across the Mekong River from Thailand. A
spokesman for the front, Tran Minh Cong, said that for security reasons, he
could not disclose how many troops the front had, where they were or what they
were doing.

There are 72 groups that describe themselves as being involved in resistance
activity in the United States, according to William L. Cassidy. Mr. Cassidy, a
private investigator who speaks Vietnamese and is a leading expert on Vietnamese
exile activities, has advised local police forces, the United States Treasury
Department and the Senate on crime involving Vietnamese refugees.

But he says he believes a traditional Vietnamese tendency toward factionalism
and suspicion has undermined the effectiveness of all 72 groups.

''It really amounts to a comic opera,'' said Mr. Cassidy, who lives in Santa
Ana, Calif., in Orange County. ''These guys still can't get along with each
other, just like in Vietnam.''

Old Disputes Divide Veterans

There are, for example, three rival groups of Vietnamese veterans, divided by
old issues like differences between northerners and southerners and allegiance
to different military cliques.

Most of the leaders of the defunct Saigon Government have been discredited in
the eyes of refugees because of their association with its defeat, Vietnamese
say, and are not playing a role in the resistance movement.

For instance, former Prime Minister Nguyen Cao Ky, who runs a liquor store in
Orange County, said in an interview: ''I'm not part of Admiral Minh's movement.
He's exaggerated his achievements too much. The people will eventually lose
faith in him.''

Despite such doubts, the front's leaders remain optimistic that the country's
regime can be overthrown. ''We don't have to overthrow the Communists by
killing,'' said Pham Van Lieu, a former colonel who was the founder of the
Vietnamese Marines and is considered the real organizer of the front.

''We don't want to kill any more,'' said Mr. Lieu, a stocky, 58 year-old
northerner who lives in Sacramento, Calif. ''But we think the Communists have so
discredited themselves by corruption, repression and economic mismanagement that
we can win by getting the moral support of the people.''

No Aid from Washington

None of the resistance groups has received financial or military help from
Washington, according to refugees and officials of the United States Government.
In fact, the exiles in the United States say, the only Government to offer aid
has been that of China, Vietnam's traditional enemy, which is locked in a bitter
fight with Hanoi over Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

The Chinese have encouraged some politically active Vietnamese in the United
States to go to Peking for talks about joining an exile government there,
according to several refugees.

A few Americans have tried privately to foster the resistance movement. Last
year a former official of the Agency for International Development who served in
Vietnam arranged a meeting in New York with former President Nixon. He took
along Nguyen Ngoc Huy, the former leader of the opposition Cap Tien Party in
Saigon who has his own resistance group; Gen. Van Pao, the onetime leader of the
secret army of Hmong tribesmen in Laos trained by the Central Intelligence
Agency, and a representative of Son Sann, the former Cambodian Prime Minister
whose guerrilla camps near the Thai border have been under attack by Vietnamese
troops.

Mr. Nixon did not offer much encouragement, the former official said. ''It was a
sad meeting.''

Though the front and other resistance groups have not had much encouragement
anywhere, Do Yen, the editor of a Vietnamese-language paper in Westminster,
Calif., in Orange County, argues that the effectiveness of the front in Vietnam
is not important.

Its significance, he asserts, is that ''it gives meaning to the misfit lives of
us Vietnamese'' in the United States.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebels Fight Vietnamese at Camp

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 186 words

DATELINE: AMPIL, Cambodia, Monday, Jan. 7


Cambodian rebels opened fire with mortars and rockets today in an attack on
Vietnamese troops who were poised to assault the guerrilla military headquarters
at Ampil.

Meanwhile, an insurgent leader charged that the Vietnamese had used choking
green-colored gas against guerrillas trying to recapture the Rithisen rebel
camp, seized by Vietnamese troops on Dec. 25. There was no independent
confirmation of the charge.  The early-morning attack by the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front prompted an artillery barrage on Ampil by Vietnamese
troops stationed a mile away.  There were no immediate reports of casualties in
the fighting.

Vietnamese troops and guerrillas also engaged in small-arms clashes late
Saturday night and early Sunday at Rithisen, situated just inside the Cambodian
border.

Thai military sources said four People's Liberation Front guerrillas had been
wounded in those clashes, but they gave no estimate of Vietnamese casualties.

The Liberation Front is one of three allied Cambodian rebel groups fighting the
Vietnamese-installed Heng Samrin Government in Phnom Penh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
DEMOCRATIC FEARS AND FRAZZLES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1230 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


Since the November election, Democrats on Capitol Hill have been thrashing
around in a state of fear and frustration. Yes, they kept control of the House
of Representatives, and they did win back two seats in the Republican-dominated
Senate. But the crushing defeat of Walter F. Mondale, the man who best
exemplified the Democratic tradition of the last 50 years, a candidate widely
supported by the party's Congressional delegation, has brought on a period of
soul- searching.

When your Presidential candidate wins only his home state, many Democrats have
concluded, you must be doing something wrong. And as a result, in the two months
since the election, a tremor of restlessness has been rumbling through
Democratic ranks.

Most affected are the members in their 30's and 40's, those with most of their
career still ahead of them. Like the Republicans who were condemned to minority
status by the New Deal and its aftermath, today's younger Democrats wonder
whether they now face a future dominated by the opposition party.

The Armed Services Upheaval


This sense of foreboding has set off a number of upheavals in recent weeks. The
latest came Friday, when House Democrats ignored the appeals of their leader,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., now beginning his last term as Speaker, and deposed 80-
year-old Melvin Price of Illinois as chairman of the Armed Services Committee.
They replaced him with Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, who is 34 years
younger than Mr. Price and is the first member of the Vietnam/Watergate
generation in Congress to head a major House committee with a permanent
membership.

Even before the election, some members of this same generation were holding
private meetings and discussing ways to assume more influence over Congressional
and party decisions. A group of Congressmen led by Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri and Tony Coelho of California said they realized they had no chance of
challenging the Speaker directly. But they met with Mr. O'Neill and pressed him
into creating an advisory council that would give younger lawmakers a greater
voice in leadership deliberations.

Mr. Gephardt, who was first elected in 1974, became chairman of the Democratic
caucus in the new Congress, the fourth-ranking leadership post. And he joined
the fruitless effort of some younger Democratic governors, led by Charles S.
Robb of Virginia, to find a new chairman of the Democratic National Committee
who would reflect the views of their generation.

Ripples of Resentment


The Senate, too, felt these ripples of resentment. Senator Lawton Chiles of
Florida, who came to Congress in 1970, the same year as Mr. Aspin, challenged
Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia for the Democratic leadership. And while Mr.
Chiles lost badly, his campaign reflected the widespread belief among Democratic
lawmakers that neither Mr. Byrd nor Mr. O'Neill embodies the image or the
message that will restore the Democrats to domination in Washington any time
soon.

For a start, these younger Democrats realize that geography, and demographics,
are working against them. The shift of population out of the Frost Belt, the
heart of Democratic strength, to the Sun Belt, the new stronghold of the
Republicans, means that any future Democratic candidate for President will have
an increasingly difficult time putting together a majority in the electoral
college.

In the states of the old Confederacy, Republicans retained 10 of the 22 Senate
seats. In House races, Republicans shook up Democratic strategists by winning
four new seats in Texas and three in North Carolina - just the sort of states
that stand to gain more seats after the next reapportionment.

The Appeal to Younger Voters


But the real shock to the Democrats was the Republican appeal to younger voters
around the country. Political analysts have long agreed that when voters of the
baby boom generation, now between the ages of about 25 and 40, finally settled
down and defined their voting behavior, they would dominate the political scene.
Their preference for the Republicans last fall does not guarantee how they will
vote in the future, but Democrats agree that, at best, the 1984 results are a
warning that cannot be ignored.

So what do they do? Part of the problem is one of style. Mr. O'Neill and Mr.
Byrd grew up in an age when political success rested largely on local
organization and personal contact. One made his mark shaking hands in the Irish
neighborhoods of Cambridge, Mass.; the other, playing his fiddle in the mountain
hollows of West Virginia.

In the eyes of their younger colleagues, both men are uncomfortable and
ineffective on television, the basis of most modern political campaigning. It is
striking that Mr. Aspin and Mr. Chiles made the same pitch: The party needs
spokesmen who can use television and counteract such Republican media stars as
President Reagan and Bob Dole, the new Senate majority leader.

More Challenges Ahead?


Therefore, the next few years could bring more challenges to senior Democrats.
Senator Byrd might well be vulnerable to a better-planned rebellion after the
next election. And once Mr. O'Neill retires, his anointed successors in the
House, Jim Wright, the majority leader, and Thomas S. Foley, the party whip,
could face a fight as they try to move up the leadership ladder.

The more serious question is this: Once the Democrats choose new spokesmen, and
they get on television, what are they going to say? So far, the answers have
been fragmentary at best.

Most Democrats agree that in recent years, the Republicans have captured two
simple but powerful ideas: economic opportunity and national pride. As a result,
many of the Democratic themes these days have a ''yes, but . . .'' quality about
them. Yes, we are for economic growth, but we also care about the poor. Yes, we
are for military strength, but we also want to contain the Pentagon budget.

Accordingly, House Democrats are hoping that the new chairman of the Budget
Committee, William H. Gray 3d, will be able to help synthesize some of these
concepts. As a black from Philadelphia, he has credibility with the party's left
wing; but he has also made it clear that he will make ''tough choices'' on
social programs and counteract the Democrats' image as ''big spenders.'' Asked
how he can manage it, Mr. Gray is fond of noting that it was Richard M. Nixon, a
conservative Republican, who was able to open American relations with China.

Encouraged by Hart


Looking back at the campaign, some Democrats say they are encouraged by the
success of Senator Gary Hart's ''new ideas'' campaign, which they envision as a
model for future efforts. They also see some promise in certain issues that
appeal to younger and more affluent voters, including environmental protection,
toxic waste disposal, technological research, support for education and the
freedom to make personal decisions on subjects like abortion.

Perhaps the most powerful of all these potential issues is arms control, and
that is one reason the revolt by Mr. Aspin, an expert in the field, was able to
succeed.

As the events of last week demonstrate, younger Democrats are searching for new
leaders who can appeal to a new generation of voters. But they are still unsure
who many of those leaders should be and what they should say.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


MONDAY, JANUARY 7, 1985 International

The U.S. will offer the Soviet Union ''some very interesting and reasonable
positions,'' Secretary of State George P. Shultz said, when the Soviet-American
arms control talks resume in Geneva today. He was not any more specific in a
news conference on his plane taking him to Geneva, but some American officials
said President Reagan had given him additional flexibility in his discussion
with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of possible restraints on the
development of an antisatellite weapons system - something that Moscow attaches
importance to halting. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Mr. Shultz has sprung back from policy disappointments, notably the withdrawal
of the American marines from Lebanon nearly a year ago and the failure of his
mediation between Israel and the Lebanese Government on an Israeli withdrawal
from Lebanon. He has found new purpose and prominence as the point man for a
major Administration foreign policy initiative: the effort to revive arms
negotiations with Moscow. (A8:1.)

The Geneva meeting on arms control is taking shape as a three-arena event: A
public propaganda battle as a backdrop to businesslike private exchanges
intertwined with throngs of journalists ready to record and judge success and
failure. (A1:5.)

Israel has halted its airlift of Ethiopian Jews to Israel because of the
publicity given to the operation, a spokesman for the Jewish Agency announced.
The spokesman for the Israeli-Jewish relief organization, which is a
semiofficial Government body, said: ''The last planeload arrived Saturday night.
We hope this will only be temporary. We are now looking for other airlines.'' On
Saturday, a Belgian charter carrier, which had reportedly been paid to ferry
about 7,000 Ethiopian Jews, announced it was withdrawing from the airlift.
(A1:4.)

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, on a visit to South Africa, toured Soweto, the
country's biggest black township, and pronounced some living conditions there
''appalling.'' (A3:4.)

A gunman in El Salvador killed a leading corruption investigator and then was
slain by the official's bodyguards, the police and witnesses said. Three
bystanders were also killed and at least two other people were wounded in the
shooting in the town of Concepcion de Oriente, 108 miles east of San Salvador.
The investigator was Pedro Rene Yanez, who had accused leaders of the far-right
National Republican Alliance of illegal business practices. His assassin was
identified as Francisco Alfaro, a follower of the Alliance. (A1:3.) National

The California irrigation water that transformed the Central Valley from a
desert into one of the nation's most bountiful agricultural areas is posing a
serious pollution threat. The water has picked up concentrated salt and other
minerals in some areas, making the soil infertile, and there is no outlet for
tainted water from the valley. Solving the problem may take 20 years, officials
say. (A1:2.)

Philadephia likes its Mayor, W. Wilson Goode, so much so that a critic
complained that he was being ''deified'' by the press. For both the Mayor and
Philadelphia his first year was one of highly visible successes, including his
role in ending a transit crisis and a successful fight to keep Philadelphia's
football team,, but there were some setbacks. (A1:1.)

An anti-Communist movement in Vietnam has been rapidly gaining adherents among
Vietnamese refugees in the United States, provoking complaints from the Hanoi
Government. The movement is made up of several groups, the largest of which, the
National United Front for the Liberation of Vietnam. Vietnamese refugees said
the front has established 100 chapters in the United States, where there are
about 450,000 Vietnamese. But many of the refugees question the movement's
effectiveness. (A11:1.) Metropolitan

The indictment of John A. Zaccaro is scheduled to be announced today on several
misdemeanor counts involving a failed real-estate deal in Queens, lawyers close
to the case said. A lawyer for one of the three other men said to have been
indicted along with Mr. Zaccaro said he had been notified to surrender his
client, Harold Farrell, today at the office of District Attorney Robert M.
Morgenthau for booking and arraignment. At the same time, charges against the
other defendants are expected to be announced. (A1:1.)

In an effort to control overtime costs, the New York City Department of
Correction is hiring a consultant to help with the problem of surging costs. The
consultant will be paid several hundred thousand dollars to find a solution that
has eluded department officials, city budget officials said. The annual overtime
costs have been running twice as high as budgeted, and in one year, fiscal 1981,
they were five times higher than the budgeted $4 million costs. (B2:4.)

Without Samuel A. Adams, it is widely agreed the 1982 CBS documentary on Vietnam
that is the subject of Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120 million suit against
the network and others, would never have been - and perhaps could never have
been - done. It was Mr. Adams, an analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency
who made the documentary program possible. (B4:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SAMUEL ADAMS: FROM C.I.A. ANALYST TO KEY FIGURE IN WESTMORELAND TRIAL

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1534 words


A. FARBER

On an August morning 20 years ago Samuel A. Adams, a fourth cousin seven times
removed of President John Adams, walked around a partition on the sixth floor of
Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in the suburbs of Washington and took
up a new assignment that moved him from the Congo section of the agency to the
Vietnam desk.

Though neither he nor anyone else could have suspected it, that move of a few
feet was the beginning of a long and twisting odyssey to Federal District Court
in Manhattan, where Mr. Adams is now a defendant in the trial of Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS and others.

Without Mr. Adams, it is widely agreed, the 1982 documentary that is the subject
of the suit would never - and perhaps could never - have been done. If it was
George Crile, a CBS producer, who promoted and constructed the broadcast that
alleged a ''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland's command in Saigon to minimize
enemy strength in 1967, it was Mr. Adams who made the program possible.

Buried Documents in Woods

It was Mr. Adams - an intelligence analyst, not a spy - who first came to
believe that the military had deliberately ''faked'' data on the size of North
Vietnamese and Vietcong forces; who took documents, now used in the trial, from
his office and buried them in leaf bags in the Virginia woods; who resigned from
the C.I.A. in 1973 and roamed the country looking for former officers who might
shed light on the fading events of 1967; who compiled massive ''chronologies''
handwritten in his tight script; and who, ultimately, provided CBS with his
research and led Mr. Crile to most of the people who would appear on ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

This week or next, as the lead-off witness for CBS, the 51-year-old Mr. Adams
will tell his story to the jury. For months he has sat in his rumpled tweed
sportjackets at the edge of the defense table in courtroom 318, taking notes as
assiduously as ever, preparing his testimony and passing advice to a battery of
CBS lawyers.

What Mr. Adams says from the stand, and the manner in which he says it, may
greatly affect CBS's fortunes in this case. Was he a man, as General
Westmoreland's lawyers have portrayed him, who was ''obsessed'' as well as
mistaken - a man who was ''often in error but seldom in doubt,'' as George
Carver, a former superior in the C.I.A., told the jury. Or was he, as other
former C.I.A. associates and Mr. Crile have described him, a ''brilliant''
analyst who, at fatal cost to his career, refused to compromise his integrity .

No matter which, Mr. Adams's life has been radically changed by his quest, and
so has the life of the retired four-star general whom he had never met before
this litigation and who now sits, day after day, just in front of him. Of the
three individual defendants - including Mr. Crile and Mike Wallace, the narrator
of the documentary - only Mr. Adams exchanges more than nods with the plaintiff,
who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968. General Westmoreland
asks after Mr. Adams's 21-year- old son, Clayton, who attends court
occasionally, and chats about how his own father wanted him to be a lawyer.

''He's a pleasant man, I really tend to like him,'' Mr. Adams said in an
interview last week. ''Whatever the hell happened back then in Vietnam, I think
he always, from his own point of view, had good motives. He's clearly not Iago
in any sense.''

Of his own actions, Mr. Adams expresses no regrets.

''I think somebody had to do what I did, and it's been a damn interesting
experience,'' he said. ''Integrity in intelligence work is a very important
thing. A number was done on intelligence in Vietnam, and we're only now
recovering from it.''

For a man who later became so dogged, Mr. Adams came to the C.I.A. almost
serendipitously.

He was born in Bridgeport, Conn., and raised in Connecticut and New York. His
father, Pierrepont, had a seat on the New York Stock Exchange and, for a time,
was a partner of Ellsworth Bunker, who later became an Ambassador to South
Vietnam.

Young Sam attended the Buckley School in New York and the St. Mark's School in
Massachusetts before entering Harvard College in 1951, where he studied modern
European history. After graduation, he enlisted in the Navy for four years and
in 1959 - ''still not knowing what I wanted'' - he entered Harvard Law School.

Mr. Adams quit law school in 1961 - ''I didn't have a lawyer's mind'' - worked
for two years at the Bank of New York, married an Alabama woman from whom he
would separate in 1983, and decided, finally, that he wanted a career in
Government.

'I Had Barely Heard of C.I.A.'

''I had barely heard of the C.I.A.,'' he recalled. ''Back in those days, the
C.I.A. was sort of like the National Security Agency today. Nobody inside talked
about it.'' But, in March 1963, Mr. Adams was accepted as an officer trainee at
C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., and, after some initiation on ''the nuts
and bolts of espionage,'' found himself writing a study on the economy of the
Congo Republic, Leopoldville.

''I had read a book about mountain gorillas in the Congo - not quite the same as
the guerrillas in Vietnam,'' he said. ''Anyway, in early 1964 a rebellion broke
out in the Congo and I was on the ground floor of it. I wrote draft memos that
went to the President, including one that accurately predicted who would become
Prime Minister.

''The State Department had said no way about that prediction, that it was
dumb,'' Mr. Adams remembered. ''But I worked harder than anybody and I had
better files.''

After ''toying'' with the idea of switching to clandestine operations, Mr.
Adams, in August 1965, joined a C.I.A. section concentrating on intelligence
regarding Vietnam. ''It was just around a partition in the office,'' he said.
''The first day, my boss told me we were going to lose the war.''

Mr. Adams, who visited South Vietnam four times in 1966 and 1967, concluded -
largely on the basis of captured documents and other material supplied by
General Westmoreland's command - that senior military intelligence officers in
Saigon were underestimating the strength of the enemy, perhaps by half. And some
of Mr. Adams's colleagues shared that view.

But in the fall of 1967 - when the C.I.A. reached an agreement with the military
on lower figures that, among other things, excluded a current number for the
Vietcong's self-defense forces - Mr. Adams wrote a memorandum calling the accord
''ill- formed'' and ''unwise.'' After the Tet offensive of January 1968, the
C.I.A. - though not the military - adopted figures of the magnitude originally
advocated by Mr. Adams. But by then, Mr. Adams had resigned in protest from the
Vietnamese Affairs staff. The C.I.A., he said, had acquiesced in ''a monument of
deceit'' by the military.

From early 1968 to 1973 Mr. Adams worked in the agency's Office of Economic
Research, eventually concentrating on Cambodia. But he never lost interest in
why the military had acted as it had in 1967 and, in 1969, he removed related
documents from the C.I.A. and hid them in bags and empty Spanish wine cartons in
a field near his 250-acre cattle farm in Virginia.

By 1972 Mr. Adams was asking the C.I.A. and the Army to conduct investigations
into the events of 1967, ''including the possibility that General Westmoreland
may have been ultimately responsible for the fabrication'' of enemy strength
figures. But whether his charges got a full hearing within the executive branch
of the Government is in dispute.

In April 1973, Mr. Adams voluntarily testified at the ''Pentagon Papers'' trial
of Daniel Ellsberg in Los Angeles, and made public his accusations against the
military. The following month - feeling, he said, that he was being pressured
out of the C.I.A. - he resigned from the agency, charging the intelligence
community with underestimating the strength of the insurgency in Cambodia.

In 1975, Mr. Adams detailed his views about the events in Vietnam in 1967 in an
article in Harper's magazine, for which Mr. Crile, who had yet to join CBS, was
the editor. Mr. Adams also testified before the House Select Committee on
Intelligence, which drew conclusions much like his own.

Mr. Adams then signed a $40,000 contract with W. W. Norton to write a book on
the subject - still unpublished - and intensified his research. In late 1980,
after Mr. Crile approached him about a documentary, Mr. Adams became a
consultant for the network for a year, receiving $25,000, plus expenses. Mr.
Crile would later write Mr. Wallace that ''Adams was the thread, he delivers the
indictment to us.''

Since September 1982, when General Westmoreland filed suit, Mr. Adams has again
been a consultant to CBS, at $200 a day plus expenses. And since last October,
he has spent most of those days in court.

For Mr. Adams, a robust 6-footer who calls himself ''a country boy,'' life in
court has been ''debilitating physically - the worst thing for me.'' But when
it's all over, he said, he plans to reapply to the ''C.I.A. I love.''

He smiled. ''I'll be sort of interested to see what they do.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Samuel Adams

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HUMAN-RIGHTS PROBLEM IN CAMBODIA

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


To the Editor:


The spirited defense (letter, Dec. 19) of human-rights conditions in Kampuchea,
formerly Cambodia, by members of a National Lawyers Guild delegation to that
country does considerably less than justice to the report of the Lawyers
Committee for International Human Rights summarizing our recent fact-finding
mission to that area. Worse yet, it reflects a disturbingly politicized basis
for assessing human-rights abuses.

The conclusions of our mission were that the rule of law was not respected in
any serious sense in Kampuchea, that beatings of political prisoners were
commonplace and more sophisticated forms of torture usual, and that from arrest
to imprisonment there was virtually a complete absence of legal process for
political prisoners.

Those conclusions were not based, as the National Lawyers Guild delegation
suggests, on material provided us by the remnants of the Pol Pot regime, but by
extensive interviews with persons who recently fled from the different areas in
Kampuchea to Thailand and to areas of Kampuchea near the Thai border not
controlled by the Khmer Rouge.

It is true that we did not visit Kampuchea itself. Despite repeated requests
over several months, that Government did not grant us visas to visit areas under
its control.

Nonetheless, the number of people we interviewed, the breadth of those
interviews and the internal consistency of the information we learned from
refugees and others persuaded us of the validity of our conclusions.

The human-rights community has failed before with respect to Cambodia. There was
silence in the mid- 1970's during the mass murders by the Khmer Rouge, savagery
on a scale rarely witnessed in the history of mankind.  There has been silence
since the invasion of that country by Vietnam with respect to violations of
human rights, violations that pale before the sickening brutalities of Pol Pot's
rule, but are nonetheless all too real and well worthy of condemnation by all
who genuinely care about human rights.  It is long past time for the silence to
end.

FLOYD ABRAMS New York, Dec. 19, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE ATTACK CAMBODIA CAMP

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 7


A force of 4,000 Vietnamese soldiers backed by tanks and artillery attacked the
headquarters camp of the largest Cambodian rebel group today, according to the
guerrillas and Thai Army officers.

The rebels said tonight that the long- anticipated Vietnamese drive on the Ampil
camp, just across the Cambodian border from eastern Thailand, had succeeded in
splitting the defenses put up by the non-Communist rebel group, the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front. A spokesman for the front said the camp's
5,000 defenders were struggling to hold at least part of the area.

Maj. Gen. Sant Sriten, commander of the Thai Army's Second Division Eastern
Forces, said that the Cambodian rebels' defense lines had been ''severely
disrupted'' and that hand-to- hand fighting was still going on at nightfall.
Parts of the camp were reported to be on fire.

The Vietnamese assault on Ampil came on the sixth anniversary of Hanoi's
overthrow of the Khmer Rouge Government in Phnom Penh. Remnants of the Khmer
Rouge army are still resisting, along with the non-Communist Khmer People's
National Liberation Front and a smaller force led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
the former head of government.

Civilians Were Evacuated


The Ampil camp's original population of 23,000 civilians was evacuated to safety
in Thailand last week. More than 100,000 Cambodians have now sought sanctuary in
Thailand. Today, about 5,000 Thai villagers were also moved away from the border
area by Thai authorities.

A Cambodian guerrilla spokesman said the Vietnamese had attacked ''in regiment
strength,'' using 15 tanks and 18 artillery pieces. General Sant said tonight he
estimated that the Vietnamese assault troops were backed by 105- and
130-millimeter howitzers and 10 to 12 Soviet-made T-54 tanks.

The Thai Army moved 150 armored personnel carriers and tanks, along with
antiaircraft guns, to the border opposite Ampil. General Sant said that if the
Vietnamese brought helicopter gunships into the border region, Thailand was
''prepared to strike back.''

In late afternoon, the International Committee of the Red Cross said that 22
wounded rebels had been taken to a Thai refugee camp hospital at Khao I Dang.



Khmer Rouge Camp Attacked A Khmer Rouge camp at Chong Bok, where the Thai,
Laotian and Cambodian borders converge, was attacked Sunday, according to the
Thai military.

The assault today on Ampil, the base camp for the Liberation Front, began at
about 6:30 A.M., a rebel spokesman said.

He said the Vietnamese first shelled rebel positions near Rithisen, a Liberation
Front camp that they overran on Dec. 25 and have since been battling to hold.
Thai military authorities, who said the shelling began shortly after 3 A.M.,
suggested that the attack might have been intended to keep the guerrillas who
are fighting near Rithisen, from moving to Ampil, about 12 miles away.

Nong Chan, another Liberation Front camp, was also reported shelled today.

Ampil's defenders successfully fought off a Vietnamese attack last April. This
year, the guerrillas were thought to be better positioned, because they have
built more extensive antitank ditches and bunkers.



Support Pledged by Chinese

They have also been supplied with antitank weapons and mortars, reportedly by
the Chinese, who have given heavy support to the Khmer Rouge in order to further
weaken the Vietnamese. Peking has said it will continue supporting the three
rebel groups, now allied in a loose coalition, until Hanoi withdraws its forces
from Cambodia.

The border camps of the three resistance groups normally have a total population
of about 250,000 people, and the numbers have increased as Cambodians continue
to flee the Vietnamese- backed regime in Phnom Penh.

As in most guerrilla wars, the camps hold a mixture of civilian and military
populations. They have developed into fortified towns, but towns nonetheless,
with markets, small industries, schools and welfare services.



Hanoi Critical of Aid

The camp at Rithisen, with more than 62,000 people, was beginning to assume the
proportions of a substantial Cambodian city.

Assistance to the camps from the specially created United Nations Border Relief
Operation has been controversial, with Vietnam charging that food intended for
civilians was reaching the guerrilla armies.

Thailand in recent years has allowed the Cambodians to flee into its territory
when under attack. Questions have been raised about how many guerrillas as well
as civilians benefit from this policy. Vietnam has sharply criticized Thailand
for providing a haven for the rebels and for cooperating with China in funneling
arms to them.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE HIT CAMBODIAN REBEL CAMP

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Non-Communist Cambodian rebels running for cover as Vietnamese attacked
headquarters camp in Ampil, Cambodia, near Thai border.  About 5,000 Vietnamese
soldiers, with tank and artillery support, reportedly succeeded in splitting the
rebel defenses. Page A3.  Associated Press

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE GIVES FINAL APPROVAL TO ACCORD ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


A Federal judge gave his final approval yesterday to the settlement under which
seven manufacturers of Agent Orange had created a $180 million fund for Vietnam
War veterans and their families who contend that the herbicide harmed them.

The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, also awarded
attorneys' fees and expenses totaling nearly $9.3 million to more than 80
lawyers or law firms across the country for representing the veterans and their
relatives in the action. This was considerably less than the $40 million or more
the lawyers were thought to have requested.

The lawyers' awards totaled $6.7 million for fees and $2.6 million for expenses.
About 40 lawyers had their claims in either or both categories entirely
rejected.

The settlement may still be challenged in higher courts by some of the veterans
and their families who think the settlement insufficient.

150,000 Claims So Far

Judge Weinstein's 137-page decision came as another court official said he was
''astonished at the number of claims'' being made on the fund by the veterans
and their spouses and children. The official, Kenneth R. Feinberg, said that
claims on behalf of about 150,000 individuals had been filed so far and that
claims were expected to total 170,000 by next Tuesday, the filing deadline.

Those who first show signs after next Tuesday of what they consider an Agent
Orange-related illness ''must file a claim within 120 days after the
manifestation'' of the illness, according to the decision.

''We had initially anticipated 50,000 to 75,000 claims,'' said Mr. Feinberg, a
Washington lawyer who had been named a special court master to help develop a
plan for distributing the settlement money.

The criteria for administering the fund are still being worked out and, so far,
claimants have not received any of the money. The fund now totals close to $200
million with interest.

Judge Said Evidence Lacking

The chemical companies that agreed to the settlement fund said they still
believed the herbicide, which has caused cancer in laboratory animals, was not
responsible for the illnesses the veterans have blamed on it. The illnesses have
ranged from rashes to cancer, miscarriages and birth defects.

Judge Weinstein himself recently said that ''sufficient evidence'' had ''thus
far not been produced'' to support a finding that exposure could cause these ill
effects. The companies, including Dow Chemical and Monsanto, said they had
settled, among other reasons, to avoid years of continued litigation.

Veterans and family members should mail their claims to the Agent Orange
Computer Center, P.O. Box 905, Smithtown, L.I. 11787. Those in New York State
needing claim forms should call (800) 832-1303. All others needing them should
call (800) 645-1355. Various attorneys received less than they had sought, as
when Judge Weinstein considered their expenses ''unnecessarily high.'' He also
praised those lawyers whose work he considered of high quality.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Jack B. Weinstein

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IRA KLEIN WORKED ON OTHER NETWORK PROJECTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


Ira Klein, the film editor who testified yesterday for Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, is a 33-year-old New Yorker who has worked as a freelance editor
since leaving CBS News in 1983.

While at CBS, Mr. Klein edited the film on the disputed documentary ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which became the subject of the
general's $120-million libel suit.

Mr. Klein, a native of Queens, attended Forest Hills High School and majored in
film at Ohio University. After completing his studies in 1974, he worked as an
assistant editor on several low-budget features. In 1978, CBS News took him on
as a freelance editor in the documentary unit and, in December 1980, the
producer George Crile asked him to edit his prospective documentary about
Vietnam. While making the documentary, Mr. Klein and Mr. Crile developed a
rancorous relationship, and Mr. Klein told Mr. Crile and his superiors that he
found the documentary unfair.

After working on ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' Mr. Klein edited
other CBS documentaries, including ''A Time to Die'' about terminal illness, and
''Our Friends, the Germans'' about West Germany. Mr. Klein had also worked with
Bill Moyers, and when Mr. Moyers left CBS temporarily, Mr. Klein joined him and
did editing work on Mr. Moyers's Emmy-winning series ''A Walk Through the 20th
Century'' and ''Creativity.''

Mr. Klein is currently working as a freelance editor on ''Portrait of America,''
a series of profiles of states of the Union produced by the Corporation for
Entertainment and Learning.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AT CBS TRIAL, FILM EDITOR CITES HIS COMPLAINTS CONCERNING DOCUMENTARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had deceived President Johnson
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the true size and nature of North Vietnamese
and Vietcong forces in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968. Mr.
Klein said yesterday that that was indeed the premise of the program.

The general maintains that the broadcast said he imposed an ''arbitrary
ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength in South Vietnam and
suppressed reports from his officers of a higher enemy presence and a higher
infiltration rate than was made known.

'We Have to Come Clean'

Mr. Klein testified yesterday - as he had in a publicized, pre-trial deposition
- that, soon after the documentary was broadcast, Mr. Adams came to his editing
room at CBS studios ''and told me that we have to come clean, we have to make a
statement, the premise of the show is inaccurate.''

The film editor said he ''looked at Mr. Adams and said, 'It's a little bit late,
Sam,' and Mr. Adams said to me that he was telling George all along that L.B.J.
had to know. At that time my assistant looked at me and rolled her eyes . . .
.''

Mr. Burt cut him off. ''That's all I want,'' he said.

At another stage, Mr. Klein testified that he once said to Mr. Crile, ''You
realize that Mr. Adams seems obsessed. Can you trust the information, the
accuracy that Sam is providing you?''

And Mr. Crile, he said, responded that ''he knew.''

Q. Did you understand Mr. Crile to be saying that he knew Mr. Adams was
obsessed?

A. Yes.

Mr. Burt took Mr. Klein over a number of other areas during his direct
examination, most of them covered in previous testimony and virtually all of
them designed to show that, in its editing process as well as in its choice and
handling of interviewees, CBS had favored some participants in its documentary
at the expense of General Westmoreland.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S ATTACKS CALLED HEAVY



BYLINE:
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


State Department officials said today that Vietnamese attacks on Cambodian
rebels operating along the Thai border were some of the heaviest ever and seemed
aimed primarily at discrediting the rebels as an opposition force in Cambodia.

The officials said that while some of the fighting had spilled over into
Thailand, there was no indication that the Vietnamese were intent on seizing any
Thai territory permanently or engaging Thai forces in major battle.

The rebels, whose camps are situated only a few miles from the Thai border,
often retreat into Thailand when pressed by the Vietnamese forces, which support
the Government of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh. Thai and Vietnamese units have
tangled periodically and, according to dispatches from Bangkok, Vietnamese
gunners shot down a Thai fighter plane today.

Attacks 'Heavier Than Expected'


''These attacks on the camps happen just about every year,'' one State
Department official said. ''But they're heavier this year than expected. There's
concern that what the Vietnamese are trying to do is deal the rebels as big a
setback as possible and thus discredit them as a military and political force.''

The Vietnamese, the official added, have little hope of totally eliminating the
rebels so long as sanctuaries are available to them. At the same time, he said,
the Vietnamese seem unwilling to carry out major attacks into Thailand to wipe
out the sanctuaries.

''They've got all the trouble they can handle without taking on Thailand in a
big way,'' he continued. ''It would be inordinately foolish. In fact, if they
push the rebels too hard, the Chinese are likely to kick up some military
activity along the Chinese-Vietnamese border just to remind them to slow down.''


Chinese Supplying Arms


The Chinese Government, whose forces sometimes engage Vietnamese units along the
Chinese-Vietnamese border, has been suppling some of the Cambodian rebels with
military aid.

At the State Department's noon press briefing today, the spokesman, Alan
Romberg, said that the fighting along the Thai border Monday involved ''the most
concentrated artillery barrage ever'' against the rebels, with the Vietnamese
firing ''between 12,000 and 20,000 artillery rounds'' into one rebel camp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR GETS NEW U.S. GUNSHIP

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 8


The United States has provided the Salvadoran Air Force with a new gunship
specially designed for counterinsurgency warfare, United States Embassy
officials said today.

The aircraft, a major increase in the weapons available to the Salvadoran
military, is officially called an ''airborne fire support platform.'' It was
delivered to El Salvador two weeks ago and is now ready for combat, the
officials said.

The new gunship is essentially a converted slow-moving twin-prop DC-3 airplane
mounted with machine guns designed to be fired in tandem and with great
precision by the plane's pilot, American Embassy officials said.

The gunship is mounted with night- vision equipment and three .50-caliber
machine guns able to fire 1,500 rounds per minute.

A Western official said the gunship might have been used to repel a rebel attack
in the east of the country on Monday night, but his account could not be
confirmed.

A Reduced Rate of Fire


The plane sent to El Salvador is similar to gunships used with considerable
success in Vietnam, but it has been intentionally built to have a much reduced
rate of fire, American officials said. The planes used in Vietnam were dubbed
''Puff the Magic Dragon'' for their ability to fire up to 18,000 rounds a minute
from specially designed ''miniguns.''

The aircraft is expected to be effective against large-scale attacks by
guerrilla units, but is considered unlikely by itself to prove decisive in the
war of small unit ambushes and sabotage that is developing here.

''It will address the problem of reaction to attacks,'' a Western official said.
''I think it's going to make a difference. But I don't think it's the system
that's going to win the war.''

Although delivery of the gunship had been expected, there was no warning that it
had already been delivered and was ready for use. American officials in El
Salvador and Washington predicted last October that at least one gunship would
be sent to El Salvador sometime this year.

Second Gunship Could Be Sent


The Reagan Administration is prepared to send a second gunship if the Salvadoran
Air Force decides it would be useful, according to a Pentagon spokesman, Col.
Donald H. Brownlee.

The gunship is one element of a new Salvadoran Army strategy to take the
initiative in the five-year-old civil war. The strategy also includes training
and equipping new helicopter assault forces, opening a new army training school
and organizing local civil patrols in towns around the country.

Provision of the aircraft is an indication of the increasing American commitment
to the Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte and confidence that the
Salvadoran military is capable of properly controlling advanced weaponry.

The gunship is part of a general buildup of the Salvadoran Air Force. The United
States has recently delivered four additional Huey UH-1 helicopters, giving the
Salvadoran military a total of 35 of the aircraft. At least five more
helicopters are expected to be delivered later in the year.

The air force also has six A-37 jet fighters that are in almost daily use on
combat missions.

Civilian Casualties Feared


Human rights organizations have warned that misuse of a gunship could cause many
civilian casualties in the populated areas where much of the war has been
fought. The Salvadoran Air Force has bombed towns on at least three occasions,
killing civilians.

Americas Watch, a New York-based human rights group, took extensive testimony
last year from peasants who contended that the air force had bombed their
villages. Such charges prompted President Duarte to issue new orders last year
mandating greater control over air force attacks.

''The rules of engagement for this aircraft are the same as for others,'' a
Western official said. ''You'e got to have positive control over bombs and
bullets.''

Salvadoran rebel leaders interviewed in recent months have said that they were
concerned by the likely introduction of a gunship into the war. The officials
said they would consider such a weapon a significant heightening in the conflict
and, while not offering a precise statement, hinted that they would take
measures to defend themselves.

American and Salvadoran officials have worried that such hints could mean the
rebels would try to destroy a gunship with a surface-to-air missile, a weapon
that is not believed to have been used in the war up to now.

The use of the gunship was recommended by a special Pentagon committee last year
that studied the war in El Salvador. The committee said gunships were needed
because, unlike jet fighters, they are able to remain airborne for long periods,
attacking rebel units with accurate gunfire instead of more indiscriminate bombs
and rockets.

The plane provided to El Salvador was purchased and equipped in the United
States at a cost of about $1.5 million, Colonel Brownlee said. Twelve Salvadoran
soldiers were trained in the United States to form two six-man crews for the
aircraft, a Western official here said.

The Salvadoran Air Force is believed to own at least six DC-3's that could also
be converted to gunships at a later date, according to the official. There are
no plans at this time to convert the Salvadoran aircraft, he added.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SELECTIVE MORALITY ON AFGHANISTAN AND GRENADA

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 314 words


To the Editor:


Your editorial on Afghanistan (''Requiem for a Nation,'' Dec. 30) heartily
confirms President Reagan's ''evil empire'' theory about the Soviet Union. If
Soviet actions really do proceed from the motives that you cite, we'd better
start digging trenches around Detroit.

Actually, your reading of the Russians, and the President's, are of a piece with
the unceasing, sickening barrage of propaganda that greets every citizen of this
country from grade one on and that keeps us ignorantly willing to tolerate even
the destruction of the planet to keep our selective sense of morality intact.

For it is not condemnation of Soviet action so much as the selective morality
behind that condemnation that distinguishes it from honest analysis. You might,
for example, have raised - just as a question - what our role has been in
keeping things messy in Afghanistan. Do we want a settlement, or do we want to
keep Satan stuck in the ugly pit we know he's in? Are we really to distinguish
between a Russian invasion there and American interventions ranging from Vietnam
to the Dominican Republic and Grenada (not to mention the scores of so-called
''covert'' or proxy destructions of legitimate governments that are not to our
liking)?  Your thinking recalls Tennessee Williams's character Esmeralda in
''Camino Real.'' This rather fabulous prostitute chiefly distinguished herself
in renewing her virginity with every full moon.  The real question in all of
this is whether we can live in the same world with the Russians or not. If the
answer is yes, which one suspects is your position, then the question becomes
one of finding language and logic to help all of us - Americans and Russians -
ease off the brink we are now poised on.  As matters stand, with enemies like
you, President Reagan doesn't need friends.

DAVID SIFF Bronx, Dec. 31, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Nixon Suffering Pain In Shingles Outbreak

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: SADDLE RIVER, N.J., Jan. 8


Former President Richard M. Nixon is suffering ''an awful lot of pain'' because
of shingles, an aide said today.

Mr. Nixon, who marks his 72d birthday Wednesday, came down with the viral
infection in December while completing his new book, ''No More Vietnams.''

He is recovering at his home in Saddle River, said a spokesman, John Taylor.

According to Mr. Taylor, Dr. Harvey Klein, the former President's physician,
said it was one of the worst cases of shingles that he had seen, but that Mr.
Nixon, who is ambulatory, might recover in a month and a half.

''He's in an awful lot of pain,'' Mr. Taylor added. ''He doesn't complain about
it much, but he says, 'Yes, it hurts like crazy.' ''

Shingles, also known as herpes zoster, is a viral infection that causes pain and
an eruption of blisters along certain sensory nerves. It has affected the former
President's ''shoulder and upper back on the left side,'' Mr. Taylor said.

The Nixons moved to the $1 million, 15-room house in Bergen County in 1981 after
selling their town house in New York City.





LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS OPENS LIBEL TRIAL DEFENSE, ASSERTS VIETNAM DOCUMENTARY WAS TRUE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


Lawyers for CBS yesterday opened their defense of a disputed 1982 documentary on
the Vietnam War, saying they would prove both that it was true and that the
people who made it believed it was true.

For 13 weeks, the documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' -
has been the subject of a $120 million libel trial brought against the network
and three other defendants by Gen. William C. Westmoreland, commander of
American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

At 10:30 A.M. yesterday, Dan M. Burt, the general's lawyer, rested the case for
the plaintiff. The evidence, he told an intent jury in Federal District Court in
Manhattan, controverted ''what the broadcast said - that William Westmoreland
deliberately deceived his superiors about the size of the enemy in Vietnam'' in
1967.

''There was no suppression,'' Mr. Burt said in a five-minute interim summation.
''No deception.''

Opening Defense Remarks

Seconds later, David Boies, the principal lawyer for CBS, stressed that only
General Westmoreland's witnesses - 19 in all - had testified so far.

''We are starting the defendants' case,'' he told the jury with a trace of a
smile, ''and I would probably be overly optimistic if I promised you light at
the end of the tunnel quite yet.

''I think you will be convinced - perhaps you are on the way now - I think you
will certainly be convinced by the end of our case that this broadcast was
true,'' Mr. Boies said. ''But independent of that, I think there can simply be
no doubt that the CBS people who put this broadcast together believed it was
true and had awful good reason to believe it was true.''

To prevail in his suit, Mr. Boies iterated, General Westmoreland must establish
not only that the documentary was false but also that CBS knew that or acted
with ''reckless disregard'' for whether it was true. The burden of proof is on
the plaintiff.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had purposely
misled President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the strength and
nature of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong in the year before the Tet offensive
of January 1968. The CBS broadcast alleged a ''conspiracy'' by the General's
command to ''alter and suppress'' the true data.

Apart from CBS, the defendants in the case are George Crile, the producer of the
documentary; Mike Wallace, its narrator, and Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A.
analyst who was a paid consultant to the network.

Judge Instructs Jury

Judge Pierre N. Leval - pacing the area behind his bench, his hands in his
pockets - reminded the jurors yesterday of his instructions to ''keep an open
mind'' throughout the trial and not to allow any ''tentative'' conclusions to
harden prematurely.

''All right, Mr. Boies,'' Judge Leval said. ''Your first witness.''

Mr. Boies began the defense case by reading portions of the depositions of two
witnesses who will not appear in person. They are Joseph Zigman, the associate
producer of the documentary, and Dwain R. Gatterdam, a senior analyst for the
C.I.A.

Mr. Zigman, who retired from CBS after 20 years following the broadcast in
January 1982, said in his deposition that he had asked to be Mr. Crile's
assistant on the project.

''I knew he was trustworthy, honest, a good reporter,'' Mr. Zigman said. Randy
Mastro, a lawyer for CBS, asked Mr. Zigman whether he had changed his view of
the producer during the making of the documentary.

''Not one bit,'' Mr. Zigman said.

On Monday, Ira Klein, the chief film editor for the broadcast, testified he had
complained to Mr. Zigman about the validity of the program when it was being
assembled in late 1981. But Mr. Zigman, in his deposition last February, said
Mr. Klein was ''just sort of worn out'' by that stage. He himself could recall
no complaints beyond those that he said were natural to any major film project.

''No one,'' Mr. Zigman said, challenged the ''accuracy'' of the documentary.
There were times when individual points were questioned, he said, but ''there
was always the possibility of going back to the material that was available to
us at the office and just clarify it, substantiate it. There was never at any
time anything that was going to go into the broadcast or went into the broadcast
that could not be substantiated and verified by some existing piece of paper.''

Mr. Zigman described Mr. Adams - whom Mr. Burt has sought to depict as
''obsessed'' - as ''cooperative'' and ''reliable.''

Mr. Adams - whose research over 15 years was crucial to CBS - was also praised
by Mr. Gatterdam when he gave his deposition last October. Mr. Gatterdam, who
had worked with Mr. Adams at the C.I.A. in 1968, said Mr. Adams was ''meticulous
and highly competent.''

Moreover, Mr. Gatterdam said, he shared Mr. Adams's view that the military in
Saigon had imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on enemy strength in
1967; that the C.I.A. had mistakenly ''caved in'' to the military's position,
and that, according to analyses by the C.I.A. after the Tet offensive, North
Vietnamese infiltration in the fall of 1967 ''averaged'' 20,000 a month, four
times the figure carried in official military records.

Because the military was ''trying to show progress'' in the war, Mr. Gatterdam
said, it ''ignored'' much evidence that the enemy was ''replenishing their
forces'' for the offensive.

Before he rested General Westmoreland's case, Mr. Burt read to the jury part of
a letter Mr. Crile had sent Mr. Wallace around June 1982 in which Mr. Crile said
he produced ''the documentary I promised'' - a work, he said, more carefully
grounded than any ''print piece dealing with such an important matter'' that he
had ever seen.

In his interim summation, Mr. Burt argued that General Westmoreland's superiors
- as well as Mr. Adams and his C.I.A. colleagues - were given all the numbers on
enemy size in 1967. That view, he said, was supported by contemporaneous
documents introduced into evidence - documents, he said, that ''don't lie.''

Mr. Boies said he agreed that documents ''capture forever the truth.'' And what
they showed at this trial, he said, was that the military acted in 1967, not
from legitimate reasons, but from ''political'' motivation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CONDEMNS HANOI'S ATTACKS; OFFERS TO SPEED UP AID TO THAIS



BYLINE:
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


The United States today ''categorically'' condemned Vietnamese military action
along the Thai-Cambodian border and offered to speed up military aid to Thailand
if the Bangkok Government should request it.

In a statement issued by the State Department, the United States charged
Vietnamese forces with ''unprovoked and hostile'' incursions into Thai territory
opposite the northwestern sector of Cambodia. The statement said that such
incursions, along with attacks on Cambodian rebels operating in that area,
constituted ''violations of the accepted norms of decent international
behavior.''

The Thais receive a steady stream of military assistance from the United States,
but have not asked that the flow be speeded up as a result of recent clashes
with Vietnamese forces, according to Alan Romberg, a State Department spokesman.


U.S. 'Ready to Respond'


Mr. Romberg added, however, ''We have accelerated deliveries of vital military
equipment during previous Vietnamese dry-season offensives along the
Thai-Cambodia border, and stand ready to respond to future requests.''

Mr. Romberg described Thailand as ''a treaty ally and a good friend of long
standing.'' He said that the United States and Thailand had ''close security
relations'' and that the Governments of the two countries were in ''very close
touch.''

The statement issued at the department's daily press briefing called on Vietnam
to stop its ''deplorable'' offensive, which some American officials say is the
Hanoi Government's most intensive ever. ''These incursions into Thai
territory,'' the statement continued, ''are the direct result of attacks against
the Khmer border encampments which cause great suffering and pain to the
innocent women and children who seek refuge in those camps.''

Vietnam supports the Government of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh, which it installed
in 1979 after its invasion of Cambodia. The rebels seek to overthrow that
Government.

Camps Scattered Along Border


Most rebel camps are scattered along the Thai-Cambodian border, just inside
Cambodia. When pressed by Vietnamese forces, the rebels frequently retreat into
Thailand, which offers them sanctuary. Sometimes the pursuing Vietnamese forces
clash with Thai forces.

American officials say there is no evidence that the Vietnamese want to seize
and hold the Thai territory where the rebels find sanctuary. Rather, the
officials say, the Vietnamese seem resigned to being unable to wipe out the
rebels totally and instead are trying to inflict such heavy losses on them that
they will be discredited as an effective opposition force.






Vietnamese Cross Into Thailand


KHOK PHREK, Thailand, Jan. 9 (Reuters) - Vietnamese troops occupying a key
Cambodian guerrilla base crossed into Thailand today but retreated after a
meeting with Thai officers, the Thai military said.

Guerrillas of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front were meanwhile
regrouping for a counterattack on the Ampil base camp, a Thai military spokesman
said. The camp, which lies just inside Cambodia, was captured by Vietnamese
troops Tuesday after a 36-hour onslaught by artillery, tanks and infantry.

At the Thai border, Thai military officers said Thai and Vietnamese forces had
come close to a clash when Hanoi's soldiers advanced to a tank ditch several
hundred yards inside Thailand as they were consolidating their control over
Ampil.

The Thai military commander, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, told reporters his officers
had warned the Vietnamese in a brief face-to-face meeting to pull back across
the border immediately or face a Thai attack.

The Factions in Cambodia

Khmer Rouge Khmer People's National Liberation Front Sihanouk Coalition The
Vietnamese-supported Government in Phnom Penh is led by Heng Samrin, a former
Khmer Rouge leader. Its army strength is put at 25,000, backed by paramilitary
police and militia units.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pol Pot; photo of Ieng Sary; photo of Khieu Samphan; photo of
Son Sann; photo of Sihanouk

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS JURORS HEAR EX-OFFICERS SAY ENEMY'S STRENGTH WAS DISTORTED

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words


Four former military intelligence officers who said they witnessed or
participated in the arbitrary reduction of Vietnamese enemy strength estimates
in 1967 testified by means of depositions and filmed interviews yesterday at the
trial of Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS.

One of the officers, Lieut. Richard McArthur, said his figures in Saigon on
Vietcong guerrilla forces had been ''massacred'' by his superiors - ''falsified,
faked, whatever terminology you would like me to use.''

Another, Lieut. Col. George Hamscher, said he had attended a meeting at the
Pentagon where he took part in the ''bloodless wiping out'' of units in the
official military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

The depositions and videotapes were introduced by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS,
to show that, for political and public relations reasons, General Westmoreland's
command had imposed an artificial ''ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy
size in the year before the January 1968 Tet offensive.

Mr. Boies opened the case for the defense on Tuesday in the 13-week-long trial
before Judge Pierre N. Leval in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

General Westmoreland's $120 million suit stems from a 1982 CBS Reports
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which charged that
the general's command had ''conspired'' to ''suppress and alter'' critical data
on enemy forces, partly by deleting the Vietcong's hamlet-based self-defense and
secret-self defense units from the order of battle.

Reminder From Judge

General Westmoreland, who led American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968,
contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had deceived President Johnson and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He denies setting an arbitrary maximum on enemy
strength and ignoring reports by his intelligence officers of a higher enemy
presence and a higher rate of infiltration than he made known.

Yesterday, Judge Leval reminded the jury ''that the issue in this case is not
whether'' the reports by General Westmoreland's command - known as the Military
Assistance Command, Vietnam or MACV - ''were accurate. It is not whether MACV
was right or wrong in its decision to exclude the SD and SSD from the order of
battle. The broadcast,'' he said, ''made accusations of dishonesty. Dishonesty
is what the case is about, not inaccuracy.''

The videotapes shown yesterday were made in 1981 during the preparation of the
documentary. The depositions, in which the officers were questioned under oath
by lawyers for both sides, were taken before the trial began on Oct. 9. Three of
the four served in 1967 in the order-of-battle section of General Westmoreland's
command. Besides Lieutenant McArthur, they were Lieut. Col. David Morgan and
Lieut. Marshall Lynn.

Colonel Hamscher - who, like Lieutenant McArthur, appeared on the documentary -
was an intelligence officer at the headquarters of the Army Pacific Command in
Honolulu. In August 1967 he represented that command at a conference at Central
Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Va. The conferees, who also
included officers from General Westmoreland's command, were asked to arrive at
enemy strength figures that could be used for both the order of battle and a
special estimate for the President.

At the conference, the C.I.A. advocated a strength total that was almost twice
the figure of 298,000 advanced by representatives of General Westmoreland. Among
the C.I.A. analysts present was Samuel A. Adams, who, in 1980, became a paid
consultant for the CBS documentary and is now a defendant at this trial. Mr.
Adams is expected to testify today.

'Interagency Cat Fight'

Colonel Hamscher said, in both his interview with CBS and his deposition, that
he was ordered by Honolulu to support the military's position and that a
''ceiling'' on enemy size had been established by senior officers in Saigon. He
said the conflict between the C.I.A. and the military was part of an
''interagency cat fight'' in which the military was determined to preserve its
role as the final arbiter of enemy strength.

The colonel said in his CBS interview that he was told General Westmoreland
could not ''live with'' a higher figure for enemy strength than 300,000: ''That
was the message we got.''

George Crile, the producer of the broadcast, who is now also a defendant, asked
Colonel Hamscher whether that was ''an honest order. Was that an order designed
to provide the President with an accurate intelligence report?''

''Probably not,'' the colonel replied. ''But I don't know for sure, because I
was never inside General Westmoreland's mind and I don't know what his reason
was, if he himself directed that a ceiling be put on.'' But the colonel went on
to describe ''the ceiling idea'' as ''very, very bad. Dishonest, yes.''

Colonel Hamscher said that, while Brig. Gen. George Godding was the head of the
Saigon delegation at Langley, the ''principal negotiator'' - who, he said, sat
across from Mr. Adams - was Col. Daniel Graham.

And Colonel Hamscher said that, during a break in the conference, Colonel Graham
led military representatives in reducing estimates for enemy units at a meeting
''in a small room at the Pentagon.''

Colonel Hamscher told Mr. Crile that the cuts made at that meeting in accordance
with a ''gains/ losses'' formula were not ''dishonest,'' although he felt that
the whole episode in 1967 had left his integrity ''prostituted.'' He also
recalled saying to Colonel Graham at the Pentagon that '' 'we can't do this,
this is wrong.' And he looked at me and said, 'Hamscher, if you've got a better
way of doing this, let's have it.' ''

Arbitrary Cut Ordered

Earlier in the trial Colonel Graham - who became director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency and retired as a lieutenant general - testified that he did
not attend the conference in 1967 and was in Saigon at that time. General
Godding also testified that he did not see Colonel Graham at the conference.

Lieutenant Lynn, in his interview, recalled that in the summer of 1967 he was
ordered by a colonel whose name he could not remember to arbitrarily cut the
size of enemy logistical units by 25 percent. It was ''complete madness,''
recalled the lieutenant.

Colonel Morgan said in his deposition that, around the same time, he was ordered
by his immediate superior, Col. Gains Hawkins, chief of the order-of- battle
section, to have analysts lower their figures for enemy ''administrative,'' or
support units.

Lieutenant McArthur, in his interview, said that his figures for guerrillas in
the fall of 1967 were halved and that when he protested to Col. Paul Weiler, who
is now dead, the colonel said: ''Lie a little, Mac. Lie a little.'' ''Well, I
said, 'I'm not going to lie a little.' And I did an about face, turned around,
and smashed out of his office.''

Colonel Hawkins, who gave a key interview for the CBS documentary, is expected
to testify for the network. General Westmoreland's lawyers will argue that, in
ordering any arbitrary cuts, Colonel Hawkins did not act on the authority of his
commander.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'CALL TO GLORY' IS GIVEN SHIFT IN THEME AND DAY

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


''Call to Glory,'' ABC's weekly prime-time series about a military family during
the 1960's, has been revamped and is being given a second chance to find the
audience popularity that has eluded the program so far this season.

The series was heavily promoted during ABC's telecasts of the Olympic Games last
summer and attracted 44 percent of the viewing audience - 26 percent is
considered passable - in its initial appearance. But since then it has drawn an
average of only 19 percent of the viewership, placing it 59th among 80 prime-
time programs this season.

Starting next week, ''Call to Glory'' will be shifted from 8 P.M. Mondays to 10
P.M. Tuesdays, and its focus will be changed from military hardware and themes
to family problems and more controversial aspects of adult relationships,
according to Steve Tisch, executive producer of the series.

The new emphasis is partly a result, said Mr. Tisch, of audience research that
showed a greater interest among viewers in the interplay between the lead
character, Raynor Sarnac, played by Craig T. Nelson, and his wife and children
than on military exploits. ''There is only limited excitement you can create
week after week by having Raynor Sarnac in a high-performance jet,'' said Mr.
Tisch.



Criticism Over Time Slot

Some television analysts criticized ABC for initially placing ''Call to Glory''
in the 8 P.M. time slot because the young-adult and middle- aged audience for
which the show is designed does not control television viewing at that hour.

With the shift to a later hour, the show will be able to capitalize on its adult
appeal and develop themes aimed at women. In fact, Mr. Tisch said he would try
to lure viewers away from CBS's made-for-television films on Tuesdays, which are
particularly appealing to women, rather than from the NBC detective series
''Remington Steele,'' which has more male appeal.

Tuesday's episode, for example, will be about the unexpected pregnancy of
Vanessa Sarnac, Raynor's wife. Future episodes will deal with how their
daughter, Jackie, ''becomes aware of the fact that she is 17 years old and a
very desirable young woman,'' said Mr. Tisch.

However, Mr. Tisch said the show would not abandon its attempt to show how the
Sarnac family is affected by events of the 1960's. ''To juxtapose the family
against the historical realities of the period is important to the show,'' he
said. Raynor Sarnac will return to Vietnam, for example, and the family's
reaction to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy will also be
explored.



'Soft for 10 O'Clock'

Still, some industry observers are skeptical that the new emphasis can help the
program. ''It is very difficult to establish a serial, and I don't see the
necessary ingredients,'' said Joel Segal, executive vice president for
broadcasting at the Ted Bates advertising agency. ''I don't see any characters
that you love to hate, which is what makes 'Dynasty' and 'Dallas' work. And I
don't see the setting having any particular allure. They have taken away the
excitement of flying, and I don't know what is left. It is an Air Force officer
and his family,the kind of story that is soft for 10 o' clock.''

And David Poltrack, vice president of research for the CBS Broadcast Group,
said: ''The question is, do American viewers want to watch middle-class people
wrestling with the same problems they have, or do they want escapism and
fantasy? The evidence from the ratings for 'Dallas' and 'Dynasty' is that they
want escapism.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR SAID TO BREAK GUNSHIP PACT

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 10


The Salvadoran Air Force is said to have used a second American-supplied
aircraft as a gunship this week, apparently undercutting an understanding
between the Reagan Administration and Congress.

The report came from witnesses to a recent battle and a source in El Salvador
with knowledge of the plane's use.

American Embassy officials told reporters on Tuesday that one C-47 aircraft had
been converted into a gunship and sent to El Salvador, equipped with special
sights, night vision equipment and three specially mounted .50-caliber machine
guns capable of firing over 1,500 rounds per minute.

The officials did not tell reporters that an additional C-47 was delivered.
Today, the United States Embassy spokesman, Donald Hamilton, said the second
plane was fully equipped to serve as a gunship, but under an agreement with
Congress was not yet mounted with machine guns.

Second Plane Believed Used

The agreement between the Administration and Congress stipulated that the second
aircraft could be used in combat only after American officials had evaluated the
performance and use of the first gunship, according to an aide of Representative
Michael D. Barnes, head of the House Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs.

But apparently in violation of that understanding the Salvadoran Air Force is
believed to have equipped the second aircraft with a rapid-fire gun of unknown
specification and used it as a gunship alongside the first aircraft in a battle
earlier this week, according to the source with knowledge of the plane's use.

It is not known if American officials were aware that the Salvadorans intended
to use the plane in combat, but it appears there was little supervision over how
it would be employed.

The United States Ambassador to El Salvador, Thomas R. Pickering, refused to
comment on the matter today. Other American officials also refused to comment on
whether the two American-provided planes had been involved in combat.

''The embassy is aware of reports that more than one plane may have been used
and is looking into the matter,'' Mr. Hamilton said.

'Cause for Serious Concern'

Representative Barnes said unauthorized use of the second plane in combat would
be cause for serious concern.

''In November I was given personal assurances by the Department of State that
this would not occur,'' Mr. Barnes said in a statement released by an aide in a
telephone interview. ''If the situation is as it appears, it is a direct
violation of the personal assurances I was given two months ago.''

An aide to Representative George Miller, Democrat of California, echoed the
criticism. ''It would appear to be a serious violation of the understanding
between the Administration and members of Congress,'' the aide said.

The terms under which the planes were to be used were set out in a letter from
senior members of Congress to Ambassador Pickering on Sept. 20. The letter was
signed by Edward Boland, then head of the House Intelligence Committee, Dante B.
Fascell, head of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and Mr. Barnes, according
to an aide to Mr. Barnes.

92 Members Sign Letter

According to two Congressional sources, the letter to the Ambassador said, ''We
understand you will not authorize release of the second rebuilt C-47 to El
Salvador unless you are satisfied that the system is working well, with due
attention to human rights concerns.''

The aide to Representative Miller said 92 members of Congress had signed a
letter to Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger in September expressing concern over the deployment of gunships to El
Salvador.

The aide said Defense Department and State Department officials had given
assurances that the second gunship would be sent into combat only after American
officials had studied how the first gunship had performed.

The American-provided planes were used to attack leftist guerrillas for the
first time, apparently with some success, in a heavy 18-hour battle in San
Vicente Province two days ago, according to several reporters who watched the
fighting. Having been told by American officials that only one gunship was in
the country, the reporters were surprised to see two gunships spraying the
guerrillas with long burps of unbroken machine-gun fire.

15 Rebels Found Dead

Army spokesmen say the bodies of 15 rebels were found when the battle ended, an
unusually high number in a war in which the rebels almost always carry away all
of their dead. The army reportedly lost at least 15 dead and over 40 wounded and
there are indications that the figures could go higher.

The Salvadoran Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Adolfo Blandon, said in an interview
today that he personally directed the battle from a specially equipped
American-provided communication helicopter that hovered above the battle.

''It's a good plane,'' General Blandon said of the C-47 gunship. ''But we need
more and better ones.''

The Salvadoran commander said he would ask the United States this year to
provide a total of six gunships and 10 Hughes 500 helicopters equipped with
rapid-fire ''miniguns'' of a type used in Vietnam. If delivered, such weapons
would radically increase the fire-power available to the Salvadoran military.

Warning by Rights Groups

General Blandon said the helicopters and gunships would be used in tandem to
clear guerrilla forces from landing zones and repel large rebel attacks.

Human rights organizations have frequently warned, however, that such
high-powered weaponry could cause heavy civilian casualties in the populated
areas where many battles are fought in El Salvador. The aide to Representative
Miller said the Administration had promised that gunships would not be used near
villages.

The Salvadoran Air Force has bombed towns and killed civilians on at least three
occasions, moving President Jose Napoleon Duarte to issue new rules last year
limiting aerial bombardment and strafing.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL TO LEAVE TOP LATIN POSITION

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


Gen. Paul F. Gorman, the commander of United States forces in Latin America and
a major strategist of the Administration's military activities in Central
America, will retire this year, the Defense Department said today.

As chief of the Army's Southern Command, with headquarters in Panama, General
Gorman has promoted an activist United States role in Central America, stirring
controversy both in Congress and in the region.

A Defense Department official said a successor would be named Friday.

The Pentagon spokesman, Michael I. Burch, said today that President Reagan had
urged General Gorman to continue as the chief of the Southern Command or to
chose from other, undisclosed assignments, but that the general declined because
he wanted ''to take up farming.''

Mentioned for Higher Posts


In Army circles, the general had been widely discussed as a candidate for two
prestigious jobs, commander of United States forces in Europe and chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Gorman's assignment at the Southern Command expires in May, and he will
reach the retirement age of 58 in August, although he could have stayed on by
Presidential order.

According to Administration officials, the general devised the tactic of using
large land and naval exercises in Central America as a visible reminder of
United States military might.

In the latest effort to ''show the flag,'' the aircraft carrier Nimitz left its
home port of Norfolk, Va., on Tuesday to steam past the Caribbean coast of
Nicaragua, whose leftist Government is fighting United States-supported rebels.
A Defense Department official said the battleship Iowa and its task force is to
follow the Nimitz soon.

Criticized on Honduras


General Gorman drew criticism from members of Congress for building airfields
and other military facilities in Honduras in connection with joint exercises.
Critics said the facilities amounted to a back-door military buildup, but the
general defended them as temporary.

The general is also an outspoken advocate of sending increased United States aid
and advisers to help El Salvador suppress leftist guerrillas. He was credited
with helping modernize the armies of El Salvador and Honduras, and pressing the
Salvadoran Army to adopt more aggressive tactics, including quick helicopter
strikes against guerrilla strongholds.

American diplomats in the region and some allied government and military leaders
reportedly found the general abrasive. Salvadoran military leaders, for example,
complained that he had sent them high-ranking Americans to supervise Salvadoran
troops, when they would have preferred lower- ranking officers to train the
troops.

The general often described the conflicts in Central America as part of a global
clash with Communism. Recently he provoked a diplomatic furor and an
Administration apology when he told a Congressional committee that Mexico was
''becoming a center for subversion'' in Central America.''

Several Other Personnel Shifts


General Gorman's retirement comes at a time of many shifts in personnel who deal
with Central America policy. By spring, the United States will have new
ambassadors in Honduras, Costa Rica and El Salvador, plus several new faces in
high posts in Washington.

Administration officials today denied that there was any political significance
in the departure. No changes have been made among the top officials who have
pushed most aggressively for an active military role, such as Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger and William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence.

General Gorman, a West Point graduate, is a veteran of the Korean and Vietnam
wars. He spent a year as the senior military officer at the Central Intelligence
Agency.

A spokesman at the Southern Command headquarters in Panama said the general
''does not give any interviews.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Paul F. Gorman

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thailand and Vietnam Agree to Set Up a DMZ

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: BAN SANGAE, Thailand, Jan. 10


Thailand and Vietnam agreed today to establish a demilitarized zone along a
stretch of the Cambodian border, a Thai general said.

The officer, Maj. Gen. Salya Sriphen, commander of Thailand's eastern task
force, said the zone was formed after the presence of Vietnamese troops on Thai
territory nearly provoked a conflict. He said a 22-yard-wide strip on each side
of the border near Ampil ''will be our DMZ.''

Vietnamese officers agreed to the zone today when they decided to pull their
troops back from the border, ending a 24-hour confrontation with Thai forces.
Vietnamese forces have been fighting Cambodian rebels operating in the
Thai-Cambodian border area.

According to the general, the Vietnamese said they were misinformed as to the
exact position of the border.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DISPUTE FLARES OVER INDIA ENVOY POST

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


President Reagan has selected John Gunther Dean, the United States Ambassador to
Thailand, as the new American envoy to India, overruling State Department
officials who had urged the appointment of another career diplomat,
Administration officials said today.

State Department officials said Mr. Dean, who was the last American Ambassador
in Cambodia, in 1975, had actively sought the India job and was given it at the
behest of Michael K. Deaver, the White House deputy chief of staff.

''It was kind of a surprise,'' said a ranking State Department official. Another
State Department official said Mr. Dean ''lobbied actively for the job.''

Mr. Deaver, who is chairman of a White House panel of ranking officials in
charge of reviewing diplomatic apppointments, said: ''I haven't talked to him
about the job. John Gunther Dean is a friend of mine and is helpful to me. I
haven't discussed any ambassadorial appointment with him.''

To Leave the White House


Mr. Deaver, who is a close friend of President Reagan and is scheduled to leave
the White House in the spring for a public relations job, first met Mr. Dean on
a trip to Bangkok

.

Asked about Mr. Dean's appointment to India, Mr. Deaver responded: ''I'm not
going to comment until the President makes an announcement. I play a role in
every ambassadorial appointment. We review all the candidates for each post and
try to come to a consensus.''

Mr. Deaver said the White House group ''tried to do a balancing'' between career
Foreign Service officers and political appointments.

Officials said that State Department officials were upset at the unusual
lobbying effort by a career officer to gain a diplomatic post through White
House - and not State Department - channels. The move came after former Senator
Charles H. Percy of Illinois turned down the job and James W. Spain, a career
diplomat with experience in South Asia and Africa, emerged as the State
Department's candidate for it.

''There were a lot of people pretty stunned to find Dean's name even
considered,'' said a State Department official. ''If he was to get a
Presidential appointment, the Foreign Service system should have been
recommending him for one. That's the system. He wasn't even considered in the
department. The view was he's been out in the field for too long.''

Abroad Since the 1960's


Mr. Dean has been abroad since the mid-1960's, serving in diplomatic posts in
France, South Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Denmark, Lebanon and Thailand.

At this point the New Delhi post is important in the aftermath of the landslide
election victory of the new Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, and uncertainty about
his internal as well as foreign policies. Mr. Gandhi is tentatively set to visit
the United States in the spring.

The White House announcement of Mr. Dean's apppointment is scheduled for next
month, officials said. In India, Mr. Dean is set to replace Harry G. Barnes Jr.,
a career officer who is scheduled to become Ambassador to Chile.

Administration officials said numerous key ambassadorial changes are now under
way, coming after a time of friction between the State Department and the White
House over ambassadorial and other diplomatic jobs.

At least a dozen ambassadors in Latin America, mostly political appointees, are
scheduled to be replaced by Foreign Service officers. The moves, coupled with
the planned departure of key State Department personnel who are also political
appointees, provoked an angry response from conservatives in the White House and
elsewhere in the Administration last month.

Decision Is Reversed

The conflict was defused when Mr. Shultz reversed a decision to send L. Craig
Johnstone, a deputy assistant secretary for inter-American affairs, to Honduras.
Mr. Johnstone was viewed by conservatives as not adopting a sufficiently strong
position toward the leftist Government in Nicaragua. Mr. Johnstone is now
scheduled to become Ambassador to Algeria.

State Department officials said key diplomatic shifts include the likely
appointment of John G. Tower, the recently retired chairman of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, to succeed Arthur F. Burns as Ambassador to West Germany
when Mr. Burns retires next year.

J. William Middendorf 2d is scheduled to leave his post as representative to the
Organization of American States. His replacement will be either Richard T.
McCormack, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, or Otto Reich, the State
Department Coordinator for Public Diplomacy for Latin America.

John A. Ferch, a career diplomat who has headed the United States interests
section in Cuba since 1982, will become Ambassador to Honduras, succeeding John
D. Negroponte. Mr. Negroponte is being reassigned to the State Department as
Assistant Secretary for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Antiwar Protest Site Named As City Landmark in Berkeley

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 132 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Jan. 10


People's Park, where violent student protests were held in the Vietnam War, has
become an official city landmark.

''It is mostly symbolic, but it is real important symbolism,'' said Ken Stein,
the Berkeley landmark commissioner, as the City Council gave its final approval
to the idea Tuesday night.

The worst clash occurred on May 15, 1969, when 148 people were arrested and one
man was killed after protesters refused to leave the park, which covers most of
a city block near the University of California.

The university owns the land and is still trying to decide what to do with it.
The designation does not prevent the university from developing the land, but
Mr. Stein said it sent ''a message to the university that people are not
forgetting about People's Park.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. ANALYST TAKES STAND FOR CBS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words


Samuel A. Adams, whose thesis that the military had lied about enemy strength
estimates in the Vietnam War formed the basis for a disputed CBS documentary,
took the stand yesterday in the Westmoreland-CBS libel trial and told of the
long road that led him to believe the underestimates placed American soldiers in
jeopardy.

The testimony by Mr. Adams, who contributed years of research and scores of
contacts to CBS as a paid consultant during the preparation in 1981 of ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' is considered crucial to the network's
fortunes in the $120 million suit brought against it by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland.

''Did you believe,'' Mr. Adams was asked yesterday by David Boies, the lawyer
for CBS, that a controversy over enemy strength in South Vietnam in 1967 ''was
just in good faith?''

No, said Mr. Adams, ''I had reached the conclusion at that point that there had
been a deception.''

The 51-year-old former analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency was called as
the first ''live'' witness by CBS lawyers, who opened their defense of the 1982
broadcast this week by reading depositions from other intelligence analysts into
the record in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Adams, who has devoted nearly two decades to proving his thesis, initially
seemed exuberant as he recalled dodging bullets in Vietcong-controlled
countryside and learning ''the sanctity of evidence'' he unearthed in reports of
prisoner interrogations and captured enemy documents.

He remembered ''bumping around the hot, dusty'' province of Long An in 1966 in a
pickup truck, compiling information in French, the only language he shared with
a Vietnamese translator. He remembered in, minute detail, the times and dates
and circumstances in which he came to feel that the military had decided to
camouflage the real might of the enemy.

And for a man who will soon be portrayed on cross-examination as both mistaken
and ''obsessed,'' Mr. Adams appeared guileless under questioning by David Boies,
the lawyer for CBS.

Q. When you traveled to Vietnam in January of 1966, what did you do when you
arrived?

A. I got off the airplane.

At one point, as General Westmoreland looked on without expression, Mr. Adams
described Vietcong defectors as ''these gentlemen.'' At another stage he
discoursed on a ''band of Havana Cubans'' he had monitored and, at yet another,
he lingered over the marriage of two junior C.I.A. colleagues.

''Maybe,'' said Mr. Boies, as Judge Pierre N. Leval smiled, ''you ought to stick
to the hierarchy and not get into the marital aspects.''

As his testimony wore on, however, Mr. Adams grew as somber as most of the
witnesses who preceded him since the trial began Oct. 9.

Mr. Boies asked Mr. Adams whether, in describing the military's position in a
memorandum on enemy strength around the time of the 1968 Tet offensive, he had
used the words ''monument of deceit.''

''That is correct, sir,'' Mr. Adams replied.

Q. That wasn't something that was manufactured or fabricated in the 1970's or
the 1980's?

A. No, sir, it was not.

General Westmoreland commanded United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968.

The documentary charged that, for political and public-relations reasons, his
command had ''conspired'' to ''suppress and alter'' vital data on the size and
fighting capacity of the enemy, mainly by deleting the Vietcong's part- time,
hamlet-based self-defense units from the order of battle, the official military
listing of enemy strength.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS defamed him by saying he deliberately
misled President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He denies
charges made by the broadcast that he imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of
300,000 on enemy strength and ignored reports by intelligence officers of a
larger Vietcong presence and a higher rate of North Vietnamese infiltration than
he made known.

Besides CBS, the defendants at the trial are Mr. Adams; George Crile, the
producer of the documentary, and Mike Wallace, its narrator.

Before Mr. Adams took the stand, Mr. Boies played for the jury a videotaped
interview of Mr. Adams by Mike Wallace in May 1981.

Mr. Adams told Mr. Wallace the disagreement over enemy strength in 1967 - in
which Mr. Adams and some other C.I.A. analysts favored an estimate twice the
size of the 298,000 proposed by the military - was ''anything but just a fight
over numbers.''

''It was the G.I.'s out there who had to fight these people,'' he said, ''these
extra enemy soldiers, the ones that weren't supposed to exist.''

Q. You realize what you're saying, that the commanding officers of those grunts
were simply not telling their men in the field what was really going on, and
therefore putting them in more jeopardy than they otherwise already were?

A. That's right.

Q. That's an awful accusation.

A. There you go.

Mr. Adams told Mr. Wallace General Westmoreland had ''slapped a ceiling on the
order of battle.''

''Now, somebody might have told him to do it,'' he said. ''I don't know.''

A 1955 graduate of Harvard College, Mr. Adams joined the C.I.A. as an analyst in
1963 after serving nearly four years in the Navy.

Mr. Adams, much of whose testimony confirmed evidence of his views and actions
already admitted through cables and memorandums at the trial, will continue on
the stand when court resumes on Monday.

He said yesterday that he became a Vietnam analyst in 1965 and made several
trips in 1966 to South Vietnam, where he saw many American casualties caused by
mines and booby traps planted by self-defense forces and where he began to
realize that the size of the enemy was being underestimated.

Mr. Adams recalled an incident in which he had asked a South Vietnamese colonel
in Long An province whether the order of battle maintained by General
Westmoreland's command was correct in listing only 160 guerrillas and
self-defense militia in the province. The colonel, according to Mr. Adams, said
the actual number for the guerillas alone was at least 2,000.

''I began to have this feeling that there was something funny going on,'' Mr.
Adams testified. ''The statistics didn't make any sense.''

Later in 1966, at C.I.A. headquarters, Mr. Adams said, he examined some captured
enemy documents for Binh Dinh province and soon concluded that the number of
guerrillas and self-defense forces for all of South Vietnam was probably triple
the 112,000 in the order of battle. And the enemy's total force, he decided, was
at least twice the figure of 280,000 then used by General Westmoreland's
command.

''I went running around C.I.A. headquarters, telling people about the problem,''
he testified. ''Something was radically wrong with the order of battle.''

Mr. Adams said key analysts for the military in Saigon agreed with him, and
appeared, by mid-1967, on the verge of substantially raising the overall
estimate in the order of battle. But, to his dismay and newfound ''suspicion,''
he testified, such a move was successfully opposed by senior members of General
Westmoreland's command.

Instead of increasing the figure for the self-defense forces, Mr. Adams said,
the military overrode C.I.A. objections and, in November 1967, removed that
category from the order of battle. ''I was in a daze,'' he testified.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sketch of Samual A. Adams

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene ;
5-Year Budget Projections

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


At his news conference Wednesday night, President Reagan urged the press to
''rally around and help with a few editorials'' in support of his position that
the Administration should no longer be required by Congress to submit five-year
budget projections.

''There isn't any economist in the world who can do that and accurately tell you
what you're going to need down the road,'' he said.

The requirement that the Administration make long-term budget projections
stemmed from the October 1967 report of the bipartisan Presidential Commission
on Budget Concepts, on which key members of the Johnson Administration,
Congressional leaders and private economists and budget experts served.



Concerned about inflationary pressures from the Vietnam buildup of military
spending and the rise of Great Society spending programs, the commission,
responding to the urgings of business and other groups, decided that the
inability of Congress and the public to see the distant consequences of present
decisions was a major weakness of the budget process.

''Clearly,'' the commission said, ''decisions made currently to embark on a
major new military weapon program, to pursue certain objectives in space, or to
accept certain Federal responsibilities in the field of education, for example,
involve a commitment of future resources - and often at levels far greater than
those required at the time of decision.''

This point has current relevance to President Reagan's determination to begin a
program of technological research to develop a defense in space against nuclear
missiles, the so-called Star Wars program. Former Secretary of State Dean Rusk,
in a television program prepared for broadcast last night, said ''Star Wars'' -
a term Mr. Reagan dislikes - could cost ''hundreds of billions of dollars.'' Mr.
Rusk said that, if the United States could develop the antimissile technology,
so could the Soviet Union, and ''then we shall be asked for additional hundreds
of billions of dollars to devise offensive weapons which can penetrate such
defenses.''

Long-range budget projections make obvious good sense for the sake of internal
Government decision-making and program management, the commission said, while
recognizing that ''certain questions arise when we consider external
publication.'' One argument against the Administration's disclosing its
long-range plans, it added, was that ''such projections are almost sure to be
inaccurate, since Federal programs and tax measures change from year to year.''

President Reagan stressed that point in his news conference. Repeating a line
often taken by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, Mr. Reagan declared: ''I
have to say defense is not a program in which we can determine what we want to
spend. This is determined by outside influences, things outside our country.''

He said that, for 1986, the Defense Department had come up, ''on its own,
voluntarily, with a bigger cut than had been asked of it for the first year,
1986.'' The Pentagon has proposed to reduce next year's increase in military
spending by $8.7 billion, compared with the $8 billion reduction requested by
the Office of Management and Budget. That $8.7 billion slice would still mean,
however, a net increase in Department of Defense outlays of $18.9 billion in the
fiscal year 1986, with total military outlays rising to $277.5 billion and
military budget authority to $313 billion.

With a long list of social programs scheduled for freezes, cuts or elimination,
aimed at holding total Federal spending in 1986 at the 1985 level, many members
of Congress in both parties are still looking for more cuts in the military
budget than the President and Secretary Weinberger will propose.

While recognizing the inevitable inaccuracy of budget projections and the desire
of Presidents not to be tied down, the budget commission decided that the case
for long-range budget projections was persuasive. ''Looking ahead several years
should facilitate wise planning for fiscal policy to promote economic growth,
and may help avoid waves of pessimism and optimism about the state of the
nation's finances,'' it concluded. Indeed business and financial planning is
currently being battered by a wave of pessimism stemming from uncertainty over
the budget outlook, especially that a further rise in deficits likely to add
nearly one trillion dollars to the public debt in the next four years will force
a rise in interest rates.



The main aim of the budget commission, as this former member of it remembers,
was to force greater candor and longer perspectives on the President and his
Administration, in order to improve decision-making in both the public and
private sectors. Things have not exactly worked out that way, as Administrations
have distorted economic assumptions and budget projections to suit their
political purposes. The result has been the enormous past and prospective rise
in the public debt, with slight prospect that it can be solved in the coming
four years.

Mr. Reagan would like to solve the long-range budget problem by getting rid of
the budget projections. But rather than obliterating the message, and perhaps
the messengers, a better solution might be to take the job of making long-term
budget projections out of the hands of the Administration and leave it to the
nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, working closely with the Office of
Management and Budget.

Admittedly, better long-range budget projections might hamper a President's
options and, whether his name is Lyndon Johnson or Ronald Reagan, disturb his
hopes and curb his ambitions. But the nation needs to know where it is going -
especially when it is in danger of going off the road and into a ditch.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'Home Front' to Close

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


The play ''Home Front,'' starring Carroll O'Connor and Frances Sternhagen, will
close following tonight's performance at 8 o'clock at the Royale Theater, 242
West 45th Street. The play, about the homecoming of a Vietnam veteran, was
written by James Duff and directed by Michael Attenborough. It opened on Jan. 2
and ran for 13 performances and 11 previews. The cast also featured Christopher
Fields and Linda Cook.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebel Leader Calls for Guerrilla Fight

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: NONG CHAN, Thailand, Jan. 11


Son Sann, the former Cambodian Prime Minister whose rebel headquarters were
captured this week by Vietnamese soldiers, called today for his forces to return
to guerrilla war.

''We are not so strong,'' Mr. Son Sann, a leader of the non-Communist Khmer
People's National Liberation Front, said at a news conference. ''We cannot fight
a conventional war against the third strongest army in the world.''

The Vietnamese have given several setbacks, including the capture of its main
camp, Ampil, to the group, which is part of a coalition battling the Vietnam
-backed Cambodian Government. Mr. Son Sann said the fight would now emphasize
hit-and-run guerrilla war, not the defense of set positions. He said: ''Ampil
was our headquarters but it can be anywhere. We will change our tactics and
approach.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY GENERAL CHOSEN AS NEW LATIN COMMANDER

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


The Defense Department today named Lieut. Gen. John R. Galvin, head of the
Army's VII Corps in Europe, to become the new commander of United States forces
in Latin America.

General Galvin, who is 55 years old, will succeed Gen. Paul F. Gorman in what
has become in recent years one of the military's most visible and sensitive
assignments.

Under General Gorman, the United States Southern Command, based in Panama,
played a major role in Central America, aiding the military forces of El
Salvador and Honduras and staging demonstrations of American military might
aimed at the Government of Nicaragua, which the Administration accuses of
underwriting Communist subversion in the region.

General Galvin will become a four- star general when he replaces General Gorman
on April 30, shortly after the United States is scheduled to conduct the next
round of joint military exercises with Honduras, called Big Pine 3.

The Southern Command oversees about 9,000 Army, Navy and Air Force troops
stationed in Panama, as well as the 55 United States military advisers in El
Salvador and 125 permanently stationed in Honduras.

Called 'a Hard Charger'


Army officers described General Galvin as ''a hard charger'' who would continue
to promote an activist United States military role in the region, but would
probably have a lower profile than General Gorman.

General Gorman was widely praised as a brilliant tactician, but he occasionally
antagonized members of Congress and State Department officials by his outspoken
portrayal of Central America as a battleground in a fight against global
Communism.

The Defense Department said General Gorman was urged to stay on, but insisted on
retiring for personal reasons.

General Galvin, a native of Melrose, Mass., is a West Point graduate and was
commanding general of the 24th Infantry Division at Fort Stewart, Ga., before
being given his European post in July 1983.

His career has included assignments that acquainted him with the political side
of military affairs as well as field and training commands. He was an assistant
to Army Secretary Stanley R. Resor before going to Vietnam in 1969, where he was
decorated for his leadership of a helicopter battalion.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
New Fighting Reported In Cambodia Rebel Camp

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Jan. 12


New fighting was reported today in the Cambodian rebel camp of Rithisen.

More than 20 artillery rounds hit guerrilla defensive positions there while
Vietnamese forces and Cambodian rebels exchanged light-weapons fire, according
to officers of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a non-Communist
group. They said four of their soldiers were killed and three wounded during the
day and previous night.

Rithisen, near the Thai border, was once the largest camp occupied by the
Liberation Front. It has been under siege for 19 days, and Vietnamese occupation
forces have been holding most of it. Recent fighting has been light.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO PLAN TO SELL NAVAL WEAPONS TO CHINA

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLEBy JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


The Reagan Administration has reached a preliminary understanding with China to
provide that Government with modern antisubmarine warfare gear, a Reagan
Administration official said today.

The official said a formal agreement to sell Peking submarine-detection devices,
as well as torpedoes and ship-defense weapons, is expected when Melvyn R.
Paisley, the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for research and engineering,
visits China later this month.

The statement came as Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, began talks in Peking at the start of a weeklong visit. General Vessey is
the first high-ranking American military officer to lead a delegation to China
since 1947.

Weinberger Visited in 1983


The deal, if completed, would mark the first fruits of more than a year of
high-level contact between Washington and Peking on possible arms sales, dating
back to Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's ground-breaking trip to
China in September 1983.

Last August Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman toured Chinese naval bases and
discussed closer military cooperation with the Chinese Navy's chief, Liu
Huaqing. In December a Chinese delegation visited American naval installations
and military contractors.

''The arms are defensive in nature and pose no threat,'' the Administration
official said today. He described the equipment as supporting ''basically
antisubmarine warfare from surface ships'' used for coastal defense.

The hardware in the proposed arms package, he said, includes sonar devices,
torpedoes and the Phalanx ship- defense system. The Phalanx, a six- barreled,
20-millimeter rapid-fire system aimed by self-contained radar, is designed to
protect surface ships from sea-skimmer cruise missiles. It has become standard
on many American combat vessels as a last-ditch defense against missile attack.

Interest in Co-production


The Administration official said the Chinese were interested in co-producing
American arms, but that no such arrangements had been made. He said the Reagan
Administration had offered some military items that the Chinese had turned down.
The official declined to elaborate on which weapons were involved.

Besides the Navy's negotiations, he added, the Army has discussed antitank
defenses with the Chinese and the Air Force has talked with Chinese counterparts
about air defense.

Although China produces its own nuclear weapons and possesses a small arsenal of
strategic missiles and submarines, overall modernization of its vast armed
forces has been slow. Heavy equipment is badly out of date, with combat aircraft
and many army weapons such as tanks based on Soviet arms from the 1960's.

Chinese leaders have said that though they cannot afford to equip the world's
largest army with state-of-the- art foreign weapons, they would like to
introduce selected technologies from abroad while relying on domestic production
improvements.

The Reagan Administration indicated early in its first term that it would
consider Chinese requests for American weapons and liberalize the export of
dual-use technology, such as civilian computers that could have military
applications. The two Governments have proceeded with caution in arms sale
talks, however, with Peking especially wary of any purchases that might appear
to give Washington an excuse to sell more weapons to the Nationalist regime on
Taiwan.

 Vessey Starts Talks




PEKING, Jan. 12 - Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, began talks here today with Chinese military leaders.

The discussions, at the start of a weeklong visit by the general, are aimed at
broadening military ties between the United States and China.

General Vessey is the first high-ranking American military officer to lead a
delegation here since Gen. George C. Marshall's abortive efforts in 1947 to
mediate in the Chinese civil war. His host here, Yang Dezhi, Chief of Staff of
the Chinese forces, commanded Chinese troops who fought United States and allied
troops to a standstill in Korea in 1953.

Although he is the first Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to come here, the
general was preceded by several high-ranking United States defense delegations
over the last four years.

Possible Visit by U.S. Ships


In another development, the general's aides said the delegation would hold
discussions here on a proposed visit by three American warships to Shanghai,
probably in April.

The warship visit, which would be the first since the Communist takeover in
1949, would underline the eagerness with which both sides have pursued military
ties. For the United States, helping to strengthen the largely outdated Chinese
forces is seen as a useful counter to Soviet military strength in the Far East.
The Chinese welcome a strong United States presence in the region for similar
reasons.

General Vessey was accompanied by a high-ranking delegation. With him is Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr., commander of United States Pacific forces, Lieut. Gen. H.
O. Thomson, director of planning and policy for the Pacific command, and 20
other officers, among them several fluent Mandarin speakers. In addition to
three days of talks here, the delegation is to tour military bases and four
other cities, including Shenyang and Shanghai.

'Beneficial to Peace'


At a banquet in General Vessey's honor this evening, both sides appeared eager
to avoid the sensitive issue of weapons and technology transfers, which have
caused anxieties in the Kremlin. But General Vessey made one remark that could
have been read as a reference to Soviet strength on China's northern border and
to its presence in Vietnam.

''The continued development of friendly relations between our two armed forces
is in the interests of our two countries and is beneficial to peace and
stability in this region and throughout the world,'' he said.

Mr. Yang responded in similar vein. Like General Vessey, he only alluded to the
specific aspects of the relationship, saying the visit offered an opportunity to
''exchange views'' on contacts between the two armed forces and ''on other
issues of mutual interest.'' But he was emphatic about the value of the contacts
to maintaining peace.

An official statement distributed by the United States Embassy last week
described the occasion as ''a soldier-to- soldier visit'' that would give
General Vessey an opportunity to meet Chinese military leaders ''and to gain a
better understand of China's defense posture.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
PROTAGONISTS WHO SUBSTITUTE SELF-PITY FOR COURAGE

BYLINE: By Mel Gussow

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1576 words


Outwardly, the two plays are dissimilar. James Duff's ''Home Front'' is a family
play about the homecoming of a psychologically wounded veteran of the war in
Vietnam. The family is of a prospering Texas variety to which patriotism and
television are a dual way of life. Bill C. Davis's ''Dancing in the End Zone''
deals with the American passion for athletic prowess and the price - physical as
well as emotional - that a star quarterback pays for his goals. The scene is a
midwestern university.

Beneath the surface, however, the two new Broadway plays are allied in their
attitude towards generational values, an attitude that is both cynical and
self-righteous. In both cases, the protagonist shoulders no responsibility for
his actions. He allows himself to be acted upon, to be influenced by people who
operate in a supervisory capacity - parents, teachers, coaches. Each of the
young men is impressionable in the extreme, a piece of blotter paper soaking up
bogus ideals. In the end, both are jolted from their passivity and rise in a
violent backlash of self- pity. They blame others for their own weaknesses and
for society's failures. No matter how destructively the individuals behave, we
are asked to sympathize with them.

Both plays are written by dramatists with a certain theatrical facility, a
talent that Mr. Davis evidenced in ''Mass Appeal.'' Despite that fact and the
generally high caliber of performance, the plays are, in varying degrees,
depressing, not only in the bitter and unconvincing message they thrust upon the
audience but in the knowledge that the work may be symptomatic of the frame of
mind of some young American playwrights.

Though it begins like a situation comedy, ''Home Front'' is the more seriously
intentioned of the two, and because of its relative expertise the one that
should have a more insidious hold on its audience. As the curtain rises on this
Dallas-Fort Worth suburb, Frances Sternhagen is bustling around her kitchen
preparing for the following day's Thanksgiving dinner. Her husband, Carroll
O'Connor, sitting in his favorite chair, represents detachment. He is a man who
has closed his ears to his wife's dithering and only wants to be left alone. The
daughter (Linda Cook) has her own flighty country club interests. Sitting glumly
on the front step is the son (Christopher Fields). From his scowl, we know that
he represents trouble. The apple of the family's collective eye, he is a Vietnam
veteran who has been scarred by the experience. He reacts by behaving as an
automaton. What we are about to see is ''the war at home,'' which was the play's
original title when it had its premiere last year at London's Hampstead Theater.


First, we will hear far too much about peanut brittle. The mother has made some,
placed it in a container and gone off to bed. In the mother's absence, daughter
and father will each make a private reconnaisance mission in search of the
candy. The son who could care less about peanut brittle, turkey and all the
home-fire trimmings, will later be blamed by his mother for peanut brittle
burglary, and this will set him off on a tirade. Do not think I am
overestimating the significance of the peanut brittle. Excise it from the plot
and the first act would lose 15 minutes and much of its flavor. Later we will
also hear too much about marshmallows.

The point of the peanut brittle and the marshmallows is that the play is overly
concerned with domestic trivialities. We keep waiting for characterization and
atmosphere, the kind of vivid writing that flows so naturally - in related
locales - from writers such as Beth Henley and James McLure. With little help
from the playwright, the actors (directed by Michael Attenborough) are dependent
on their own resourcefulness. Mr. O'Connor, stubbornly and successfully avoiding
Archie Bunker mannerisms, stresses the father's stolidity. On the other hand,
Miss Sternhagen's mother increases in giddiness, even to wearing what appears to
be a feather in her hair. She is, in fact, a certifiable dingbat.

The Serious Part does not begin until the second act, and it is not justified by
the meandering comedy that has preceded it. The smoldering son erupts, verbally
attacking his mother and sister and, finally, threatening his father with a gun.
If the play worked, one might say that the playwright had cleverly seduced us
with family comedy and then shattered us with a dramatic catharsis. The truth is
that the play splits in two; there is a definite disparity in tone between the
first act frivolity and the second act crisis - in contrast, for example, to
David Rabe's ''Sticks and Bones,'' which from start to finish was a mordant
black cartoon.



Along the way we have been given scant clues to the reasons for the son's
disaffection - a story about an Army friend's suicide, hints about inhumanity in
war and about the repressive effect of his home life. Now we learn the trauma of
his past. When drafted, he did not want to serve, and asked his father for money
so that he could run away to Canada. His father, pleading patriotism, refused to
help him. Therefore, the son entered the army and was trained to be a killer.

We are supposed to believe that the father has committed an unpardonable offense
and feels no guilt, though up to this point he has been earnestly trying to
break through his son's wall of indifference. The father, as we see him, does
not deserve such a devastating indictment - and neither does the mother. She is,
at worst, harmless. Putting such a heavy dramatic burden on the father's refusal
also serves to discredit those dissenters who went to Canada or otherwise
protested the war without parental approval or financial support.

As the son wallows in his own contempt, we think of characters in other plays
(and movies) beginning with Ken Talley in Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July,''
who is traumatized by his war experience but able to offer insights into the
roots of his despair. In contrast, Mr. Duff's protagonist erodes our patience.
When he talks about wanting to go somewhere ''just to be myself,'' we wish him
good speed on the road to cliche.

While ''Home Front'' at least shadow boxes with some vital targets, Mr. Davis's
''Dancing in the End Zone'' is a pro forma exercise in dramatic puppetry - and
we can see the playwright pull the strings. In this case the protagonist is a
campus hero (Matt Salinger), leading his team singlehandedly and selflessly to
some mythical Big Ten title of the author's imagination. Two people are pushing
him - his coach (Laurence Luckinbill) who will do anything to win a game, and
his crippled mother (Pat Carroll) who is coach at home.



We are told that athletics are not the young man's natural metier. He is
peaceful at heart; he likes to go to the zoo and look at the animals. But his
ambitious mother has prodded him on the road to machismo and over- achievement.
When we meet him, he is a total innocent and close to a fool. In common with the
young man in ''Home Front,'' his character was shaped by a single trauma. When
he was a child, his mother told him the ''good times'' were locked inside of a
particular birch tree; he took his axe and gave it 40 whacks.

Despite the disillusionment at not finding the good times, he still believes
anything anyone tells him. The third person to get his ear proves to be his
downfall. She is a graduate student (Dorothy Lyman) and self- styled tutor
supposedly trying to help him to bridge the gap between his failing classroom
performance and his ''gift grades.'' Instead of minding the business of
tutoring, she asks impertinent questions like, ''Do you throw up before every
game?'' (He does).

Quite quickly she becomes the outspoken antagonist of all matters athletic,
libeling football as militaristic and homoerotic. After one chaste kiss, the
quarterback is helplessly in love, and, acceding to the tutor's wishes, he gives
up the sport. In the middle of a game, he sees a worm crawling on the field and
to avoid harming the creature, he calls a time-out. Finally, he hauls his coach
into court for lying, cheating and maiming his athletes. One of the play's many
mysteries is why the coach recommended the tutor and why he refuses to react
when the hero's mother warns him about the young woman's plot to break up the
team.

The plot is full of holes, the stylized bleacher setting is unhelpfully
schematic - fuzzy clouds occasionally float into view - and the ending is
sentimental. Furthermore, in the days of Doug Flutie, the situation is untimely.
Not all sports stars are dolts, or Billy Budds, as the playwright might like us
to believe. Though the acting is assured and Mr. Salinger would seem to have a
bright future, all except for Miss Carroll could sue the author for non-support.
She does have some acerbic wisecracks, as the priest did in Mr. Davis's ''Mass
Appeal.''

Along with peanut brittle in the kitchen and worms on the football field, both
plays deal at least passingly with questions of honor, but the only character
who seems to have courage or conviction is the tutor's offstage, estranged
husband in ''Dancing in the End Zone.'' He is serving a prison sentence for tax
evasion, having deducted from his total indebtedness the proportionate cost of
maintaining the war in Vietnam. In contrast to others we see on stage at the
Royale and Ritz Theaters, the unseen husband is clearly a man of principle.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LEADINGECONOMISTS OF THE RECENT PAST WASHINGTON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 28, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 529 words


The economists who emerged in the 1960's and 1970's to assume high Government
posts came mostly from universities. They were an articulate band of men and
often wielded great power with their respective presidents.

All of them were considered mainstream economists, whether conservative or
liberal. Collectively, they managed to create an increasingly strong position
for economists in the policy councils of Washington and in the public mind - a
position that the Reagan Administration, through its downgrading of professional
economic advice, has begun to erode.

Some of the best-known economists of the past two decades were:



Walter W. Heller .A witty, University of Minnesota economist who once described
himself as an ''educator of Presidents,'' he is credited with being the chief
architect of the Kennedy-Johnson tax cuts, a successful program that today's
supply- siders are fond of recalling. As head of the President's Council of
Economic Advisers, he raised the office to new peaks of influence, both in
public and in private. Last week, he recalled Donald T. Regan's confirmation
hearings at which the Treasury Secretary said that ''all things being equal''
the budget would balance. From then on, he says, ''I figured Regan had a great
future in Washington.''




Arthur M. Okun. A fast-rising star, he became C.E.A. chairman in 1968 at age 39.
A thorough believer in frequent tax and spending changes, he failed to persuade
President Johnson to raise taxes to finance the war in Vietnam. This, many
believe, helped bring about the sharply higher inflation rates that soon
followed. Mr. Okun was the inventor of the ''misery index,'' which is obtained
by adding the unemployment and the inflation rates. He died in 1980.




George P. Shultz.  A conservative specialist in industrial relations, he served
the Nixon Administration as secretary of both Treasury and Labor and as head of
the Office of Management and Budget. While at Treasury he also maintained an
office in the White House, prompting some to see his commanding role as somewhat
similar to the one Mr. Regan will soon play. Mr. Shultz, who has written a book
about economic policymaking, now serves as President Reagan's Secretary of
State.




Alan Greenspan. A Wall Street economic consultant, he raised the C.E.A.
chairmanship to still greater importance under President Ford. An ardent
free-market advocate, he was said in 1983 to be the leading candidate to become
Federal Reserve chairman before President Reagan decided to reappoint Paul A.
Volcker. He headed the commission that fashioned a compromise plan to keep the
Social Security system afloat.




Charles L. Schultze.  Jimmy Carter's C.E.A. chairman, the affable, chain-smoking
University of Maryland economist played a major role as Administration spokesman
but was somewhat overshadowed in policymaking by the White House staff. He
fought a largely losing battle against inflation and recession. Now at the
Brookings Institution, Mr. Schultze said, when asked whether the Regan- Baker
switch had important implications: ''There may be, but at the moment I haven't
figured them out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter W. Heller; Photo of Alan Greenspan

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paying the Agent Orange Lawyers ''Why is there always a secret singing when a
lawyer cashes in?'' asked the poet Carl Sandburg. ''Why does a hearse horse
snicker hauling a lawyer away?'' The American lawyers who descended on Bhopal,
India, enlisting clients to sue Union Carbide, shared some of the shame in the
wake of the disaster there. Every calamity seems to draw a swarm of lawyers
eager to line their pockets with huge contingency fees.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


At least that's the way many Americans see it. Others, more charitably, just see
lawyers as a necessary evil.

Last week, in deciding which lawyers have earned how much in the massive
litigation over Agent Orange, Federal District Judge Jack Weinstein in Brooklyn
offered evidence to support all these images. More important, he distinguished
carefully among them, rewarding those attorneys he found most worthy and denying
fees and expenses to many he concluded had contributed little to the legal cause
of thousands of afflicted Vietnam veterans. His work provides a useful example
for future catastrophes.

Agent Orange was sprayed for a decade to defoliate jungles in Vietnam. The
herbicide contained small amounts of the poison dioxin, which thousands of
veterans have blamed for subsequent illness and death. Their claims against
seven manufacturers were consolidated in Judge Weinstein's court and were
settled last May, before trial, for a lump sum of $180 million.

Judge Weinstein combined compassion for the victims with a cool assessment that
their case ultimately would have failed for want of reliable cause- and-effect
evidence. He noted also that the lawyers had compiled evidence of manufacturer
negligence and failure to warn of the chemical's dangers that made the
settlement a bargain for the defendants. He found some lawyers to be creative
and productive, others parasitical and extravagant.

He will permit $9.3 million in legal fees, a quarter of the amount requested.
The main trial lawyers will receive more than $1.3 million, including a bonus
for skill and diligence. About 100 lawyers will split the rest, while dozens of
lawyers, mainly hangers-on, will get nothing from the fund.

Even these awards, Judge Weinstein acknowledged, might seem lavish to working
Americans, but he said the amounts are reasonable when all the costs are
considered. Fee awards, he noted, must encourage lawyers to undertake litigation
risks without giving windfalls to opportunists. His analysis and careful
accounting should guide other judges in tailoring fee awards to those ends.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS ;
Less for LawyersOn Agent Orange

BYLINE: By Katherine Roberts and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


A Federal judge last week awarded lawyers in the Agent Orange case fees that
totaled less than a quarter of what they had requested. Judge Jack B. Weinstein
of Federal District Court in Brooklyn gave final approval to the settlement of
the lawsuit, under which seven manufacturers of Agent Orange created a $180
million fund to compensate Vietnam War veterans and their families who contend
that their health was damaged because of exposure to the herbicide.

While lawyers representing the veterans were thought to have requested more than
$40 million in legal fees and expenses, Judge Weinstein awarded about $9.3
million to more than 80 attorneys or law firms. He denied claims for fees or
expenses made by 40 other lawyers. In grading the lawyers' performances, the
judge praised some for the quality of their work and chided others for
duplicating services and for seeking to be reimbursed for unnecessary expenses.
A Houston lawyer was criticized for ''unnecessarily high'' expense requests. The
lawyer, the judge wrote, ''regularly ate and stayed at first-class restaurants
and hotels and used courier services almost to the exclusion of first class
mail.''

By the deadline Tuesday, claims on behalf of 170,000 veterans and their
relatives are expected to be filed. The criteria for administering the money
have not been worked out, and none of it has been disbursed.

The veterans blamed the chemical, a defoliant which was sprayed in Vietnam, for
illnesses ranging from birth defects and miscarriages to cancer. In settling the
case, the chemical companies said they still thought the herbicide was not
responsible for the illnesses. Judge Weinstein recently said that ''sufficient
evidence'' had not yet been produced to link Agent Orange to the medical
problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD ;
Thais FaceVietnamese

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 211 words


One of the biggest concerns about the six-year-old Cambodian war has been the
risk that it might spread to other countries. For a brief moment last week, the
risk became acute as Vietnamese troops crossed into Thailand and came face to
face with Thai troops.

The Vietnamese Army, estimated at up to 180,000 troops, is on one of its biggest
offensives since installing a Cambodian government in January 1979 against
Communist and non- Communist opposition. Camps have sprung up along the border
with Thailand to afford escape for both civilian refugees and rebel guerrillas.
With the dry season, the camps have become the main targets of Vietnamese
attacks. Vietnamese tanks and artillery last week overran a big base at Ampil,
which is headquarters for the anti-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation
Front. When some guerrilla forces retreated across the border, the Vietnamese
followed. They returned to the Cambodian side after Thai officers warned they
would be attacked.

The State Department said it was ready to accelerate arms shipments to Thailand,
''a treaty ally and good friend of long standing.'' The offer of more arms
appeared to be a precaution. American officials said they had no evidence that
Vietnam sought to seize Thai territory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

APOSTLE OF PERSONALITY

BYLINE: By Richard Wightman Fox

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1773 words


FORGOTTEN PROPHET

The Life of Randolph Bourne.  By Bruce Clayton.  275 pp. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press. $25.

Randolph Bourne, a literary Wunderkind in New York City before World War I, was
physically deformed and ugly to look at but a talented writer and endearing
friend. Imprisoned in a grotesque child's body, he cultivated a vitality of
spirit through vigorous prose, lively conversation and attachments to his many
devotees (especially women). His friend James Oppenheim, the editor of Seven
Arts magazine, was initially shocked at ''the humped back, the longish, almost
medieval face, with a sewed up mouth, an ear gone awry.'' But Bourne quickly
captivated him. ''He wore a cape, carried himself with an air, and then you
listened to marvelous speech . . . and looked into blue eyes as young as a
Spring Dawn.''

Bourne, who was born and raised in Bloomfield, N.J., went to Columbia College on
full scholarship at the age of 23 and was on his way to major distinction as a
critic of culture and politics when he was suddenly silenced nine years later by
the flu epidemic of 1918, which killed half a million Americans. If he had
lived, he would have joined Walter Lippmann (who survived his brush with
influenza), John Dewey, Reinhold Niebuhr, Lewis Mumford, Lionel Trilling and
others in the pantheon of 20th-century American intellectual giants. Instead, as
Bruce Clayton, who teaches history at Allegheny College, says, he became a
''forgotten prophet.''

Mr. Clayton's biography, the first since John Adam Moreau's ''Randolph Bourne:
Legend and Reality'' (1966), captures the drama of Bourne's emotional and
intellectual development. Harassed by loneliness and self-doubt, he transcended
his disabilities - birth scars and spinal deformation due to spinal tuberculosis
- when he realized that they were socially as well as physically derived. His
moving essay ''The Handicapped'' (1911) noted that his biggest obstacle to
self-respect had not been the taunts or averted glances of those who found him
disgusting; it was the willingness of the world to ignore him, to deposit him in
the ranks of the superfluous. The discovery that society could do without him
provoked a Jamesian ''will to believe'' in himself - and to produce an
impressive corpus of essays ranging from rhapsodic paeans to youth written
before the war to blistering attacks on the collusion of intellectuals with the
war party of 1917.

Unfortunately, Mr. Clayton does not make the further point - made first by
Christopher Lasch in his short essay on Bourne in ''The New Radicalism in
America'' (1965) - that Bourne's views on the handicapped were tied to a broader
insight about modern life. He saw himself as part of a whole generation of
intellectuals who felt su- perfluous, cut off from life, threatened with
dehydration in

Richard Wightman Fox, who teaches at Reed College, is the coeditor of ''The
Culture of Consumption: Critical Essays in American History, 1860- 1960.'' the
modern wasteland. Fears about declining vitality were certainly not new to the
early 20th century. Bourne grasped that the modern problem was not just
dessication but generational alienation; moreover, the older generation was
itself in disarray, lacked authority, had no wisdom to pass on. His own
generation, he observed, had brought itself up. Thus the generation gap was a
social and psychological reality of the early years of our century and a key
ingredient in the creation of a self- conscious class of alienated intellectuals
- of which Bourne was a leader in life and for which he was a mythic figure in
death.

In response to the modern experience of dislocation, Bourne proposed the ''life
of irony,'' as he titled one of his most original Atlantic Monthly essays. Mr.
Clayton minimizes its importance by labeling it ''an exercise in convoluted
thought.'' The Moreau biography had a surer grasp of the centrality of irony in
Bourne's philosophy. For Bourne irony was a faith that combined skepticism about
tradition with a sympathetic appreciation of the truths found in divergent
perspectives. The ironic stance was both a commitment to relativism and a quest
for value. In Bourne's words, it was ''the science of comparative experience,''
the philosophical equivalent of the social pluralism he lauded in his
''Trans-national America.'' It was ''the great purger and cleanser of life,''
the path to vibrant personality, the guarantor of what he called perfect
honesty.

That Rousseauean formulation - which is not concerned with the midcentury,
post-Freudian irony of Niebuhr and Trilling - puts Bourne's irony in
perspective. He found it entirely compatible with sincerity, with the
examination and disclosure of one's ''true self'' in intimate dialogue with
others. The lingering Protestant liberalism of his youth was protection against
the darker possibility that peeling away encrusted traditions and inherited
prejudices might reveal not a pristine self ready for new experience but a mass
of conflicting and uncontrollable impulses.

Mr. Clayton could have probed his subject more deeply if he had said less about
all Bourne's ups and downs with his editor at The Atlantic Monthly and more
about what he meant by terms like ''sincerity'' and ''personality'' - and how
those notions, which Bourne held dear, helped define his politics and
intellectual milieu. Mr. Clayton tells us that such literati as Van Wyck Brooks,
Waldo Frank and Paul Rosenfeld were all close friends of Bourne's, but we never
learn what, if anything, they had in common. With his associates at Seven Arts,
another periodical where he played a key role, Bourne shared a devotion to
personality - which he considered a spiritual, not psychosocial, category.

On personality, Mr. Clayton muddies matters unduly by invoking the historian
Warren Susman's important distinction between the character building of 19th-
century moralists and the personality boosting of 20- century popular
therapists. When Bourne called for personality, he had in mind something close
to what Mr. Susman calls character - a generous vitality attained through
disciplined self-scrutiny. Bourne abominated the ''personality'' that was
purchased in the consumer marketplace and tried on for effect. The robust,
sincere selfhood he sought could be uncovered only after all social masks had
been stripped away.

The paradox of Randolph Bourne is that he could rage about the threat to
personality in a mechanical world and still embrace the scientific, efficient
progressivism of early 20th-century reform. His book on education, ''The Gary
Schools'' (1916), was a hymn to bureaucratic efficiency and scientific
management. Mr. Clayton suggests that his heart was not in it, that this was not
the real Bourne. But the stronger possibility is that he was one of the many
late 19th- and early 20th-century moralists who saw no basic conflict between
science and personality. Following John Dewey, they saw science as a social
activity that permitted people to cultivate their full potential as practical
and reasonable beings. Science was not some heartless machine set against the
human spirit - it was the toolmaking ca- pacity writ large. A fully mature
personality would develop its scientific as well as its esthetic talents.

In an epilogue, Mr. Clayton wonders what would have become of Bourne if he had
lived. He offers the admittedly wild speculation that he would have moved toward
Reinhold Niebuhr's critique of liberalism and become an interventionist in World
War II. Perhaps so, though the Anglophobe Bourne would scarcely have drawn his
sword with the eagerness of the Anglophile Niebuhr. It seems equally likely that
he would have joined Dwight Macdonald's small coterie at Politics magazine.
Macdonald's wartime neutralism was explicitly based on Bourne's perception that
''war is the health of the state.'' He had no illusions about Hitler but
believed that conducting a modern war meant building a ''totalitarian liberal''
society to defeat a totalitarian fascist one. Bourne's critique of the modern
state - and of the intellectuals' subordination to it - has much more in common
with Macdonald's later pragmatic anarchism than with Niebuhr's justification of
the state as the defender of civilized values.  But whatever the hypothetical
Bourne of the 1940's might have thought, such speculation should not be allowed
to remove the sting from his biting World War I essays. The threat to
personality lay not in science, not in efficiency, but in the mobilization of
scientific efficiency and of the intellectual class - by a state that lived by
''the terrorization of opinion and the regimentation of life .'' B A Message for
the Young In truth, (Randolph) Bourne was all but forgotten until the 1960s and
early 1970s when youthful collegiate liberals and radicals confronted the
Vietnam War.  Some have said Bourne is ''useful'' only in times of crisis or an
unpopular war. And yet his admonitions to youth to live ''contemporaneously,''
to channel their energetic idealism into responsible institutions, and to dodge
the pressures making for easy conformity are timeless. And if that advice falls
on complacent ears, his message to the handicapped, young or old, should serve
as a credo for all those blasted by ''the fumbling hand of nature.'' . . .  It
was his own unprejudiced, cosmopolitan mind that allowed Bourne to be among the
very first to see that twentieth-century America needed a new, expanded mind. As
a result, he argued for a host of continental writers, all the while encouraging
enthusiasm for American writers whom the old order snubbed. Had Bourne not
championed Dreiser and the ''underclass'' . . . the emancipation of American
literature would have taken longer. . . .  Ironically, it was the war that both
ruined Bourne's reputation and elicted the prophetic words that have the
greatest claim on our imaginations today. The war may or may not have spawned a
''lost generation.'' . . . Countless ''tired liberals'' . . . acknowledged that
they had misunderstood the war and gone to foolish extremes, but only a few . .
. had the decency to pay homage to Bourne. Not even chastened ''realists'' were
ready for Bourne's bitter cry: ''War is the health of the State.''- From
''Forgotten Prophet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Randolph Bourne in his 20's and a drawing of his death mask

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 14, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
SECOND INAUGURAL ADDRESS

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


MIAMI What will be at the center of Ronald Reagan's concerns this week? What
will he be spending his time on?

Not the reverberations from the departure of a trio of cronies. A cartoon by
Morin in The Miami Herald shows the President, on his knees, clinging
desperately to Nancy Reagan in her overcoat, as she says, ''Honestly, dear! I'm
only stepping out to do some shopping!''

Nor does he feel the need to urge on Senate majority leader Bob Dole, who tells
Democrats that no tax increase is possible this year, thereby using the threat
of a four-year, trillion-dollar deficit to force cuts in the growth of
entitlements and defense spending.

Nor is Mr. Reagan worried about Mr. Gromyko's interpretation of last week's
demi-summit. That was last week's Topic A, and Presidents work in what to the
rest of us is the week to come.

His mind is fixed on the yellow pad in the folder marked ''Second Inaugural
Address.'' This is the 50th U.S. inaugural and Mr. Reagan is the 40th President,
but just over a dozen men have been blessed with the opportunity to rededicate
their Administrations, to deliver a second inaugural.

On an occasion piled so high with difficulty, here are a few tips on how to help
a nation disenthrall itself:

First, fit the message to the place. This is an outdoor speech, with the Capitol
dome in the background, and the speaker's breath shown in vapor in the frigid
air. This is the place for homely grandeur rather than intimacy of expression,
and the place for great themes to be evoked rather than a program to be sold.
Time enough later on, in the State of the Union address - an indoor speech to
the Congress - to flesh out that theme with a plan.

Next, suit the theme to the time. This is not a first inaugural, which
traditionally breaks with the past and sets new departures, new deals, new
directions. A second inaugural must not merely restate the first inaugural's
goals, but should show how second-term goals build upon and reach beyond those
of the first.

A unity theme, for example - a reminder that we are ''We, the people'' - is more
appropriate to a first inaugural after a squeaker victory. When Richard Nixon
called in his speech- writing team after his 1968 election, he asked: ''Anybody
here read Polk's inaugural?'' We confessed to having been absent during the
study of Polk in Speech Writing 101, but Mr. Nixon - narrowly elected in the
midst of the divisions of the Vietnam War - was reaching for the appeals of the
first chief executive seeking to be ''President of all the people.''

But Ronald Reagan has been re- elected in a landslide. The nation is as united
as it is ever likely to be. A big majority has said, ''We're with you, Mr.
President''; now it remains for Mr. Reagan to tell us where he'd like to go.

The Reagan first-term themes - Growth Without Inflation, Peace Through Strength,
Return to Traditional Values - can be restated with effect, but the question
arises: How have these evolved after four years? What will he be doing to speed
the return of Washington's power to ''We, the people''?

O.K., inflation is down; what sacrifices are required to sustain growth and cut
deeply into unemployment? O.K., we have regained our strength and induced the
Russians to renew arms talks - now what are his criteria for the kind of
agreement he is seeking? And yes, ''Traditional Values'' have gained new
respect, but which values of patriotism, protection, privacy and piety does he
envision as central to the next four years?

In the stumbling summation at the end of his first debate with Mr. Mondale, Mr.
Reagan seemed to be reaching for a Vision of America; next Monday, perhaps he
can encapsulate his second-term goals with a half- dozen sentences that begin
with the traditional ''I see an America where . . .''

On his record to date, Mr. Reagan is likely to be remembered by future
generations more for what he has represented than for what he has said. He leads
by being and refraining, rather than by doing and explaining.

If he can turn out a memorable inaugural address next week, and follow it with a
State of the Union that picks up its themes and makes them specific, the
re-sworn President will prove to his countrymen that he understands and can
articulate the purposes of his leadership.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 14, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOWETO PROTEST BLOCKS KENNEDY SPEECH

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: SOWETO, South Africa, Jan. 13


Black demonstrators forced Senator Edward M. Kennedy to cancel plans for a major
speech today that was to have been the climax of a one-week visit to South
Africa.

The Massachusetts Democrat was to have addressed a meeting at Regina Mundi
Cathedral in Soweto, South Africa's biggest black township, just outside
Johannesburg.

Between 3,000 and 4,000 people assembled to hear the Senator but in their midst
around 100 demonstrators from the radical Azanian People's Organization marched
toward the altar shouting ''No more Kennedy!'' and bearing placards that
described him as an imperialist. Bishop Desmond Tutu, winner of the 1984 Nobel
Peace Prize and one of the Senator's hosts, announced after emotional pleas for
calm that the Senator's speech had been canceled.

Trip Ends in Disarray


In contrast to a trip here in 1966 by his brother Robert, the Senator's visit to
South Africa thus ended in disarray. Some South African commentators suggested
it had hardened white attitudes to change while highlighting divisions and
hostility toward the United States within the country's black opposition.

Kennedy aides said they had recommended cancellation of the speech since it
might have provoked violence leading to police intervention.

 In an interview aboard the aircraft that later carried him to Lusaka, Zambia,
Senator Kennedy said he had agreed to cancel the address for fear it would
provoke bloodshed if the police intervened.

The cancellation, which appeared to embarrass Bishop Tutu in his home
constituency, also seemed to underscore the dramatic shift in black attitudes
since Robert Kennedy toured South Africa over 18 years ago and received an
enthusiastic reception as the herald of a hoped-for new era.

Since 1966, according to the Rev. Allan Boesak, president of the World Alliance
of Reformed Churches and a co-host of Senator Kennedy, black South Africans have
become profoundly distrustful of the West in general and the United States in
particular since, with their investments here, they seemed to be supporting the
white minority regime.

In 1966, Dr. Boesak said, the United States was seen as a champion of civil
rights, but since then has lost popularity.

A Shift in Mood


While the demonstration at Regina Mundi involved only a small minority of those
present, it seemed also to reflect a deepening rift in black politics between
those espousing a multiracial opposition to South Africa's system of racial and
tribal compartmentalization, called apartheid, and those, like the Azanian
Peoples Organization, advocating a more radical protest excluding whites.

Speaking to reporters before the speech was canceled, Bishop Tutu said the
Senator's visit had highlighted existing divisions that were leading to a
''serious realignment'' in the politics of the black opposition. He described
the confrontation as ''a watershed.''

At the same time, legislators from what is called the liberal end of South
Africa's white political spectrum have suggested that the Senator's visit has
also hardened a white backlash against the Government's nominal changes,
producing a sense of chauvinism among English-speaking and Afrikaner South
Africans that associates Senator Kennedy, as a hostile outsider, with black
opponents such as Bishop Tutu.

Police Near Cathedral

Senator Kennedy's motorcade halted well before Regina Mundi Cathedral and the
Senator was not present when his aides told reporters his appearance had been
canceled. The cathedral, a plain and unadorned edifice set opposite a used-car
lot on broken ground, is a place redolent with symbolism, for it is here that
blacks, forbidden by law from holding outdoor meetings, assemble each year to
commemorate those who died in riots in Soweto in 1976.

Reporters had the impression that the speech had been abandoned because of the
presence of the demonstrators, but both Senator Kennedy and Bishop Tutu insisted
later that their preoccupation had been with the possibility of police
intervention.

Armed riot policemen were standing by a few hundred yards away from the
cathedral but made no move to close in. After word of the cancellation became
known, Bishop Tutu addressed those of his followers assembled under the vaulted
ceiling of the cathedral.

''I want to find out something from you,'' he said. ''Senator Kennedy came to
this country at my invitation. He is my guest.''

The Bishop, clearly distressed, said he had wanted the Senator to come here to
help expose ''the evil system of apartheid.''

''I did not ask him to come here as our liberator,'' he declared to thunderous
applause.

Referring to the white authorities, Bishop Tutu said: ''The system is determined
that this meeting should be disrupted and I do not want to give them that joy.
My question to you is: Do you want Senator Kennedy to address the meeting?''

The bulk of the audience gave a huge cry of ''Yes!''

A Barrage of 'No'

But at that point about 100 demonstrators from the Azanian Peoples Organizattion
set up a barrage of ''No!'' The two sides came to a close confrontation before
the altar, with the Senator's opponents and supporters standing eye to eye,
waving clenched fists. There were no exchanges of blows. The demonstrators held
aloft banners saying: ''Reject Kennedy, reject imperialism.''

In a charged atmosphere, Bishop Tutu then asked those who objected to the
Senator's visit to stand up and be counted. Then he did the same with those who
supported the visit.  The overwhelming majority backed the Bishop.  Bishop Tutu
complained bitterly that, on recent trips outside South Africa, he had received
''wonderful support for our struggle'' but when he returned home, to his own
community, ''this should not be what occurs.''

''The system is not foolish,'' he said. ''The system knows how to turn us
against ourselves.''

''I am very deeply saddened, to the point of tears,'' he declared.

Despite the confrontation, both of the antagonistic groups then joined together
in singing the nationalist anthem.

Jackson Expected Next Month


Haroon Patel, a spokesman for the Azanian Peoples Organization, told reporters
that his group opposed both Democrats and Republicans in the United States
because of America's ''expansionist role'' in Vietnam and Cuba. ''Kennedy,'' he
said, ''is the epitome of U.S. imperialism.''

Mr. Patel said the same treatment would be offered to the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
expected here next month, if he sought to use his visit for political ends.

''We see Kennedy and Jackson in the same light,'' he said. ''The basis of our
objection'' to Senator Kennedy, he said, ''is that he is coming here to canvass
for the 1988 elections.''

The Azanian Peoples Organization is considered to have little support in Soweto
compared with the United Democratic Front, of which both Bishop Tutu and Dr.
Boesak are patrons. The front is a multiracial alliance of organizations opposed
to South Africa's new Constitution, which offers limited political presence to
people of Indian and mixed racial descent but which ignores the black majority.

s

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of demonstrators in Soweto, South Africa

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 14, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
CUT THE MILITARY BUDGET? OH, SURE

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Representative William L. Dickinson, the top Republican on the House Armed
Services Committee, had this to say about the military budget President Reagan
is preparing to send Congress next month:

''I'd be embarrassed to get up and try to defend what he's proposed.''

And the Alabama Congressman had this to say when pressed for one example of
where the military budget should be cut:

''Listen, I've got somebody waiting to take me to lunch.''

Such is the collective dilemma that confronts members of the 99th Congress.

Someone Has to Choose


They arrive with a conviction that the military must contribute more to reducing
the Federal deficit. Even conservatives like Mr. Dickinson and the Senate Armed
Services chairman, Barry Goldwater, say so.

There is growing enthusiasm for a ''freeze'' of Pentagon spending, halting the
military buildup at this year's level, probably with an adjustment for
inflation. But even those who support a freeze say they do not believe the
military should just stop everything in its tracks for a year.

Someone, Congress or the Pentagon, eventually has to choose which programs grow
and which shrink so that the total stays within the budget limits.

Missiles? Troops? Pensions? Research? Pick a category and there is an
influential crowd of supporters who argue that that particular item is vital to
national security, politically untouchable or otherwise off-limits.

'This Elaborate Dance'


Some advocates of lower military spending predict that after much hue and cry,
1985 will be little different from the past few years.

''We have this elaborate dance, but we end up in about the same place,'' said
Senator Jeff Bingaman, a New Mexico Democrat who has watched the dance for two
years from his seat on the Armed Services Committee. ''I don't see a great deal
in the equation that has changed from last year or the year before.''

''Spine transplants are what we really need to take Reagan on,'' said
Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, a military critic on
the House Armed Services Committee.

In fact, Congress has managed to cut fairly deeply into President Reagan's
budget requests. But it has done so without interrupting the upward trajectory
of military spending or fundamentally changing the way the money is spent.

The military budget has grown a record six straight years in ''real,'' that is,
inflation-adjusted, dollars, pushing past the spending peaks of the wars in
Vietnam and Korea.

Relatively Painless Changes


Much of what Congress has saved along the way has come from relatively painless
changes: A 4 percent pay increase for troops instead of 5.5 percent, 440 Patriot
missiles for the Army instead of 585, a decision not to reactivate an old
battleship, a windfall from declining inflation and fuel costs, some better
bargains extracted from contractors.

But this year Congress will get a budget with much of the easy savings squeezed
out. Under pressure from the President's budget advisers to make a show of
austerity, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has already ''given up'' $11.1
billion in spending authority for next year, mostly through postponing pay
increases and reaping the bookkeeping benefits of lower inflation.

What is left, according to military budget experts, presents Congress with some
unpleasant choices.

Take weapons.

Military hardware, especially nuclear arms, has been the fastest- growing
account in the military budget under President Reagan. From 1980 to 1985,
spending on major conventional weapons doubled and on nuclear weapons almost
quadrupled.

Constituency for Every Weapon


Yet Congress and the military have been generally unwilling to take on the
organized phalanx of contractors, service personnel and jobs-minded politicians
who defend any major weapon.

''Cutting weapons is something everybody agrees to in general, but it's
difficult to get a majority to agree to it in specifics,'' Mr. Bingaman said.
''Each system has its own constituency.''

Indeed, if this year is true to history, the Pentagon will send Congress a
budget that slyly excludes some things it knows Congress is likely to put back:
M1 tanks made in Michigan, for example, or attack submarines built in Virginia
and Connecticut, or tanker planes for the ever- popular National Guard, which
has an active lobby.

In addition, the big nuclear weapons like the MX missile may be helped this year
by arms talks in Geneva. Defenders will argue that Congress should not force the
Adminstration to make concessions while it is in mid-bargaining.

When Congress and the military do cut weapons spending they usually go at it by
buying fewer of each weapon each year, a practice called ''stretching out.''

Critics like Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat, argue that this is wasteful
because it means each weapon carries more of the manufacturer's overhead and
thus is produced at a higher cost.

Dollar Cut Isn't a Dollar Saved


Another problem with cutting weapons is that a dollar appropriated for a weapon
is actually doled out over several years, as contractors deliver on their
long-term contracts.

Scrapping a new weapon may make it easier to balance the books in future years
(just as much of this year's military budget is committed to finishing off old
commitments). But cutting that weapons dollar will reduce this year's deficit by
only 15 cents.

Congress is notorious for caring more about this year's deficit than next
year's.

One way to cut the deficit right now is by reducing personnel costs. A dollar of
military pay goes straight into a paycheck.

Mr. Weinberger, with his eye on the immediate deficit, proposed last month to
delay a pay raise for the men and women in uniform and to cut the pay of the
Pentagon's one million civilian employees.

But Mr. Dickinson and others say Congress is unlikely to cut any deeper into pay
and may restore some of the savings claimed by Mr. Weinberger.

One of the military's proudest accomplishments in the past few years has been
recruiting legions of qualified soldiers into the volunteer Army. Now there are
signs that this success is threatened by a decline in the numbers of potential
recruits and competition from the growing civilian economy.

''I think we've got to be very clear that we're not getting into those
quality-of-life programs,'' said Representative Joseph M. McDade of
Pennsylvania, the top Republican on the House military spending subcommittee,
referring to the pay and pensions credited with helping lure new recruits. ''If
we have a success story, that is it.''

For similar reasons, Congress has grown leery of cutting other aspects of
''combat readiness,'' such as training, ammunition stocks, spare parts and
flying hours. Once these were fair game for nibbling away at the budget, but not
since press reports that many combat units are ill-prepared to fight.

In Search of Fat


There is, of course, one category Congress could cut by acclamation. Waste.

Inflamed by reports of misfiring missiles and $7,600 coffeemakers, Congress has
been pressuring the Pentagon to reform its buying habits, with mixed results.

The problem is that fat, when it exists, is usually well marbled through the
budget, not sitting on top awaiting the carving knife.

As Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, the new chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee, once put it: ''There is no line item in the budget that
says: 'Waste, fraud and abuse - $8,924,673,749.34.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. Army soldiers; graph of military spending since 1982

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 14, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FACES COAST TRIAL IN KILLING OF COLLEGE TEACHER

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 13


A 20-year- old Vietnamese immigrant is to go on trial Monday in the death by
shooting of a California State University professor who had close professional
and political ties with Vietnam.

Minh Van Lam, of Westminster, faces a murder charge in the Oct. 13 shooting of
Edward Lee Cooperman, a professor of physics at the university's Fullerton
campus. The police found Dr. Cooperman dead in his office when they responded to
a call from Mr. Lam, whom they later arrested.

Alan May, Mr. Lam's attorney, has suggested in pretrial hearings at the North
Orange County Municipal Court that Dr. Cooperman's death was accidental or even
a suicide, while Dr. Cooperman's family, friends and colleagues maintain that
the 48-year-old professor was the victim of an anti- Communist political
assassination.

''We still have no verifiable indication that this is a political shooting,''
said Capt. James Bankhead of the Fullerton Police Department.

Foundation to Aid Vietnam

But Dr. Cooperman's supporters say they are convinced that his activities in
connection with Vietnam led to his assassination. Dr. Cooperman advocated normal
relations between the United States and Vietnam, and was the founder in 1979 of
the Foundation for Scientific Cooperation with Vietnam.

Mr. May, citing documents taken from Dr. Cooperman's office, has asserted that
the professor had shipped nuclear testing equipment and computer components to
Vietnam, which prompted an investigation by Federal agencies.

The United States forbids the shipment of anything but emergency relief aid to
Vietnam.

''He had received death threats since about 1977, but in the last weeks before
his death he was terrified,'' said Klaaske Cooperman, Dr. Cooperman's widow.

Friends have said that Dr. Cooperman had bought guns for protection and changed
his daily routine in the last weeks of his life.

Anthony Russo Jr., a close friend of Dr. Cooperman's, cited the shooting last
summer in San Francisco of a Vietnamese couple, Ngu Yen Van and Pham Ti Luy, who
were friends of the professor's. A group calling itself the Vietnamese
Organization to Exterminate Communists and Restore the Nation said it was
responsible for the shooting.

Mr. Russo, a former employee of the Rand Corporation, was charged, with Daniel
Ellsberg, with espionage in the Pentagon Papers case, which ended with the
judge's declaring a mistrial.

Lam's Version of Shooting

Mr. Lam has said the shooting of Dr. Cooperman was accidental. Police reports
show that he telephoned Mrs. Cooperman three days later and told her the gun had
discharged while he was engaged in a ''playful tussle'' with his former teacher.

According to Mr. May, Mr. Lam was with Dr. Cooperman on the morning of the
shooting. After the .25-caliber pistol went off, Mr. May said, Mr. Lam left to
see a movie with a girlfriend. He returned three hours later and called the
police. Mr. Lam has pleaded not guilty to the murder charge.

Mr. Lam and Dr. Cooperman met in 1983 when Mr. Lam was a student in one of Dr.
Cooperman's physics classes, and became friends.

At the pretrial hearings witnesses testified that Dr. Cooperman had befriended
several Asian students and had occasionally been seen wrestling with some of
them in his office.

The witnesses also stated that Dr. Cooperman had bought Mr. Lam and two Asian
students black leather jackets. Dr. Cooperman's friends angrily disputed
allegations by Mr. May that Dr. Cooperman had felt a homosexual attraction
toward Mr. Lam.

Mr. May subpoenaed the financial records of Dr. Cooperman's Vietnam foundation
in an effort to establish that financial difficulties might have led him to
suicide.

Mrs. Cooperman testified at a pretrial hearing that her husband had often taken
as much as $55,000 with him on his trips to Vietnam, and had lent tens of
thousands of dollars to friends, but denied that they had financial problems.
She said Dr. Cooperman earned $38,000 a year and that she did not know the
source of the money he used for traveling and to make loans.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition


;
DON'T LEAVE IT TO THE PROFESSIONAL SOLDIER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


To the Editor:


Until Andy Mager's utopia arrives (''I Won't Register for the Draft,'' Op- Ed,
Jan. 5), we must maintain armed forces that can defend the nation, yet resist
misuse in foreign interventions. This means returning to the draft.

The lessons of Vietnam could hardly be plainer. The antiwar movement was a
product of the draft. Americans saw their sons, husbands, friends, brothers
endangered by a sordid and senseless adventure. Their protests and their votes
extricated our armed forces from Asia. It is true that it took 10 years.
Governments, even democratic governments, are most tenacious when their folly is
greatest. Furthermore, student deferments and other loopholes diverted much
energy toward personal solutions to the problem of Vietnam.

In contrast, a professional army is a trouble-free tool for sending American
power where it does not belong. A decade after Vietnam, opponents of
intervention were a powerless few when President Reagan sent professional troops
to Grenada. Most Americans seemed content to let the professionals do what we
pay them to do.  If we do not once again make military policy a household issue,
the same thing will happen when our troops invade Central America. Only by
drafting our soldiers can we hope to control the fighting done in our name.

ALBERT E. TUCHER Linden, N.J., Jan. 6, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VESSEY SAYS PEACE IS AIM OF CHINA TIE

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 14


Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said today that
military ties between the United States and China ''are designed to promote
peace and understanding, and threaten no third party.''

General Vessey, on the third day of a weeklong official visit here, offered no
elaboration in his remarks, which were made at a banquet for Chinese military
leaders. But his statement suggested that the United States was seeking to
reassure the Soviet Union in the aftermath of a statement Saturday by a Reagan
Administration official in Washington that a preliminary agreement had been
reached to provide China with modern antisubmarine warfare equipment.

The deal, if concluded, would be the first fruit of more than a year of high-
level contacts between Peking and Washington on possible arms sales.

Through his aides, General Vessey has refused to respond to any questions from
American reporters on the reported arms agreement. But officers attached to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff said the general had been angered by the timing of the
disclosure in Washington, which occurred as he was beginning his visit here.

A United States Embassy statement distributed in advance of General Vessey's
arrival said that it was to be a ''soldier-to soldier'' visit and would not
include discussion of United States arms sales or the transfer of military
technology. This appeared aimed at both Chinese and Soviet sensibilities.

Training and Tactics Stressed


At the banquet today, General Vessey declared that his talks here had shown that
the two sides agreed that ''training and tactics are as important as
technology'' in the military contacts between them. He also asserted that the
contacts had as their primary goal peace in Asia and the region.

''My visit has come at a time when our two nations are working to preserve and
strengthen a peaceful environment'' in Asia and the world, he said, standing
beside Yang Dezhi, Chief of the General Staff of the Chinese Forces.

''In my talks with General Yang,'' he went on, ''we found that there is much to
agree on; as Defense Minister Zhang Aiping has said, our mutual goal is to make
the Pacific region truly pacific, truly peaceful.''

''It is important for all to know that our military ties are designed to promote
peace and understanding, and threaten no third party,'' he said.

Mr. Yang, a 74-year-old veteran who was deputy commander of the Chinese forces
that fought United States troops in the Korean War, remained impassive
throughout General Vessey's remarks. He rose afterward and toasted the American
with Missouri corn whisky, then offered a noncommittal speech in which he
thanked General Vessey for ''his friendly remarks.''

'Practical Measures' Urged


Chinese reserve was also suggested by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang's call during
an earlier meeting with General Vessey for ''practical measures'' to improve
United States-Chinese ties during President Reagan's second term.

According to the official New China News Agency, Mr. Zhao urged ''further
implementation'' of a 1982 agreement on reducing United States arms sales to
Taiwan, which totalled $760 million last year, down only slightly from 1983.

General Vessey's visit is the first by the top-ranking United States military
officer since the Communist takeover of China in 1949, and it has been
complicated from the outset by disclosures about possible arms deals.

China is eager for United States assistance in modernizing its largely outdated
forces, particularly the navy, which faces a growing challenge from Soviet naval
forces based at Soviet ports in the Far East and at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam. But
it has not wanted to make too public an issue of cooperation with the United
States for fear of prejudicing sensitive relations with North Korea and other
developing nations.

In the wake of the visit here last month of Ivan V. Arkhipov, a First Deputy
Prime Minister of the Soviet Union, there has been an additional concern not to
provoke Moscow unnecessarily.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. John Vessey Jr. with Yang Dezhi

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CAMBODIAN PREMIER NAMED

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 310 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 14


Cambodia's 33-year-old Foreign Minister, Hun Sen, was named Prime Minister
today, according to Government press agency reports from Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge commander who broke with Pol Pot in 1977 and
supported the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia the next year, was elected by the
country's National Assembly, the reports said, to replace Prime Minister Chan
Si, who died late last month in Moscow. The cause of Mr. Chan Si's death has not
been officially announced.

Cambodia's head of state remains Heng Samrin, another former Khmer Rouge officer
whom the Vietnamese installed in 1979 after overthrowing the Pol Pot regime.

While Mr. Heng Samrin has been a shadowy figure over the last few years, Mr. Hun
Sen, a member of the Politburo of the Cambodian People's Revolutionary Party,
has been both highly visible and outspoken.

A slender, intense man whose face bears a scar from from his days as a guerrilla
fighter against the United States-backed Government of Marshal Lon Nol, Mr. Hun
Sen is described by diplomats as a powerful figure in Cambodian politics. A
strong supporter of the Vietnamese, he has traveled abroad frequently to promote
the Heng Samrin regime, which is not recognized by the United Nations. He made a
trip to Paris last fall, reportedly to explore ways of negotiating an end to
Cambodia's continuing civil war.



New Fighting Near Border


NONG SAMET, Thailand, Jan. 14 (Reuters) - Cambodian guerrillas clashed with
Vietnamese troops at two border points today as non-Communist forces braced for
a Vietnamese assault on their last surviving camp, Thai military sources said.

They said at least nine guerrillas of the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front were wounded when a new battle erupted at their former base at Rithisen,
opposite the Thai village of Nong Samet.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX- C.I.A. ANALYST SAYS WESTMORELAND'S ACITONS COST THOUSANDS OF LIVES

BYLINE: By M.A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


Samuel A. Adams yesterday accused Gen. William C. Westmoreland of taking actions
that, in effect, cost the lives of thousands of American soldiers.

Mr. Adams is a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst whose charge of
military ''deception'' regarding enemy strength in South Vietnam underlies a
disputed CBS documentary. Testifying in Federal District Court at the trial of
the general's $120-million libel suit against CBS, Mr. Adams recalled visiting
the Vietnam War memorial in Washington and reflecting on the dead.

''I asked myself, as an analyst,'' he said, ''how many of the 45,000 who were on
those slabs were killed, probably, by people not listed in the official order of
battle for the enemy. At least one-third, maybe one-half.''

In 1967 - as part of what Mr. Adams and CBS have called a ''conspiracy'' to
minimize the might of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong - General Westmoreland
ordered the removal of the part-time, hamlet-based self-defense forces from the
listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle. According to the 1982
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' he imposed an
''arbitrary'' ceiling of 300,000 on reports of the size of enemy forces.

No Offensive Capability

General Westmoreland, who commanded American troops in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, has denied setting a ceiling, arbitrary or otherwise, on the order of
battle. He also testified that he deleted the Vietnamese self-defense forces -
newly estimated in late 1967 at approximately 120,000 - because they had no
offensive military capability and their inclusion in the order of battle at
twice their previous number would have misled the press and Government
officials.

Yesterday, under questioning by David Boies, a CBS lawyer, Mr. Adams said that
if the enemy had been listed at the half-million or more that he and some C.I.A.
colleagues advocated in 1967, rather than at the figure of 298,000 insisted upon
by the military, that the toll of American casualties might have been
significantly lessened.

Q. What was at stake in this battle between the C.I.A. and the military over
enemy strength?

A. At stake, basically, was our policy in Vietnam. If the enemy was twice as
big, we had to do something to change our policy. We could have mobilized our
forces to try to fight, or we could have withdrawn. I remember all the people
being killed while we were playing with numbers on the seventh floor of C.I.A.
headquarters.  The G.I.'s stepping on booby traps and mines. These kids who were
fighting the war. That's what I was concerned about.

Mr. Adams, who resigned from the C.I.A. in 1973 because of what he described as
''dishonest appraisals'' of enemy strength by ''American intelligence,'' served
as a paid consultant to CBS for the broadcast on Vietnam. He is a defendant at
this trial before Judge Pierre N. Leval, as is George Crile, the producer of the
documentary, and Mike Wallace, its narrator. Mr. Wallace, who was recently
hospitalized for what his doctors termed exhaustion, returned to court
yesterday.

Mr. Adams, who is 51, had advanced his thesis of deception privately within
Government circles before making it public in an article in Harper's magazine in
1975. The article was edited by George Crile, who worked for the magazine before
becoming a CBS producer in 1976.

Long Preparation

The scope of Mr. Adams's contribution to the broadcast was underscored yesterday
when the witness recalled interviewing one former military analyst 20 or 30
times - ''a whole mess of times'' - ferreting out and becoming close friends
with other former officers long before the documentary was prepared in 1981 and
reading ''scores of books'' and ''winding this little crank'' on a microfilm
machine at the Library of Congress ''for about two months.''

The 90-minute documentary - which was played in its entirety for the jury
yesterday for the first time in this 14- week-old trial - alleged a
''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland's command to show progress in the war by
suppressing and altering ''critical intelligence on the enemy in the year
leading up to the Tet offensive'' of January 1968. As a result, it said,
President Johnson and the American troops were caught ''totally unprepared.''

General Westmoreland, who contends that the documentary falsely accused him of
lying to the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the composition and
size of enemy forces, sat impassively at the plaintiff's table as Mr. Adams
testified about the formation of his belief that sound intelligence had been
made subservient to political concerns in 1967.

Mr. Adams, who will be cross-examined by General Westmoreland's lawyers when
court resumes tomorrow, said he was ''satisfied'' with the documentary and
particularly with the ''extremely careful'' labors of Mr. Crile.

'Massive Falsification'

''I was satisfied,'' he said, ''in the sense that it portrayed accurately in my
view what I thought was the massive falsification of statistics, order-of-
battle statistics. It also portrayed accurately information which I had gotten
concerning the laying on of a ceiling by General Westmoreland in early August
1967, and it has always been my feeling that it was the laying on of the ceiling
from which all of the other events came in train.''

Mr. Adams, who appeared on the CBS broadcast, also said he was convinced of its
importance, ''with the fact that it was covering a key event in the Vietnam War.
It demonstrated to me, and I thought it demonstrated as well to anyone who
looked at it, how politics could affect intelligence.

''We, in intelligence,'' he said, ''had tried to fool the American public, we
tried to fool the Congress and even to some extent the Administration, but we
ended up, I think, in fooling ourselves. I thought the documentary explained, at
least in part, how we managed to lose this war.''

Still, Mr. Adams told the jury, the documentary was not ''the end of the
story.''

''I felt that there may have been political pressures on General Westmoreland to
come up with the things he came up with,'' to ''come up with good news'' for
Washington, the witness said. But the general and others denied that, he
continued, ''so basically we went with what we had.''

No Regrets

After Mr. Adams said he had no regrets ''whatsoever'' about taking part in the
broadcast, Mr. Boies raised a charge by Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's
lawyer, that Mr. Adams was ''obsessed.''

''We lost a war in Vietnam,'' Mr. Adams replied. ''There's never been an
adequate investigation of how we managed to do it. We're a great big country and
Vietnam is a little bitty country. I don't think it's enough to say the press
did it.''

Mr. Adams was somewhat less tough on the C.I.A. than he was on the military in
his testimony. He said he had agreed in 1967 with the view of George V. Allen, a
colleague, that the C.I.A. had ''sold out'' to the military on enemy strength
estimates. And he recalled how, as early as 1969, he took copies of
order-of-battle documents from the C.I.A. and buried them on a Virginia farm
because he ''was scared that perhaps this kind of record might disappear.''

But, in the end, Mr. Adams's often- expressed affection for the C.I.A. shone
through.

Q. If you had to do it all over again, would you still join the C.I.A.?

A. Yup.

(end)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'VIETNAM UNDER COMMUNISM,' ON 13

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


HOW should we regard Vietnam today - as a nation to be pitied, admired,
distrusted, despised? ''Vietnam Under Communism,'' the ''Frontline'' documentary
on Channel 13 at 9 tonight, straddles the answer. This ought to be a good thing;
a dispassionate examination of Vietnam is to be prized. At the same time, the
documentary doesn't quite allow us to find our own answer. In part, its even-
handedness gets in the way.

Thus ''Vietnam Under Communism'' opens with what almost seems like standard
agitprop. Guns flash and bombs fall in old black-and-white film. Solemnly, the
narrator speaks:

''Christmas in Hanoi - 1972. America unleashes a barrage on the capital of North
Vietnam. The bombing, aimed at both the backs and the spirits of the people, is
relentless, devastating, but in vain.''

Then we see Vietnam today - rusted-out American tanks, lush green fields,
children singing about Ho Chi Minh. A solitary soldier stands guard on the bank
of a river while a junk sails by. Listen to the narrator now:

''This is Vietnam today - patient, proud, hopeful - a nation at peace.''


An instant later, however (and forget for a moment that Vietnam is not at peace;
it is fighting in Cambodia and sometimes along its own northern border), the
documentary makes it clear that life in Vietnam is grim. Corruption abounds.
People are ''ill fed, impoverished.'' They live in ''a totalitarian society.''
They are ''resigned,'' and their only triumph seems to be that they have
endured.

Clearly, the documentary is trying to be ideologically equitable, balancing East
and West. But it's being self- conscious while it does it. It's trying too hard,
and we are not sure what to think. We see street scenes, markets and rice
paddies, but it is as if we're at a distance. Granted that this viewer saw a
version of the documentary that was without Judy Woodruff's opening and closing
comments. It was still clear a point of view was missing.

Thus the documentary examines the tragedy of Vietnam's divided families: fathers
and husbands who have left the country, leaving wives and children behind. A
Vietnamese official says that the wives and children may also leave, but that
emigration has slowed because the United States declines to accept refugees.

Then, in an interview, Assistant Secretary of State Paul D. Wolfowitz says that
the United States ''got out 3,500 kids and their families.'' Certainly that is
not many; the figure seems to uphold Vietnam's claim that the United States does
not accept enough refugees.

On the other hand, ''Vietnam Under Communism'' then offers ample evidence that
Hanoi does not care about the divided families, and that humanitarianism does
not move it. Again we have balance: accusation, rebuttal and counter-rebuttal.
But the human dimension seems to get lost.


Consequently, ''Vietnam Under Communism'' seems detached, unduly fearful of
making judgments. It's a pity. We expect and demand, even if unrealistically,
more than we get. Western television crews have not had much access to Vietnam
since Hanoi's triumph, and WCCO of Minneapolis, which is presenting the film for
public television, apparently was granted a 35-day visa.

Nonetheless, the documentary ought to be watched. As the Australian Ambassador
to Vietnam says in an interview, we ''can't ignore a country of 16 million.'' ''
Vietnam Under Communism'' doesn't satisfy our curiosity about Vietnam, but at
least it demystifies a mysterious place. The documentary was produced, written
and directed by Greg Pratt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 16, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AN AFGHAN FOOTNOTE: LEGEND OF A SOVIET FARM BOY

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 15


After nearly five years of playing down the conflict in Afghanistan, the
official Soviet press has found a war hero.

He is a farm boy from Byelorussia named Nikolai Chepik who, just two months
before his tour of duty was to end, is said to have given up his life to save
his comrades from a rebel attack.

The 20-year-old paratroop sergeant is being portrayed in newspaper articles as a
hard-working, fun-loving young fellow, quick to jump onto a tractor or to pick
up a guitar, with a deep sense of duty to his motherland.

The articles, which are appearing with growing frequency in the press, say
Sergeant Chepik died a year ago next month when a band of Afghan guerrillas
attacked his sapper team, wounding him twice in the legs and cornering his
comrades. As the Afghans closed in, the young fighter intentionally set off a
stack of hand grenades, sacrificing his own life and taking with him more than
30 of the enemy.

'All the Way to Motherland'


''The last thing he could see,'' the cultural newspaper Literaturnaya Gazeta
wrote this week, ''was the peaks of the Hindu Kush, and above them the huge,
bright sky, a sky stretching all the way to his motherland.''

The line was an unmistakable allusion to Tolstoy's ''War and Peace,'' in which
Prince Andrei Bolkonsky, falling on the field of battle, sees above him the sky,
''that lofty, limitless sky.''

The creation by the Government press of an Afghanistan war hero at this time, as
part of the rising publicity the conflict has received in recent months, is seen
by Western diplomats and others here to be a sign that Moscow is preparing for a
long conflict.

''Once you start making heroes of the men who die there,'' a Western diplomat
said, ''it gets harder to back away and say it was all in vain.''

'Forever in Our Ranks'


Already a song has been written about the exploits of the young sergeant -
''Chepik is with us, our hero, forever in our ranks.'' A bronze bust has been
put up in his home village, and a ''Chepik Alley'' of 365 trees has been
planted.

His desk in the local schoolhouse has become a place of honor reserved for the
best student, and a separate room has been set aside as a personal museum,
newspapers report. Some 40 other schools have set up ''Chepik Corners,'' in
which children may study the sergeant's exploits.

Twenty-three members of the youth group known as the Young Pioneers have taken
his name, the papers report, and throughout Byelorussia, workers' brigades are
reported to have made him a symbolic member, working extra shifts in his honor.

In paratroop companies, the newspaper reports say, photographs of the sergeant
are handed out as rewards for top performance.

Chepik-Style Bangs


''I just don't know what to do,'' a squadron leader is quoted as saying.
''Everyone's wearing bangs under their berets, Chepik-style. Nothing we say can
make them stop.'

Sergeant Chepik has also been awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, one
of the few cases in which such a high award has been publicized for exploits in
Afghanistan.

In recent months, press accounts of action in Afghanistan have become more
explicit, portraying Russians dying at the hands of vicious rebel bands.

Increasingly, parallels are being drawn with Russia's fight against Hitler's
invaders in World War II, which is certain to draw sympathy from a population in
which that war strikes a deep emotional chord.

And Sergeant Chepik himself, hearing stories of that earlier war, is said to
have cried out: ''Oh, I wish I'd been there. I'd have shown those monsters.'

Son of Farmer and Milkmaid


Nikolai Chepik, the son of a farmer and a milkmaid, the grandson of a fighter in
the Russian Revolution, is described in one newspaper by those who knew him as
''an honest, hard-working, well-behaved fellow, an average student - normal!''

A school friend could not help laughing as he told a reporter stories of the
pranks they played. An army chum said that when their work was over, there was
no one more ready than Sergeant Chepik to join in a song.

His teacher, Anna Nemogai, talks with those who ask about the boy who was known
by the nickname Kolya. ''One great request,'' she tells them. ''Don't 'dress up'
our Kolya. After all, he's just one of our village boys.''

For many people, according to the Communist Party newspaper Pravda, a visit to
his statue is a sacred mission.

Already, the papers report, pilgrims have come to the little schoolhouse about
60 miles from Minsk, traveling from as far away as Laos, Vietnam, El Salvador
and Afghanistan.

Along with Russian pilgrims, they read what is said to be the notebook Sergeant
Chepik kept throughout his service in Afghanistan as he helped Government troops
fight the civil war against Western-backed rebels.

''The soul of a paratrooper,'' he writes, ''is a great love of life.''

''There are many roads in the world, but the best of them all is the road
home.''

''If death looks your friend in the eye, take that gaze on yourself.''

A Thought on Fickleness


And after the girl who said she would wait for him forever married another, he
wrote, ''Believing that a girl will wait is just like jumping with a parachute
packed by somebody else.''

By the dozens, people are said to be writing to Sergeant Chepik's parents in
their village, Chervony Mai.

''I couldn't be silent,'' reads one letter that was quoted by the newspaper
Sovetskaya Byelorussia. ''A heartfelt mother's thanks for your son. Only in our
country do people fight to the death for peace, as he did. We will be proud of
your Kolya forever. He has entered our family like one of us.''

Many beg for photographs of Sergeant Chepik, says Sovietskaya Byelorussia's
correspondent, S. Lyapich.

''They are needed, these photographs,'' he writes. ''They are needed not for
collections, but as something very personal. When we look into his face, we gaze
deeply into ourselves.''

For Mr. Lyapich, the sergeant, with his open smile, exemplifies something noble
in the Russian character.

''If a miracle happened and he came to life, even for just a moment,'' Mr.
Lyapich writes, ''I am sure he would smile at us all and say: 'Hey, all of you,
don't look so glum. Life goes on.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nikolai Chepik

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Says Vietnam Attacked Across Border

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 16


China said today that Vietnamese troops attacked across the border into the
Chinese province of Yunnan on Monday but were repulsed with ''due punishment.''

The Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ma Yuzhen, also said at a weekly news briefing
that China would continue to assist ''to the best of its ability'' Cambodian
rebels retreating from an offensive by Vietnamese occupation forces.

In China's border conflict with Vietnam, the official New China News Agency said
that Vietnamese troops advancing under artillery cover crossed the border Monday
but that by Tuesday night ''all the invaders were expelled with a number of
Vietnamese troops killed or wounded.''

The report gave no Chinese casualty figures, but the agency said six Chinese
civilians were killed and one wounded Jan. 9 when the Vietnamese staged a border
ambush in the autonomous region of Guangzi Zhuang.

Later, the agency said China had released 15 Vietnamese soldiers and other
''armed personnel'' on a highway leading to the Vietnamese town of Dong Dang. A
death certificate for one Vietnamese was also turned over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ADAMS CROSS-EXAMINED IN CBS CASE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words


Lawyers for Gen. William C. Westmoreland yesterday attempted to show that,
contrary to a disputed 1982 CBS documentary, the general had not suppressed
higher estimates in 1967 for Vietcong ''irregular'' forces.

Samuel A. Adams - whose thesis of military ''deception'' underlies the broadcast
that is the subject of General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit in Federal
District Court in Manhattan - testified that virtually the same figures that
were said to have alarmed the general were, nonetheless, given by his command to
the Central Intelligence Agency and apparently to other intelligence
organizations as well.

The numbers were ''certainly similar,'' Mr. Adams acknowledged under
cross-examination by David Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland. But more
importantly, he had testified earlier, those numbers were not ultimately used.

Mr. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who served as a paid consultant to CBS and is
now a defendant at the 14-week- old trial of the general's suit, took the stand
last Thursday.

A key witness for CBS, he had testified on direct examination that General
Westmoreland had imposed an arbitrary ceiling of 300,000 on reports of enemy
size in 1967, partly by masking the strength of the political cadre and of such
''irregular'' forces as the guerrillas and the self-defense units.

Military-C.I.A. Quarrel

Mr. Adams, who took part in 1967 in a quarrel between the military and the
C.I.A. over the proper estimates for enemy strength, seemed uneasy under
cross-examination. He fidgeted, and the prodigious memory he displayed on direct
examination failed him a number of times as Mr. Dorsen pursued discrepancies
between his testimony and other statements he had made.

For example, Mr. Adams had said last week that he first realized the C.I.A. had
''sold out'' to lower estimates advanced by the military when he returned to
Washington in September 1967 from a conference on strength figures in Saigon. He
said he had left the conference after two or three days.

But George Carver, Mr. Adams's former superior, had previously testified that
Mr. Adams was aware in Saigon of the ''compromise'' between the C.I.A. and the
military. And yesterday, Mr. Dorsen read excerpts from a book Mr. Adams has been
writing for a decade in which he says that, on the night he learned of the
agreement, he attended a party in Saigon and ''pounded the table, cursed the
military and drank too much.''

General Westmoreland commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

The CBS documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' asserted
that, to show progress in the war, the general's command engaged in a
''conspiracy'' to minimize the size and nature of the enemy, mainly by deleting
the self-defense forces from the official military listing of enemy strength
known as the order of battle. It said that ''critical'' intelligence on the
scope of enemy forces had been ''suppressed and altered.''

General Westmoreland contends that the broadcast defamed him by saying that, for
political and public relations reasons, he had lied to President Johnson and the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. He also denies charges made by the documentary that he
had ignored reports by his intelligence officers of a larger Vietcong presence
in 1967 and of a higher rate of North Vietnamese infiltration than he made
known.

The general testified that, when he ordered the removal of the self-defense
forces from the order of battle in the fall of 1967, it was because he had come
to believe that those units were insignificant militarily and that their
inclusion at a number much higher than used before would mislead Washington and
the press. The part-time, hamlet- based self-defense forces, officially
estimated until early 1967 at approximately 70,000, were considered thereafter
to number around 120,000.

On Paper, Strength Fell

In mid- to late 1967, when a special estimate was being prepared for the
President at a series of conferences like the one in Saigon, Mr. Adams and some
C.I.A. colleagues favored a total figure for enemy strength of about 500,000,
including the self-defense forces. The military argued not only that the
self-defense forces should no longer be counted but also that the political
cadre of about 85,000 should be listed separately. Thus, on paper, the total
military strength of the enemy fell from 298,000 in May 1967 to a range of
223,000 to 248,000 in November.

Through a variety of contemporaneous memorandums and cables, Mr. Dorsen sought
to demonstrate that a number of C.I.A. officials and analysts in 1967, including
Mr. Adams, believed that the self-defense forces did not pose an offensive
military threat and should not be considered in the same league with regular
enemy troops.

But Mr. Adams insisted the self-defense forces were responsible for many
casualties due to mines and booby traps they had laid. And he clearly upstaged
Mr. Dorsen when the latter pressed the idea that Vietcong guerrillas might get
''paid'' more rice if they exaggerated their numbers. ''Guerrillas do not get
paid,'' Mr. Adams remarked dryly. ''And they ate locally.''

Mr. Adams testified that, as early as March 1967, Maj. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson
Jr., General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence, informed the C.I.A. that, as
a result of new studies, the enemy's ''irregular'' forces, including guerrillas,
were thought to number about 198,000.

Mr. Dorsen then showed Mr. Adams his testimony in 1975 before a Congressional
committee in which he recalled a May 1967 episode involving General
Westmoreland, which was also recounted in the documentary. The details of the
episode had been furnished Mr. Adams by Col. Gains Hawkins, who was General
Davidson's order-of- battle chief.

According to Mr. Adams, Colonel Hawkins said that when General Westmoreland was
told at a briefing of the higher estimates for the ''irregulars,'' as well as
for the political cadre, he ''nearly fell off his chair,'' and his ''jaw went
slack, with almost sort of a catatonic look.'' The general, by this account,
said, ''What am I going to tell the press, what am I going to tell Congress,
what am I going to tell the President?'' Then, according to Mr. Adams, he said:
''Gentlemen, I want you to take another look at those numbers.''

Colonel Hawkins, who also appeared on the CBS broadcast, is expected to testify
that he interpreted that command as an order to make ''arbitrary'' cuts in the
figures. Through depositions read into the record by CBS lawyers, four former
intelligence officers have already testified that such reductions were carried
out.

Figure Seen at Conference

But yesterday, Mr. Adams conceded that Colonel Hawkins and other officers
representing General Westmoreland at an enemy strength conference at C.I.A.
headquarters in Langley, Va., in August 1967 may have shown a figure for
''irregular'' forces that was as high as 183,000. Even though the military
opposed the inclusion of such a figure in the order of battle or in the estimate
for the President, it was contained in one or more of the slides shown at the
conference, attended by delegates from a half-dozen intelligence agencies.

The documentary said that General Westmoreland ''chose not to inform the
Congress, the President, not even the Joint Chiefs of Staff'' of the higher
estimates for the ''irregulars.'' But Brig. Gen. George Godding has testified
that he briefed the Joint Chiefs in August 1967 on the numbers advocated by both
the C.I.A. and the military, and that Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, then chairman of
the Joint Chiefs, concurred in General Westmoreland's decision to delete the
self-defense forces.

Yesterday Mr. Dorsen pointed out that, at the Pentagon Papers trial of Daniel
Ellsberg in 1973, Mr. Adams himself had testified that General Wheeler favored
dropping the self-defense forces. Mr. Adams said he could not understand how he
had said that, because he did not know General Wheeler's position before this
case.

Mr. Dorsen also read the names of five senior intelligence officials, including
Richard Helms, then Director of Central Intelligence, who had ''signed off'' on
the accord with the military - after the Board of National Estimate listened to
Mr. Adams discuss his reservations for two hours.

But Mr. Adams said that it was a ''sad day,'' and that one board member, Sherman
Kent, said: ''Sam, it makes my blood boil to see the military cooking the books.
Haven't we gone beyond the bounds of reasonable dishonesty?''

''And I said,'' Mr. Adams recalled, ' ''we went beyond those bounds last
August.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS TROOP ASSERTION BASED ON 'GUESSES,' WITNESS SAYS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words


Samuel A. Adams testified yesterday that an assertion on a disputed CBS
documentary that North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam in late 1967
was quadruple the rate reported by Gen. William C. Westmoreland's command was
based on ''guesses'' by CBS military sources.

But Mr. Adams - a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst whose thesis of
''deception'' by the command underlies the 1982 broadcast that is the subject of
General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit in Federal District Court in
Manhattan - said that ''in intelligence, it is almost impossible to do anything
but guess.''

''You never have firm and solid information,'' Mr. Adams told the jury under
cross-examination by David Dorsen, a lawyer for the general. ''We didn't have a
big clicker counting off the troops coming down the Ho Chi Minh Trail.''

The 90-minute documentary - for which Mr. Adams was a paid consultant - charged
that General Westmoreland's command suppressed contemporary reports that
infiltration in each of the five months before the enemy's Tet offensive of
January 1968 was 20,000, not the 5,500 official figure. The 20,000 estimate was
supported on the broadcast by Col. Russell Cooley, a former intelligence officer
in Saigon.

Narration by Wallace

Mike Wallace - the narrator of the documentary and, like Mr. Adams, now a
defendant at this trial - went on to say in the film:

''And so, the President of the United States, the American Army in Vietnam and
the American public back home were destined to be caught totally unprepared for
the size of the attack.'' President Lyndon B. Johnson, he said, ''had been
alerted to the enemy's intentions, but no one had been able or willing to inform
him of the enemy's capability.''

A key witness for the network, Mr. Adams provided CBS with the results of his
research carried on over 15 years which led him to believe that General
Westmoreland's command conspired for political reasons to minimize the strength
of the enemy in South Vietnam in 1967.

Mr. Dorsen began cross-examining Mr. Adams on Wednesday and will continue when
court resumes on Monday. Yesterday, with Mr. Adams again less composed than he
had been on direct examination, Mr. Dorsen sought to establish that the
statements on infiltration and other segments of the program were without merit.

His voice heavy with sarcasm, Mr. Dorsen asked Mr. Adams whether he really
believed that senior officers in Saigon had decided to withhold vital
information on enemy size from the troops in the field.

Q. Were they trying to keep the figures a secret from the U.S. Army, Mr. Adams?

A. They were trying to keep the numbers down. It's a horrible thing; I find it
hard to contemplate.

Q. So you find it rather incredible?

A. Sir, I find a whole lot of things in this story incredible. It was very
difficult for me to accept the idea, but, as incredible as it was, I came to
believe it happened.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, contends that CBS libeled him by saying that he had lied to President
Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the true strength of the North
Vietnamese and Vietcong.

A Long-Running Dispute

The CBS documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - focused on
a long-running intelligence dispute in 1967 in which Mr. Adams and some C.I.A.
colleagues argued for a total enemy strength estimate of a half-million, twice
the size of the estimate successfully propounded by General Westmoreland's
command.

The accusation regarding infiltration figures was only one of the allegations
made by the broadcast. It also charged that, to show progress in the war,
General Westmoreland had imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports
of enemy size, mainly by deleting the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the
military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

The general has testified that he removed the self-defense forces because he had
come to believe that they were insignificant militarily. He said he had informed
his immediate military and civilian superiors not only of that action but also
of a new set of higher estimates for the self-defense and other irregular
forces. He identified those superiors as Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, the
commander of American forces in the Pacific, and Ellsworth Bunker, the United
States Ambassador in Saigon in 1967.

Yesterday, Mr. Adams acknowledged that, before the broadcast was shown in
January 1982, he had read a letter from Col. Gains Hawkins, a former
intelligence officer, who wrote that he had briefed an American public relations
officer in Saigon on the new figures for the ''irregulars.''

Wrote to His Wife

Colonel Hawkins - an important source for both Mr. Adams and CBS - wrote to his
wife on May 30, 1967, only two weeks after General Westmoreland had learned of
the higher figures and, according to documents in this case, only days after he
had ordered that they be passed along to the Embassy. The public relations
officer was identified in the letter as Barry Zorthian, who was chief spokesman
for the United States Mission in Vietnam.

Mr. Adams said he had not discussed the letter with Colonel Hawkins, with whom
he had had many conversations about intelligence since 1967.

Mr. Adams also indicated that another former intelligence officer in Saigon had
told him before January 1982 that Admiral Sharp may have attended a May 1967
briefing on the new estimates for ''irregulars.''

With regard to monthly infiltration estimates of 20,000 between September 1967
and January 1968, Mr. Adams said they were the ''best guesses'' of several
former military intelligence officers. And, in intelligence work, he said, the
word ''guess'' is synonymous with ''estimate.''

No Access to 'Raw Data'

Mr. Adams said that, after the officers left Saigon in 1968, they did not have
access to the ''raw data'' on which their reports had been based. Nor, he said,
had he seen such reports, which he presumed had been ''destroyed.''

The witness said the 20,000 figure was used in the documentary after it was
''confirmed'' by a former intelligence lieutenant named Michael Hankins.
Moreover, he said, reviews conducted by the C.I.A. and others after the Tet
offensive ''corroborated'' the high level of infiltration in the months before
the attack.

Mr. Dorsen suggested to the jury that Mr. Adams was incorrect about the
conclusions of these reviews; that Mr. Adams's notes of his one conversation
with Mr. Hankins, in 1980, were meaningless and that estimates of 20,000 were no
more reliable than other estimates provided CBS by other sources. Bernard
Gattozzi, another former intelligence officer, Mr. Dorsen said, had told George
Crile, the producer of the documentary, that the infiltration from North Vietnam
in the fall of 1967 might have been as high as 70,000 a month.

''We went with the lower figures,'' Mr. Adams said, adding that he did not
believe Mr. Gattozzi meant to say that the 70,000 figure was the rate each
month.

On Monday, Mr. Adams testified that Mr. Gattozzi had told him that monthly
infiltration during that period was ''in the neighborhood of 25,000, 30,000,
35,000, 40, and 45,000.''

''Did it ever occur to you,'' Mr. Dorsen asked yesterday, ''that these gentlemen
might be mistaken?''

Mr. Adams paused before replying.

''I suppose it might have occurred to me,'' he said. But after talking to the
officers, ''my doubts went away.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodians Are Moved Deeper Into Thailand

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 175 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 17


At least 60,000 Cambodians who fled recent Vietnamese attacks on border
settlements are being moved to a refugee camp deeper in Thai territory,
according to international aid workers and Thai officials.

The move came amid signs that the Vietnamese may be preparing to seal the
Cambodian-Thai border and stay in the camps abandoned by Cambodian rebels and
their civilian supporters since Vietnamese attacks began in mid-November.

Nearly 250,000 Cambodians supporting three anti-Vietnamese guerrilla armies
trying to overthrow the Cambodian Government installed by Hanoi six years ago
were living in the border camps when the attacks began. More than half of them
have already sought refuge in Thailand.

The Cambodians who began to move quietly on Wednesday to the Khao I Dang refugee
camp, north of Aranyaprathet, are apparently from the makeshift settlement at
Red Hill, according to refugee workers. The people in that settlement fled at
Christmas from Rithisen, the largest civilian camp of the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
WORDS AND WORK

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


PARIS In the middle of a speech on development frustrations, an African

official paused to ask: ''Who started this 'third world' rating anyway - first,
second, third? Why?''

The occasion was a conference of the African-American Institute in Gabon last
week. The remark reflected how much perceptions have changed in little over a
generation.

The idea of a ''third world'' did not start out as a lower place on the totem
pole. It was generated at the 1955 Bandung conference, which President Sukarno
of Indonesia opened by declaring it ''the first intercontinental conference of
the so-called colored peoples in the history of mankind.''

The purpose was to reject the polarization of the world into blocs led by the
U.S. and the Soviet Union, to map a third way, and to spur decolonization. It
was reinforced at the 1961 nonaligned summit conference in Belgrade, a gathering
of 25 legendary leaders that included Yugoslavia's Tito, Indonesia's Sukarno,
India's Nehru, Egypt's Nasser, Ghana's Nkrumah, Ethiopia's Haile Selassie,
Cyprus's Archbishop Makarios.

Now the nonaligned movement includes well over 100 countries, some - like
Vietnam, Cambodia and Cuba - quite clearly aligned.

Classical imperialism, the colonization of territories subjecting indigenous
peoples to foreign rule, has almost disappeared. But the vocabulary remains,
still passionate though fuzzy. With the exception of the once-proud third world
label, it could be said that whatever has been achieved or has failed in the
oft-demanded transfer of technology and resources, the one transfer that has
thoroughly taken hold is that of vocabulary.  Most of it, even the Marxist
catchwords of class, exploitation, neocolonialism, originated in the
industrialized West. So did the catchwords of sovereignty, independence,
democracy, individual rights and national dignity. They all have meaning, but
not at all the same meaning for everybody.  So there is something skewed in a
debate that uses big words to describe the grievances of societies grappling
with the terrible problems of entering the modern world against societies that
have defined, not only for themselves, what modern means.  It leads to a
debilitating hypocrisy, on both sides. Hypocrisy isn't all bad. It's a tacit
acceptance of standards even if they're only goals, very far from achievement.
But it is an irritant and an obstacle to practical pursuit of what is possible.
One aspect to which I am continually exposed by profession is the complaint
about the deforming, antisocial impact of the media. ''Haven't you distorted the
image of Africa?'' asks a Gabonese official who spent years working in European
television. A minister proclaims, ''The media should be at the service of
development.'' And an earnest ambassador from Chad says: ''Why don't you
consider the consequences? Your reports are drying up foreign investments.'' The
onslaught makes me defensive. I can't help reminding the official from Chad that
flattering reports that would mislead investors would make Western information
services useless, even for his own country's purposes. The real reason for the
dominance of Western media is that, for all their faults, they are more
credible. People don't believe their own palaver, let alone their leaders', not
to speak of their neighbors' and rivals' leaders.

The best way for African and other developing countries to induce a more
accurate, balanced flow of information to the West would be to develop their own
press so that it provides a reasonably reliable base.

The arguments offered for why it isn't possible stress inexperience, lack of
technology, cultural habits and especially the weakness of new nations trying to
mold some coherence out of deeply rooted ethnic hostilities. This, I was told,
is why one- party states and dictatorships can't be avoided. The alternative
wouldn't be political pluralism but tribal war.

All that is probably true. But it amounts to a plea for a double standard, a
hidden self-disdain wrapped in an alien vocabulary divorced from local reality.

The antidote came from an American engineer, a man who has spent his life
building big, solid things in improbable places. He is working on a Gabonese
railroad and pretends he is a mercenary, not concerned with big ideas and big
words. But he is making something real, in a real forest, with real people, to
create real wealth.

''Third world'' began as an assertive political slogan. Now it is a sense of
having been left behind. Catching up isn't about vocabulary, it's about work and
skills.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFICIAL RULES OUT ARMS FOR CAMBODIA REBELS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 18


Washington's highest-ranking official on Asian affairs ruled out arms assistance
to Cambodian rebels today, saying that American military involvement in the
Cambodian civil war would only make negotiating with Vietnam more difficult.

Speaking at a news conference at the end of a three-day visit to Thailand, the
official, Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, said he continued to hope that Hanoi will agree to discuss a
political solution in Cambodia. Vietnam has 160,000 to 180,000 troops in
Cambodia battling three resistance groups.

On Thursday, Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, said Thailand was
pressing the United States to join the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and China in giving military assistance to Cambodian rebels. Guerrillas of the
non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front, one of the three
Cambodian resistance groups, have been under heavy Vietnamese attack since
mid-November.

'Political and Humanitarian'


Today, Mr. Wolfowitz, who has been attending a Southeast Asian regional security
conference as well as meeting with Thai leaders, said, ''We have for a long time
been providing political and humanitarian support for the non-Communist
resistance, and will continue to do so.''

But military support, he said, ''should not be an American role; it is best
undertaken by others.''

He added, ''It bears repeating - one can't say it often enough - that we give no
support of any kind to the Khmer Rouge.''

He said that Washington had ''repeatedly'' told Peking that the Khmer Rouge, who
are supported by China, could have no part in a political solution for Cambodia.

Remnants of the Communist Khmer Rouge, who ruled Cambodia in a reign of terror
from 1975 until January 1979, when the Vietnamese took Phnom Penh, are the
largest of three groups that are loosely allied against the Vietnamese- backed
Government in Phnom Penh. The Khmer Rouge group has 30,000 fighters.

The Khmer People's National Liberation Front, under the political leadership of
a former Prime Minister, Son Sann, has about 15,000 guerrillas. The third group,
also non-Communist, includes about 5,000 armed followers of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, a former head of state and government.

Hanoi's Demands


Hanoi has insisted that no political solution is possible in Cambodia until the
forces of Mr. Son Sann and Prince Sihanouk break with Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge
leader. Vietnam has also demanded that China and Thailand stop aiding Khmer
Rouge rebels.

Mr. Wolfowitz said Vietnam's military concentration on the non-Communist Khmer
People's National Liberation Front showed ''that their claims that they are in
Cambodia only because of the Khmer Rouge are very hollow claims indeed.''

He added, ''They have dealt themselves a political and propaganda setback
because their actions have strengthened bipartisan support in the United States
for our policy.''

He said the American policy was to back the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, or Asean, whose strategy was ''to present Vietnam with a very clear
choice: to continue its efforts to achieve a military solution or to accept a
political settlement that would not only serve the interests of the Asean
countries and the Cambodians, but would also protect Vietnam's security
interests.''

''We feel,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said, ''that the chances of a political settlement,
as small as they may seem, would be larger if the United States is not involved
in a military role.''

Thailand's Desire for Jets


On other subjects, Mr. Wolfowitz said Thailand's interest in buying F-16 jet
fighters ''was under review'' by both Governments. He would not elaborate.
Diplomats and Thai officials suggest that the Thai Government of Prime Minister
Prem Tinsulanonda might be less enthusiastic about the purchase of the planes
than the Thai military.

Thai Government finance and budget officials have been reported to be opposed to
the purchase of aircraft, which would drain foreign reserves.

On Vietnam's reluctance to release prison-camp refugees to the United States,
Mr. Wolfowitz repeated the American position that anyone imprisoned for past
association with the United States would be accepted for resettlement there.

Mr. Wolfowitz's visit to Thailand coincided with that of the Swedish Foreign
Minister, Lennart Bodstrom, who has been on an official visit to Hanoi. Mr.
Bodstrom told reporters in Bangkok that Sweden, Vietnam's largest Western aid
donor, was about to reduce its assistance to Hanoi by 20 percent. Sweden has
given Vietnam about $40.5 million in aid, nearly twice as much economic
assistance as the United States has given to Thailand.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MARTIN GERSHEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


Martin Gershen, a reporter, editor and author, died of lung cancer Thursday at
the George Washington University Hospital in Washington. He was 60 years old and
lived in Washington.

From 1962 to 1970, he worked for The Newark Star-Ledger and won the Ernie Pyle
Memorial Award in 1967 for his Vietnam War dispatches. He also wrote ''Destroy
or Die, the True Story of My Lai.''

He was an editor for The Chicago Sun- Times from 1973 to 1976, a Jerusalem
correspondent for Business Week and, at the time of his death, a press officer
in the Department of the Navy.

Mr. Gershen, a Bronx native, graduated from New York University in 1949 and
received a master's degree in journalism from the University of Illinois in
1972.

He is survived by his wife, Dr. Ada

 Gershen; two sons, Robert, of Cromwell, Conn., and Joseph, of Santa Cruz,
Calif.; a daughter, Susan, of Manhattan; a sister, Libby Hopkins of Waldoboro,
Me.; a brother, Alvin E., of Princeton, N.J., and two grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S ACHIEVEMENTS POSE HARD TESTS FOR SECOND TERM

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2376 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


President Reagan approaches the start of his second term Sunday with the most
dramatic successes of his first four years framing the most important and
difficult tests of his second.

After four years in office and a landslide re-election, many Presidential
scholars say Mr. Reagan has already proved himself above average among the
nation's 40 Presidents. But whether history ultimately ranks him among the near
great or below average, they say, is likely to turn on how he handles the
challenges of the next four years.

In foreign policy, his aggressive buildup of the nation's arsenal of strategic
weapons has set the stage to test the Reagan thesis that successful arms control
can be achieved only when the United States bargains from a position of
strength.



Arms Control: Glory and Risks

Already Mr. Reagan has turned to that as his first priority, and most
politicians say that achieving a major arms agreement with the Soviet Union
would secure him an important place in history, but that failure to strike any
accord in his eight years in office could be damaging.

''If Reagan fails on arms control and the arms race goes on to new spirals and
gets out of control, he'll pay a political price in history,'' Kirk O'Donnell,
counsel to House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., said in a comment echoed by
others.

On the domestic side, Mr. Reagan's 25 percent cut in income tax rates and his
costly military buildup now require another major assault on budget deficits
that have soared over $200 billion. The deficits, many economists say, threaten
the economic recovery that has been the keystone to Mr. Reagan's re-election and
popularity.

''Reagan is mortgaged to the economy,'' commented Prof. Richard E. Neustadt of
Harvard University. ''If his luck holds, then he'll look very wise. And if it
doesn't, he'll look perfectly awful.'' ''History tends to rate Presidents on
their first term, but maybe this is a President who will be rated more on his
second term,'' agreed the Presidential historian James MacGregor Burns of
Williams College.

''His place in history is up for grabs,'' Professor Burns went on. ''On the
basis of his first term, he has been an 'above-average' to 'good' President. He
could enter the pantheon of Presidents but he could also take a real header and
end up down with Calvin Coolidge, below average. Reagan is living dangerously on
both the great criteria, foreign policy and domestic economic policy.''

Beyond the specific issues, some scholars and politicians question whether Mr.
Reagan, who, at the age of 73, takes his official oath of office Sunday, will
have vigor and command throughout his second term, or whether he will be
afflicted by the fatigue and disarray that hobbled some earlier Presidents in
their second administrations.

The political and academic communities will be watching Mr. Reagan's Inaugural
Address Monday for clues to his intentions for leadership.

Some are asking whether he will signal a new burst of Presidential activism with
a stirring call to action, as Franklin D. Roosevelt did in 1937, or whether he
will offer a more subdued and prosaic evocation of peace and prosperity, as
Dwight D. Eisenhower did in 1957. In recent weeks Mr. Reagan's relatively low
profile and his willingness to let Senate leaders take the initiative on the
budget have invited comparisons with Eisenhower.

The 'Ifs' of the Second Term

''If his inaugural sounds more like Roosevelt in '37 than Eisenhower in '57,
then we'll know it's the same Reagan we saw at the start of his first term,''
commented David R. Gergen, former communications director in the Reagan White
House.

''I'm not clear whether that fire is still there. There are some people around
the President who are content to say, 'If we can just keep what we've got, we'll
have a successful second term.' That would be a massive change for Reagan
himself. The inaugural will provide a clue on whether he can regain momentum,
lay out a plan for the next four years and mobilize the country behind him.''

Second terms have been hard on Presidents, even the most respected, and many
analysts suspect that Mr. Reagan's second term will be no exception, despite the
ease of his re-election.

In his second term, Franklin D. Roosevelt ran afoul of strong Congressional
opposition to his plans to pack the Supreme Court and revamp the Executive
Office of the Presidency. Woodrow Wilson saw the Senate reject membership in the
League of Nations and spent his waning months physically incapacitated.

Theodore Roosevelt fell into stalemating battles with Congress. After his 1948
victory, Harry S. Truman took his staff to Key West, Fla., for six weeks and had
trouble regaining the political initiative. After his 1964 landslide, Lyndon B.
Johnson saw his legislative successes overshadowed by the nation's agony in
Vietnam. In a truncated second term, Richard M. Nixon had sour relations with
Congress over his refusal to spend money that Congress had appropriated, even
before he was forced to resign.

Alone among recent Presidents, Eisenhower seems to have emerged moderately well
in his second term.

Reagan Associates Are Confident

Close associates of President Reagan contend he can break the pattern. They cite
the bipartisan successes of his second term as Governor of California.
Moreoever, Mr. Reagan now enjoys unusually high personal popularity for a modern
President about to begin his second term.

Even opponents credit him with rekindling national pride and patriotism,
reasserting traditional values and restoring public confidence in the
Presidency. Thomas E. Cronin, a presidential scholar at Colorado College, rates
Mr. Reagan strongly as ''a restoration President.''

In the economic field, the 1981 tax cuts, the dramatic fall in inflation from
12.4 percent to 4 percent and the break in the wage-price spiral, which some
attribute to Mr. Reagan's handling of the air traffic controllers' strike, are
hallmarks of the Reagan years.

Despite Mr. Reagan's efforts to shrink the size of domestic programs, Federal
spending as a percentage of what Americans spend for goods and services actually
rose in his first four years.

Assessment by Foe and Friend

Nonetheless, allies and adversaries alike agree that perhaps his major
accomplishment has been to punctuate the end of the post-New Deal era by halting
the surge of growth and activism in Federal programs and shifting the focus of
the national political debate to retrenchment in Government.

''When the liberals start looking at the deficit, I think that's a revolution,''
asserted Thomas S. Winter, editor of the conservative weekly Human Events.

Yet after his year of legislative triumphs in 1981, Mr. Reagan's legislative
record has been mixed and he has increasingly left political initiatives to
Congress. Since his re-election, he has surprised other politicians, moreover,
with his low profile and by not showing the dynamic, aggressive leadership of
1981.

His 1984 campaign lacked the specific policy agenda of 1980. In his transition
period, he has neither aggressively drawn the defeated Democrats into bipartisan
efforts on the budget or tax reform, nor has he pressed his own Administration
to carry out the austere budget-cutting he initially accepted. His efforts
stalled on his unwillingness to curb Pentagon spending vigorously; he let the
initiative pass to the Senate.

With the Democrats holding a 70-seat majority in the House of Representative, as
against 51 seats four years ago, and his own Republican Party divided by budding
rivalries for the 1988 Presidential nomination, Mr. Reagan has also agreed to
the belated breakup of his highly effective White House political team, just as
the early maneuvering with Congress begins.

The Dangerous Fifth Year

These developments have raised questions in several quarters about whether he is
showing early signs of the second-term burnout that plagued some of his
predecessors.

''In theory, the fifth year of a Presidency is an enormous strategic
opportunity,'' Professor Neustadt said. ''It's your one and only opportunity in
your second term. But that opportunity has been messed up every time by
tiredness or ebullience and overconfidence. My guess is that's already happened
in this Administration and history may be repeating itself.''

James L. Sundquist, a governmental scholar at the Brookings Institution here,
observed: ''The danger for Reagan is if he seems to be getting more detached. I
don't see how he can hold the Republicans together. Power in our system is
always fragmented, but it fragments more with a lame-duck President. People
start to follow other leaders.''

Lately, Mr. Reagan has bristled at suggestions that he has abdicated leadership.
Aides say his low profile reflects the normal political cycle of introspection
and policy-formulating after an election. ''He's just biding his time,'' said
Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate majority leader.

Messages as the Start

The next two weeks will give Mr. Reagan an ample opportunity to project
leadership and dominate debate with his Inaugural Address, his State of the
Union Message and his Budget Message. Moreover, if Congress balks, he is ready
to go to the public, as he did so effectively in his first term.

''We'll open up with the Inaugural and those other two messages and the
President will travel to some key Congressional districts in March and April,''
said Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman. Some Reagan associates predict a
combative President; others predict a more bipartisan President.

Despite pressures from conservative Republicans, like Representative Jack F.
Kemp of upstate New York, to make tax reform the central priority of his second
term, Mr. Reagan is placing arms control and deficit reduction first. The
Treasury Department's plan for a major overhaul of the tax system and a new
effort to revive American financial aid to Nicaraguan rebels will come later.

Other items, such as revamping the executive branch, encouraging investment in
depressed areas, moving against crime, revising environmental laws and renewing
efforts to ban abortion or promote voluntary school prayer, are farther down the
list, officials say.

Congress Leaders Are Cautious

''In the President's mind, tax simplification is important, as important as
deficit reduction, but not as urgent,'' Mr. Speakes said.

Republican Congressional leaders like Senator Dole and Representative Robert H.
Michel give it lower priority. Mr. Dole said, ''If you had a vote today in the
Finance Committee on any of the tax packages, I don't think you'd get three or
four votes.''

More bluntly, Mr. Michel said: ''I don't think you're going to get it in this
session - period.''

But Republican leaders regard big cuts in the deficit as vital to prevent an
increase in interest rates and inflation that could derail recovery. Some
economists fear that the strong dollar and the large foreign trade deficit could
also become a drag on recovery, or the dollar could plummet and touch off a turn
downward.

''What Ronald Reagan needs to do is make sure the deficit doesn't make the
economy careen out of control,'' said Norm Ornstein, a senior scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute here. ''I don't think we need 4 percent growth
each year. But we do need a sense that things are under control, not where
interest rates and inflation shoot up to unreasonable levels.''

Kevin Phillips, author of ''Post-Conservative America,'' observes that since
World War I, economic recessions have afflicted all eight Republican
Presidential terms, in 1922, 1926, 1930, 1954, 1958, 1970, 1974 and 1982.

Antidote With a Hitch

As an antidote, Mr. Reagan has mapped an austerity budget that would eliminate
programs like revenue sharing and Amtrak and cut sharply into Medicare,
Medicaid, farm credits and crop subsidies, veterans' health care and student
aid. The hitch is that his cuts in military spending are far too small to
satisfy Republican leaders, let alone Democrats, in Congress.

Unless Mr. Reagan gives ground or works out some broad deal with the Democrats,
Republicans say, they fear they cannot achieve the yardstick now accepted by
financial markets. That is the $50 billion target for deficit reduction proposed
by Senator Dole and strongly advocated by Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board.

''Such is the prestige of the chairman of the Fed that he can set the benchmark
for the credibility of any deficit- cutting action,'' commented Robert D.
Hormats, an economist at Goldman, Sachs in New York and a senior economic policy
official in four administrations.

Another Republican worry is that the public will come to regard a strategic arms
agreement with the Soviet Union as another touchstone for Mr. Reagan's
second-term success. While White House officials say arms control is Mr.
Reagan's top priority, they caution that his commitment is to negotiate
seriously, not to take just any agreement. Mr. Reagan has told his negotiators,
''If it isn't a good agreement, if it won't work, we don't just seek a piece of
paper,''

But Democratic strategists contend that, the more Mr. Reagan asks Congress to
allocate money for weapons like the MX missile and a $26 billion research
program for a space defense system to gain leverage with Moscow, the more he
raises public expectations for eventual agreement.

Some advocates of arms control question whether internal divisions between
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Secretary of State George P. Shultz
will eventually hamper arms negotiations. Others ask, more fundamentally,
whether Mr. Reagan is more dedicated to the idea of strategic defenses than to
arms control and will refuse to give up research on military defense, if that is
Moscow's price for reducing its offensive nuclear missiles.

''I think the President's deepest emotional commitment is to making the world
safer, and he sees the way to do that is through strategic defense and other
measures,'' said a senior national security official. ''I don't see the
President backing away from his commitment to pursue this research.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VESSEY IN CHINA: A DUAL SYMBOLISM

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 19


Over dinner in an old imperial pavilion here this week Gen. John W. Vessey Jr.,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the commander of China's
4.2-million-strong army that it was ''good for ordinary soldiers'' like
themselves to eat the sort of food served to emperors.

The remark brought a smile to the face of Yang Dezhi, a survivor of more than
half half a century in China's highly politicized armed forces. No less than
General Vessey, he knew how much more than common soldiering had brought the two
men together at a lakeside pavilion in Peking.

Not since the two armies fought each other in Korea 30 years ago have Americans
had the close look at Chinese capabilities that General Vessey and his officers
were given in their weeklong visit here. Nor has there been a similar
opportunity for Pentagon professionals to study the entanglement of factors that
have driven China to seek a military understanding with the United States.

What Vessey Saw


When the members of the American party left Canton today for home, they had
spent many hours discussing strategy, tactics and weaponry. General Vessey had
lectured at China's top military academy, watched infantry, artillery and
aircraft fighting a mock battle across the north China plain and cruised down
the Huangpu River in Shanghai past a flotilla of destroyers, frigates and
submarines.

In meetings and over 10-course banquets, officers on the two sides swapped
experiences of battle in Korea and Vietnam. For the two commanders, the ironies
were perhaps more palpable than for anybody else. Mr. Yang first encountered
United States troops in Korea, where he was deputy commander when Chinese troops
were employing ''human wave'' tactics against American positions. A quarter of a
century later, General Vessey commanded the American troops in Korea.

Behind the camaraderie lay political and military considerations of the first
importance for both sides. By far the most weighty of these was the one that was
barely mentioned in the public speeches, a common desire for the strongest
possible counterbalance to Soviet military power. Chinese and American
journalists covering the visit were accompanied most of the time by only one
other reporter, the Moscow representative of the Soviet press agency Tass.

Little Practical Progress


United States officers who spoke to reporters on a background basis said that
apart from arrangements for a port call to Shanghai in April by United States
warships, little of a practical nature was accomplished during the talks. The
implication was that the American purpose in making the trip was symbolic, to
remind the Soviet Union of the strategic disadvantages it faces as long as its
policies make common adversaries in Washington and Peking.

General Vessey alluded to this in his farewell speech in Peking when he said
that United States-Chinese military ties ''threaten no third party.'' It was a
point that Mr. Yang passed by in his reply, but United States officers said
discussions behind closed doors left no doubt as to the Chinese commanders'
preoccupation with the 50 Soviet divisions stationed along China's northern
frontier and with the projection of Soviet military power elsewhere in Asia,
notably in Afghanistan, Cambodia and Vietnam.

At the military academy visited by General Vessey, the anxieties are explicit.
Other recent visitors have described how English-speaking Chinese officers stand
before a wall-sized illuminated map showing the deployment of Soviet forces,
including nuclear missiles, and offer a commentary that emphasizes the Soviet
military ''threat'' to Europe, the Middle East and Asia. The commentary was
still being offered after the visit here last month by Ivan V. Arkhipov, a
Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister.

Recognition of Weaknesses


For the Chinese, too, having General Vessey here had its demonstration value.
But behind this lay the pressing concern to modernize Chinese forces. The
Chinese have taken stock of their weaknesses and launched a program of arms
procurement. In this, they look more than anywhere else to the United States.

The concern has ramifications in internal Chinese politics. Since the jump in
Chinese outlays caused by the 1979 border war with Vietnam, the Government of
Deng Xiaoping has imposed a tight hold on the military budget, arguing that the
civilian economy must come first. The army, navy and air force have been ordered
to make deep manpower cuts and to redirect barracks, airfields and ports to
civilian ends.

At the same time, the armed forces' political influence has been sharply
trimmed. From its beginnings, the Red Army was encouraged to think of itself as
an ideological vanguard and its commanders have never been far from the pinnacle
of power. Under Mr. Deng, the generals have been told, in effect, to return to
their bases and to concentrate on turning their echelons into a modern fighting
force.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

$4 MILLION CLEANUP OF DIOXIN IS STARTING AT SITES IN NEWARK

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Jan. 19


The cleanup of dioxin-contaminated sites in the Ironbound section here will get
into full swing next week, but the thousands of cubic yards of dirt and the tons
of scrap metal to be removed will not be going far, according to the state
official in charge of the project.

The material will be loaded into trailer-size containers, sealed and stored near
the former Diamond Alkali plant, where the potentially carcinogenic substance
originated as a byproduct of the manufacture of Agent Orange, the chemical
defoliant used extensively during the Vietnam War.

Ronald J. Senna, chief of the Bureau of Site Operations for the State Department
of Environmental Protection, said that more than 100 containers, measuring 20 to
40 feet long, 10 feet wide and 8 feet high, would be needed to contain the
materials collected during the initial phase of the cleanup. The containers will
be stored at 120 Lister Avenue, a few hundred yards from the former Agent Orange
plant at 80 Lister Avenue.

''There are no disposal options at this point,'' Mr. Senna said. ''There are no
approved, acceptable disposal methods.''

He noted that from one site alone - the Brady Iron and Metal Company site at 55
Lockwood Avenue - thousands of cubic yards of contaminated soil would be
removed.

In addition, contaminated soil from dirt strips along sidewalks of half a dozen
streets, as well as from Conrail tracks that cut through the area, will be
removed and stored. The soil will be excavated to a depth of between one and
three feet, and an impervious seal will be placed over any area where the
contamination runs deeper, Mr. Senna said.

Contaminated material from the nearby Newark Boxboard Company and the Hildemann
Industries site on Raymond Boulevard will also be removed.

In addition, the bed of the Passaic River near the site will be dredged if it is
found to contain unacceptable levels of dioxin. Readings as high as 50,000 parts
per billion were found at the plant site. The Federal Centers For Disease
Control in Atlanta have determined that a safe level of the material is one part
per billion.

Dioxin is a by-product of the manufacture of 2-4-5-T, one of the principal
ingredients of Agent Orange. The defoliant was manufactured by Diamond Alkali,
which later merged with the Shamrock Oil and Gas Company to form the Diamond
Shamrock Corporation.

Mr. Senna said the cost of cleaning the contaminated sites, excluding the former
plant site, was estimated at $4 million, with Diamond Shamrock paying the bill
as part of a Dec. 21 consent agreement.

The company has also issued a letter of credit for $12 million to the Department
of Environmental Protection as a guarantee that the former plant site would be
decontaminated.

Heavy concentrations of dioxin were discovered at the site of the chemical plant
in June 1983, and subsequent tests showed that the dioxin had migrated to nearby
areas of the community.

Mr. Senna said the cleanup of the sites away from 80 Lister Avenue was expected
to be completed by the end of May.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IRAQ'S TANKER WAR MAY MISS THE MARK

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


When Iraq announced that it would blockade shipping at Iran's main oil-loading
terminal, Kharg Island, last year, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein hoped to
internationalize the conflict and halt Iran's oil shipments, forcing the
Iranians to the peace table. Indeed, as Iraq began attacking tankers and Iran
threatened to hit back by closing the Strait of Hormuz, which would cut off much
of the oil exported to the West, Iraq's Gulf neighbors and the big foreign
powers feared they would become directly involved in the stalemated war.

Western governments drew up contingency plans for replacing Gulf oil and
insurance companies raised their war-risk premiums. When Iran did retaliate by
striking Saudi and Kuwaiti ships on the western side of the Gulf. Washington
sent 400 Stinger missiles to Saudi Arabia, which downed an Iranian F-4 that
intruded into its airspace.

But interviews with Iraqi officials and foreign diplomats during a recent
three-week visit to Iraq made clear that the tanker war has not provoked a
regional conflict or driven Iran to negotiate. Iran's oil exports have
decreased, in part because of the soft international oil market. They have not
been critically interrupted.

Iraqi planes have hit some 70 commercial ships, including 34 tankers, with 47
confirmed deaths, according to officials at the Lloyd's insurance group in
London. Last week, Iraqi military communiques claimed aerial strikes against
three ''naval targets'', although these have not been independently confirmed.

''The goal is to make the Iranians incapable of continuing the war,'' Deputy
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said in the glittering new Foreign Ministry in
Baghdad. ''We're not against it if someone sells them wheat or cheese. We just
want to cut off all cooperation that provides them with cash.'' Despite Iraq's
military superiority, the attempted blockade has been enormously costly and only
partially successful.

Iraq's weapon of choice, the $250,000 Exocet, is a sea-skimming French-made
missile that Argentina used in the Falklands war to sink the British destroyer
Sheffield. Small and sophisticated, the Exocet can be launched from safe high
altitudes, but it has yet to sink a ship in the Gulf.

When an Exocet hits, it may poke a hole in a tanker's side but the oil or
ballast aboard often absorbs much of its charge, which sometimes does not even
detonate. One military analyst compares it to ''shooting a bullet into the
mud.'' Watertight compartments inside the tanker minimize flooding and
sophisticated fire-smothering devices confine the damage.

Psychological Deterrent

A direct hit by conventional iron bombs, which are much cheaper but more
difficult to use, would cause more damage. But Iraqi pilots would have to fly
Soviet-made fighter-bombers that lack the accuracy, range and endurance of the
French Super Etendards and new Mirage F-1s that fire their Exocets. Conventional
bombing could also be ineffective except at low altitudes, where pilots would be
vulnerable to Iranian antiaircraft.

Iraq's strategy is decided behind the gates of the heavily guarded presidential
compound in Baghdad. Field commanders are not encouraged to take bold
initiatives. ''If they continue fighting defensively like this, this war will
never end,'' said a military attache in Baghdad. ''In fact, you can't call this
a war at all,''

But the tanker war is less a military affair than a psychological deterrent. It
is also good business for outsiders. Shipyards in nearby Bahrain and the United
Arab Emirates work overtime to patch up damaged ships and send them back into
the Gulf. Hit recently by an Exocet, a 30-year-old Indian cargo vessel carrying
onions and potatoes to Iran was repaired in five days.

The value of the oil is generally several times greater than the creaking tanker
carrying it. With Iran discounting prices by as much as $3 a barrel and offering
to replace lost oil or pay for insurance, some enterprising owners have been
only too willing to insure their tankers at inflated values and pay
extraordinary bonuses to intrepid seamen.

From time to time, Iraq threatens to ''destroy'' Kharg Island, a tiny coral
outcrop 30 miles offshore. But Kharg's underwater pipelines are well- protected.
With the new expansion of the Iraqi pipeline to Turkey last summer and
completion of another pipeline to Saudi Arabia scheduled in September, Iraqi
leaders exude a new confidence that they can continue the war with less economic
strain. Even at border posts there is little sense of wartime urgency, and
dozens of new high-rise apartment and office buildings give Baghdad a surface
sense of peace and prosperity.

The main obstacle to peace remains Iran's refusal to negotiate unless President
Hussein is overthrown. In moments of frustration Iraqi commanders compare
themselves to Americans during the Vietnam war - another draining war of
attrition against a seemingly implacable enemy. Iraqi officials seem resigned to
continuing fighting at the current level.

''We will continue this strategy and escalate our attacks until we cut off this
vital artery,'' Information Minister Latif Nassif Jasim said in an interview.
''We have no other choice.'' But for the first time since the war began in
September, 1980, there is talk in Baghdad that the war may go on for
''decades.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL'S DILEMMA/LIVING WITH A DIRTY WAR

BYLINE: By Thomas L. Friedman; Thomas Friedman, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1983
for his reporting from Lebanon, is now chief of the Jerusalem burea of the
NewYork Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6073 words


AVRAHAM BURG, A YOUNG ISRAELI PEACE activist and the son of Yosef Burg, Israel's
Religious Affairs Minister, was trying to explain recently what the last
two-and-a-half years of Israeli involvement in Lebanon have done to his country.
He tried several images until he finally hit upon what he thought was the
appropriate one.  ''Jaundice,'' he said. ''In the old days when there was a
plague of jaundice, the very religious had their own healing system. They would
come to the hospital and bring pigeons with them. Then they would place the
healthy pigeon on the sick person's stomach right over the liver. After a couple
of seconds, according to the story, the pigeon would turn yellow with jaundice
and the patient would become healthy.''

''So the jaundice is Lebanon,'' concluded Mr. Burg, ''and we are the pigeon.''

For many Israelis, Lebanon has indeed become some kind of affliction - a virus
that the nation caught while performing the necessary but dirty operation of
ending the attacks against its northern border settlements. For others, the
Israeli invasion of Lebanon has come to symbolize some things that were wrong
with Israel before and that now must be healed slowly and painfully.

Two-and-a-half years ago, the first Israeli tanks rumbled into Lebanon as part
of the now well-documented grand plan of former Defense Minister Ariel Sharon.
The idea was to go to Beirut, install a friendly Christian Government, drive out
the Syrians and destroy the Palestine Liberation Organization militarily and,
even more importantly, politically. This has not worked out as planned, and
everyone knows it. Meanwhile, many Israelis' perceptions of their northern
neighbor and of the whole invasion have undergone a complete transformation -
from an initial sense of discovery and acceptance through disappointment and
rejection to what today amounts to almost outright fear. Not fear of Lebanon as
an aggressor, but as a place in which soldiers must serve and from which no one
knows anymore what will emerge.

''When it comes down to it, there are really two suicide brigades in Lebanon,''
wrote Shimon Lerer, a correspondent for the newspaper Davar. ''The first one is
made up of Shiite fundamentalists prepared to ram their cars loaded with
explosives into army posts. The other consists of Israeli soldiers who
crisscross the highways and byways of Lebanon in 'safari' trucks, jeeps and
armored cars, knowing that they are liable to



 be blown away at any moment by Shiites, Syrians or Palestinians.''

Lebanon is no longer a word that stands alone in the Israeli press or daily
conversation. It is now frequently accompanied by the word bitsa - Hebrew for
swamp or mudheap. Habitsa Halevanonit, the Lebanese swamp. It is beginning to
become one word, just as Lebanon itself has become an integral part of Israel's
''problems.'' On Dec. 13, a day of heavy snow and rain in the north, the Israel
Army Radio added south Lebanon to its daily weather roundup. ''Today,'' the
broadcaster quipped, ''one can say without risk of expressing a political
opinion that Israeli soldiers are indeed sloshing around in the Lebanese mud.''

The national unity coalition Cabinet, already burdened by high inflation and
mounting debt, is debating how far, or even whether, to withdraw unilaterally
from Lebanon - possibly without any prior security arrangements from the
Lebanese. The debate is a direct result of the frustration and exasperation felt
by many Israelis with the entire Lebanese episode, and of the desire by some to
end it at almost any cost. The Cabinet has been divided. Both the Likud and
Labor ministers would like to see United Nations forces deployed after any
Israeli withdrawal. But if that is not possible, Prime Minister Shimon Peres, of
the Labor Party, has been leaning toward a unilateral, phased pull-out over the
coming months and living with the risks, while Foreign Minister Yitzhak Shamir,
of the Likud bloc and a former Prime Minister, has counseled a more cautious
approach until firm security guarantees can be established in south Lebanon. The
end result will probably be some kind of compromise involving a partial
withdrawal and then waiting to see what happens in its wake.

Meanwhile, wives and mothers now pray that their husbands and sons will not be
sent to serve in Lebanon; soldiers stationed in Lebanon are frequently
preoccupied with coming home alive and virtually nothing else. The behavior of
some officers in Lebanon in this regard finally prompted a public reprimand from
the Chief of Staff. In a highly revealing statement to senior Israel Defense
Forces soldiers, Lieut. Gen. Moshe Levy said: ''In conversations with officers
in Lebanon, I hear many comments to the effect: 'My job is to see to it that my
soldiers get home safely.' I reject this. The job in Lebanon is to carry out
missions. Anyone whose sole concern is getting his soldiers home safely should
leave them at home.''

The army radio runs a program during which soldiers in the field are interviewed
and can send their regards back to their loved ones over the airwaves. The show
is live and makes for some interesting listening. At one point during Ariel
Sharon's

 ongoing libel suit against Time magazine, one soldier in Lebanon sent the
following message home and was applauded by his comrades: ''Regards to Arik
Sharon, who is enjoying himself in New York, from the suckers in Lebanon.''


Many soldiers stationed in south Lebanon don't take advantage of weekend home
leaves, because they don't want to risk the perils of traveling more than they
have to on the occasionally booby-trapped, sniper-infested roads. Every patrol,
every trip home has become a military operation. Since the start of the war, 604
Israeli soldiers have died, and 3,599 have returned home wounded or maimed. Only
a few weeks ago, the 141st soldier was reported to have been given a prison term
for having refused to serve in Lebanon. (While still only a tiny sliver of the
total number of draftees, this is a huge number for a country where
conscientious objection has been virtually unheard of.)

Speaking about the transformation Lebanon has undergone in the mind of Israel,
Ehud Ya'ari, Israeli television's Arab affairs correspondent and co-author of a
highly regarded work on the Israeli invasion, remarked: ''Lebanon has stopped
being Lebanon for Israelis. It no longer has any geographical meaning. When you
say 'Lebanon' now, you say something bad. It is a bad word. Lebanese are bad.
Israelis who serve with them are bad. It is bad to have anything to do with
Lebanon.''







 T WAS NOT ALWAYS that way.  When the Israelis first arrived in Lebanon in June
1982, the local population in many areas greeted them with flowers and rice. But
the Lebanese greet all invaders with flowers and rice. The grenades come later -
once it becomes clear that the newest liberator has turned into the latest
occupier. But who in Israel knew that at the time? To understand the Israelis'
disappointment in - and in some cases, loathing of - Lebanon today, one must
appreciate the warmth with which they were accepted at first by many Lebanese,
especially Christians, and how much those crumbs of friendship meant to a people
who had dwelled for so many years almost totally cut off from their neighbors.

''You saw Lebanese license plates in Israel, and that was a big deal,''
remembers Joel Greenberg, a graduate student in Middle East studies who after
his first tour of duty in Lebanon became a conscientious objector to the war and
went to jail for refusing to carry out reserve duty there. ''They used to take
visiting Jewish groups on tours there. It was a whole atmosphere of 'Let's go
sightseeing. Let's see the cedars. Let's see the mountains.' It was different
from the West Bank. Lebanon was friendly. They liked us. Who knew it was only
Christians who liked us? Who knew who was a Shiite or a Druse? They liked us.
The idea was that Lebanon was a nice place to serve. Well, that sure turned
around.''

There was a real sense among many Israelis of discovering a new friend. The
Lebanese were never afraid of openly fraternizing with Israelis. Israeli
soldiers in Lebanon were constantly whipping out Instamatics and posing with
Lebanese to capture the moment. At dinner parties in Israel, it became the
''in'' thing to serve Lebanese delicacies, particularly the huge purple
cherries. Israelis frequently told of friends they had made in Beirut or Junieh
and of the homes to which they had been invited.

''You are dealing with people who have been utterly rejected,'' noted Reuven
Merhav, who served as Israel's informal ambassador in East Beirut. ''The fact
that an Arab was kissing you as a human being was greatly appreciated.''

It was a heady feeling, a feeling that people do not forget easily. Eitan Haber,
a correspondent for the newspaper Yediot Aharonot, recently wrote a brief
reminiscence of those first few months of the Israeli invasion, which, while
hellish and deadly in the military sense for both the Israelis and the Lebanese,
nonetheless had about them the air of adventure in a new world.

''The third winter in Lebanon,'' wrote Mr. Haber. ''The articles about the Swiss
chocolate-wrapper scenery, the cherries, the videos, the Beirut girls, the
Junieh restaurants - they read and sound today like fairy tales. Was it real or
did we dream a dream? If someone had fallen asleep two years ago and awakened a
few days ago, he would not believe the drastic change. The pastry shops in
Sidon, the ice cream on the Khalde Road, the smiles, the friendly welcomes to
many Israeli private cars. . . . Those naive Israelis wanted to change the world
and remodel Lebanon. The joke of the year.''

The transition started with the massacre by Christian Phalangist militiamen of
Palestinian men, women and children in Sabra and Shatila during September 1982.
For Israelis who opposed the Lebanese invasion from the start - and they were a
significant minority - this mass murder was proof that something very bad was
afoot. For those who supported the operation, it was the beginning of doubt.
Suddenly, Israelis started to question who these ''Christians'' were whom they
had ostensibly fought to protect. What kind of place was this Lebanon where
people butchered one another? What other old scores didn't they know about?

Such questioning and self- doubt accelerated during the spring and summer of
1983, when Israeli soldiers became caught in the crossfire - somewhat of their
own making - between Druse and Christians in the Shuf Mountains east of Beirut.
There, they witnessed many small- scale Sabra and Shatilas that rarely got
reported but had a big impact on the Israeli troops in the area. The stories
filtered home. Slowly, Israelis began to understand a truth about post-civil war
Lebanon. That it is a country, as they say, where not even the law of the jungle
applies.

Fed up with being shot at in the Hatfield-McCoy style of the Shuf Mountains war,
the Israeli Army pulled out unilaterally on Sept. 4, 1983, and hunkered down
farther south along the Awali River. In retrospect, this was one of the most
critical decisions taken after the invasion began, for it allowed the Syrians to
reassert their influence over Beirut and to exert enough pressure on the
Lebanese Government to scuttle the May 17, 1983, Israel-Lebanon accord, which
the Israelis had negotiated as their political reward for the Lebanese
operation. More important, the withdrawal from the Shuf brought down the full
weight of the Israeli presence in Lebanon on the south, which is about 80
percent Shiite Moslem and 20 percent Christian and Sunni Moslem. This led to
economic disruptions, a flooding of the local market as Israeli produce competed
against local crops, ubiquitous roadside checkpoints where Lebanese drivers had
to produce identification papers, and a partial cutting off of the south from
the capital, Beirut. The local population began to turn against the Israelis
with a vengeance, beginning with protests which quickly escalated to outright
violence. The very people the south Lebanese cheered for liberating them from
the capricious rule of the P.L.O. began to be seen as equally oppressive.

Attacks by predominantly Shiite groups, some of them with ideological and
military links to Iran, began to mount, and, ironically, the same southern
villages that were most hostile to the P.L.O. became the main sources of
shooting at Israeli forces. On Nov. 4, 1983, the Israeli command post in Tyre
was blown up by a suicide truck driver, killing 29 soldiers and security men. In
a way, that attack signaled the end of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in
Lebanon for the time being and the beginning of the full- scale guerrilla war by
Lebanese Shiite groups against Israel.

Sam Marcus, a 31-year-old high-school teacher, served several tours in Lebanon
and lived through the transition. During his first tour, in the summer of 1982,
he often volunteered to take his unit's jeep into nearby towns to do the
shopping, because this gave him a chance to engage the local population in
conversation.

''I found real warmth,'' he recalled during a recent interview. ''It reassured
me that what we were doing was right.''

When he went back on his second tour, in mid-1983, ''the rules had already
changed,'' said Mr. Marcus. He worked checking cars at a roadblock and found
Christians to be still fairly friendly. ''One day this man stopped his car and
threw his children into my arms and snapped a picture,'' he recalled. At the
same time, he detected ''much more animosity from the Moslems.''

His most recent tour was last May.

''I did not volunteer to go into any towns, and I even wondered whether to take
home leave because I didn't want to go on the roads,'' said Mr. Marcus. He and
his comrades had as little contact as possible with the Lebanese. Soldiers were
being sniped at and ambushed on a daily basis.

''I almost hate that place, Lebanon,'' Mr. Marcus says now. ''I bought a bottle
of J & B whisky once when I was there and brought it back home. But after the
Tyre bombing, I didn't want to touch it. It only reminded me of that awful
place. So many deaths. I couldn't think of anything positive about Lebanon. I
couldn't look at that stupid whisky bottle. I think I threw it out.'' ACCORDING
TO ISraeli defense sources, there were more than 900 attacks on Israeli troops
in south Lebanon in 1984. These attacks come in infinite guises: hit-and-run
ambushes by Shiite gunmen hiding in banana groves, roadside bombs manufactured
with homemade explosives and set off by radio signals built from components of
children's walkie-talkies, rocket-propelled grenades fired from rooftops with
timers made from old watches, cooking gas bottles filled with dynamite and
placed by the side of the road, old Russian-made mines and artillery shells
stuffed into bags of nails, radio bombs, cigarette-pack bombs, car bombs and
trip-wire bombs, suicides and homicides. Lebanese ingenuity is without limit in
this field. Israeli defense sources estimate that more than 90 percent of these
operations are being carried out by various Shiite individuals and
organizations, with only 10 percent, at most, coming from Palestinians.

''We are now involved in a Shiite-Israeli war in Lebanon,'' commented a senior
Cabinet minister. ''No one even talks anymore about the Palestinians, although
the potential threat is still there.''

In purely military terms, the danger posed by these Lebanese guerrillas, while
deadly, is actually relatively minor. It is their psychological impact which is
so disturbing. To begin with, the Shiites are a completely new and different
enemy for the Israelis. Unlike the Palestinians, who were a foreign element on
Israel's northern border, the Shiites are indigenous there and are harder to
ferret out and difficult to retaliate against.

Also, the Shiites have exhibited a degree of bravery and cunning that the
Israelis do not like to attribute to their Arab foes. There is something
authentically committed and frightening about the Lebanese Shiite guerrillas.
They are not just ready to kill, they are ready to die. These are people who,
unlike the Palestinians, don't meet with reporters or issue publicity releases.
Instead, they go home to savor their attacks quietly. Even after two years of
nonstop underground activities against the Israeli Army, only a small fraction
of them have been caught.

Moreover, the nature of the fighting in Lebanon is something to which Israeli
soldiers are not accustomed. Like the United States Marines who were stationed
in Beirut, their whole training is based on being on the move, on the offensive,
not sitting around waiting to be shot at by the local people in a war that has
no boundaries.

''In Lebanon you never know where the enemy is,'' said Avraham Burg, the peace
activist. ''It is a war people in Israel never experienced before. We never
really fought with the population. We fought with the Jordanian, Syrian and
Egyptian armies, but never with the civilians. During the Suez War, you knew
that the canal was the front. That was where the danger was and nowhere else.
But in Lebanon, wherever you step you are surrounded by the war. I want to know
where the enemy is, because I want to tackle him, but if everyone is the enemy -
the road, the truck, the food, the sea - I can't fight them all.''

A few soldiers based in Lebanon do not tell their families where they are
serving. After Asaf Volobelski was wounded, he told the newspaper Yediot
Aharonot how he broke the news to his mother: ''Mother was in a state of shock.
All the time she had believed that I was serving in the Golan Heights. I wanted
to spare her worry. Three months ago, the assignment officer told me, 'You are
going to join an artillery battalion in Lebanon.' I asked him if there wasn't
another battalion I could join, since I was afraid of going to Lebanon. They
told me, 'You are going and that's it.' My parents did not know a thing. The
truth is that we in the unit are sort of afraid of service in Lebanon.''

Some officers who have been in Lebanon a long time, though, believe that the
Israeli media and antiwar establishment are exaggerating the dangers of
operating there as well as the troops' reactions. One Israeli captain, a regular
in Lebanon, recently described the situation as he saw it to a group of visiting
reporters near Sidon.

''The soldiers don't go around peeing in their pants,'' he said. ''But it is
dangerous enough to keep you on your toes. You walk around in a flak jacket,
with a bullet in the chamber and your finger on the trigger.''

Observing the Israelis hunkered down in outposts surrounded by huge dirt
barricades, almost exactly like the United States Marines during their last days
in Beirut, a West European diplomat who travels frequently in the south
commented, ''The Israelis are totally preoccupied with self- defense. Maybe the
biggest cost of this war for them is that they have lost their image in Arab
eyes of 'Supersoldier.' ''

That may not be a totally fair observation. Given a defined mission with a clear
enemy, the Israeli soldier is still probably among the best anywhere.
Volunteerism for dangerous- duty elite units in the army in general is higher
than ever. But in Lebanon, nothing is clearly defined and there is an air of
absurdity about the Israeli predicament: the fact is that no one is quite sure
who the enemy is or whether staying longer will make things better or worse.  IN
THE MINDS OF MANY ISRAE

lis, the Lebanese invasion was the

country's first grand failure of policy. As a result, it has disturbed many
people deeply and shaken their confidence in the Government. ''The 1973 war was
a failure in some ways, but it was forced on Israel by the Arabs,'' said the
Israeli novelist A. B. Yehoshua. ''This was a war of choice and a failure of
choice. That is what bothers people about it. It was a failure of perception and
intelligence. We had huge problems before, but never a grand failure. This was
not something done to us. It was on our own initiative.''


Esther Koenigsberg Bengigi, an American-born psychologist who emigrated to
Israel several years ago and married an Israeli paratrooper, articulated the
gnawing sense of disillusionment and dissonance the war has created within the
self-image of many Israelis. ''The war changed my feelings toward Israel more
than toward Lebanon,'' she said. ''It was always very important for me to feel
that Israel was right, was smart and that it always did things the right way,
especially after having grown up during the whole Vietnam period in America and
really feeling worked over by the Government. I was taught that Israel wants
peace more than others and just wants to be left alone. After Lebanon,
everything wasn't so clear. I really felt anger.''

People have tended to react to this failure by trying to explain it in terms of
their own world view, by tuning it out altogether, or both.

A minor political row broke out several weeks ago when Rabbi Shimon Ben-Shlomo,
an ultra-Orthodox member of the Knesset, declared in an interview with the
Jerusalem weekly Kol Ha'ir that the mounting casualties suffered by Israeli
troops in Lebanon were a result of the ''licentiousness'' of women who serve in
the army. ''The girls are the cause of the killing,'' he told Kol Ha'ir.
Elaborating on his remarks in a later radio interview, he said: ''We believe
that providence leads us in combat when our camp is holy. When it is impure -
for example, when men and women are together in one place - God lifts His
providence. As a result, our soldiers are exposed to more dangers, and we are
placed in the hands of Satan, who denounces us.'' The newspaper Davar was so
appalled by these remarks that it ran a parody quoting a fictional Shiite
spokesman as declaring: ''As long as the licentiousness in the Israeli army
continues, we will continue to set roadside bombs.''

Those on the left of the political spectrum also see the war in their own terms.
''Lebanon for me is a kind of divine punishment,'' said Mr. Yehoshua, the
novelist. ''This is our punishment for the West Bank. It is God saying to us:
'You don't want to return territory? O.K. So now I will give you some
territories which you will beg to return and cannot.' This is the real
punishment for our policies on the West Bank.''

The vast majority of Israelis, though, seem to have stopped talking about the
Lebanon war altogether, for two basic reasons.

First, they are sick of it, espe





 cially since there seems to be no easy way out. The most commonly heard refrain
on Lebanon is, ''What is there left to talk about?'' The Lebanon war has been
''Belfastized'' says Yehuda Litani, a political reporter for the newspaper
Haaretz. Emotional disengagement has replaced emotional involvement.

''We don't even want to look at it; it is so undignified, such a fiasco,''
remarked Rabbi David Hartman, one of Israel's leading philosophers. ''The only
time it surfaces is when you get reserve duty. People ask: 'What part of Is of
Israel are you serving in? The south? Fine. The north? Aaaaccch.' ''

Said Sam Marcus, the soldier: ''The first time I went, people asked me about it
for weeks and weeks. Now, after I am home a couple of days, it's gone. The truth
is, I don't talk about it either.''

The second reason people don't talk about Lebanon is that, for all the agreement
that things have not worked out there as expected, the vast majority don't feel
they can pull out all the way before they at least secure the country's northern
border from rocket attacks by the Palestinians and underground Lebanese groups.
That is why many soldiers who hate to go to Lebanon, and judge the original
grand scheme a failure, still go without question. That is why in last summer's
national elections, Lebanon was never a hotly debated issue.

Robert Kuperman, a 40- year-old reserve officer who has served in Lebanon
several times despite being excused from hazardous duty because his brother had
been killed in previous action, summed up the mood of the vast majority of
Israelis who go to Lebanon today and would never consider conscientious
objection.

''We have to face reality,'' he said, while showing a journalist around south
Lebanon a few weeks ago. ''They told me that, because of my brother, I didn't
have to serve. I said, 'I want to go anyway.' I said, 'What is this? Am I living
here or am I living in Alaska?' As long as we are here in this part of the
world, we face dangers, and that means sacrifice. It is part of being an
Israeli.''

But what is so frustrating for Israelis is that, after all they have expended in
Lebanon, they still have not been able to achieve security. The invasion has, in
fact, created a whole new situation that no one anticipated. The ''Shiite
Genie'' was let out of the bottle, as some Cabinet ministers now put it
privately. The original defense equation for Lebanon of ''occupation plus X
amount of time equals security'' doesn't calculate anymore. The security
equation now being debated by the Cabinet is quite different: whether, by
staying in Lebanon to protect against Palestinian incursions, Israel risks
rousing the permanent enmity of the Shiites, or whether, by pulling out of
Lebanon in order to reduce that enmity but before adequate security arrangements
are in place, it risks a possible return of the Palestinians.

Thus, Israel finds it has a choice between bad and worse. And the upshot is that
people feel cheated - much like a man who pays insurance premiums for 20 years
and then finds, after his house has burned down, that his policy doesn't apply.
''If it turns out that all we have done is traded the hostility of 7,000
Palestinians for the hostility of 700,000 Shiites, then I think we will have
made a very poor trade,'' commented the Israeli statesman Abba Eban.  WHETHER A
JUStified mistake or not, more and more people in Israel are beginning to ask
themselves how it happened. ''How did we get ourselves into this mess?'' they
say.

is becoming painfully clear to many Israelis is that they knew virtually nothing
about Lebanon, and what they did know was loaded down with cliches, stereotypes
and their own ideological baggage. ''There used to be a superficial
understanding of Lebanon, a simplistic perception of some kind of place on the
fringe that was a source of terror,'' said Joel Greenberg, the graduate student
who has become a conscientious objector. ''It was a Palestinian base. If you
just go in and clean it up and mop it up, everything will be O.K., and we will
have peace.''

Lebanon tended to be viewed in Israeli eyes almost entirely as an extension of
their own conflict with the Palestinians. It was rarely seen, except by academic
experts, as a dynamic society made up of a mosaic of communities with
conflicting interests in which the Palestinians were just one small dimension.

''If Sharon would have taken a second-year course on Lebanese history, he never
would have gone in,'' remarked Moshe Maoz, chairman of Islamic and Middle East
studies at Hebrew University.

Israeli scholarship on Lebanon before the invasion was limited, because Lebanon
was never a nation in active conflict with Israel. There was little desire to
devote resources to its study. Also, relatively few Lebanese Jews settled in
Israel, so there was a shortage of people with first-hand understanding of the
subtleties of Lebanese politics. Israeli experts on Arab affairs had to rely
primarily on Lebanese newspaper clippings and radio broadcasts for raw material
in making their assessments, and, naturally, these media conveyed none of the
richness or the mendacity of Lebanese political life, where people tend to do
just the opposite of what they say.

To the extent that Israelis thought about Lebanon, they tended to think of it as
a Christian country with a Westernized culture that was threatened by
Palestinian terrorists. Remarked Shlomo Gazit, the former chief of Israeli
military intelligence, ''No one paid any attention to the real demographics.''

Former Prime Minister Menachem Begin constantly spoke of Israel's protecting the
Lebanese Christians, as though they were some small group of monks interested
solely in preserving their religious order, and not a wealthy minority
determined to hang on to their power and political advantages despite massive
demographic and social changes. There was never any sense of the venal and
corrupt nature of Lebanese political life and of some of its leading
politicians, let alone any feeling for the maze of shifting alliances.

''You know what they thought about Lebanon?'' asked Rabbi Hartman, the
philosopher. ''It was that the Lebanese were being conquered by the terrorists
and that we were going to liberate them, so why don't the Lebanese say, 'Thank
you?' When Begin asked why the world didn't speak out when 'the Christians of
Lebanon were being killed,' he was giving the Lebanese the image of the Jews of
Eastern Europe. They were the Christians. We were fighting to save the Jews of
Eastern Europe.''

The Christians tended to be depicted by Israeli officials as the ''real''
Lebanese and the Moslems as pro-Syrian stooges. Part of this was the natural
result of the fact that the Moslems, for the most part, refused to talk to the
Israelis. What the Israelis may never have understood, the Lebanese statesman
Ghassan Tueni once observed, is that ''the real Lebanon is two Lebanons'' - at
least two.

''We knew that there were Christians in the south, but we didn't know anything
about what was north of that belt,'' said Avraham Burg, the peace activist. ''We
knew it was some kind of complicated Middle East Belfast. O.K., so they have a
lot of tribes. It meant nothing. We didn't know about differences between Sunnis
and Shiites. Then, all of sudden, we went in, and everything changed. We found
out that it was a kaleidoscope that kept changing.''

Even the Christians recognized the deficiencies in Israel's understanding of
their country, a lacuna that they alternatively exploited and decried. One of
the main sources of tension between the late President, Bashir Gemayel, and Mr.
Begin and Mr. Sharon was the issue of involving Mr. Gemayel's Phalangist militia
in the fighting alongside Israeli forces during the invasion. Mr. Gemayel kept
trying to explain that if the Israelis wanted him to be elected president by the
coalition of Moslem and Christian political forces that made up Lebanon, he
could not afford to get involved directly in the fighting. That was widely
understood in Beirut at the time. The Israeli leadership and soldiers, however,
always saw this as cowardice on Mr. Gemayel's part. It may have been that, too,
but in his own way Gemayel was trying to tell the Israelis that the Christians
were not the only political force in the country, even though he had exploited
that image earlier in order to entice the Israelis into the invasion.

''The Israelis saw Lebanon through a single angle that was presented to them,''
said Pierre Yazbek, the representative of the Phalangist-controlled Lebanese
Christian Agency in Jerusalem. ''They didn't understand the balance that was
Lebanon. They tended to perceive Lebanon in blocs. The Christians good. The
Shiites bad. But the inter- balance, reaction and interaction between them all
were completely ignored, even to this day. There is always something lacking in
their perception of Lebanon. There is never a feeling of the whole picture.''

This basic problem, many Israelis now recognize, was at the root of their almost
total negligence of the Shiites in the south in favor of the Christians living
there, who were led by the militia leader, the late Maj. Saad Haddad. The
Israeli army had certain officers in the south - ''Lawrences of Lebanon'' as
some called them - who had long- standing relationships with Major Haddad and
his militia. When the Israelis took control of the whole south, they simply
refused at first to have any contacts with the local Shiite Amal militiamen or
to allow their subordinates to deal with them. Any such contacts were viewed
almost as an insult to Major Haddad.

Since the Israeli Army did not go to Lebanon to occupy the country and was
greeted sincerely at first as a liberator from the P.L.O. by Christians and many
Shiites, it had a very difficult time seeing itself otherwise. Israeli officers
used to refer to their ''presence'' in south Lebanon - some still do - never
their ''occupation,'' well after the south Lebanese started to see them quite
differently. Then, when Israelis began to become aware of the Shiite dominance
in the south, their grievances and their links with Iran, there was almost a
sense of surprise, a sort of ''Guess who's next door!'' THERE WILL PROBably
never be a Pentagon Papers, an Israeli investigation into the whole Lebanon
operation. Certain aspects of it, such as Sabra and Shatila and the Shuf
withdrawal, have been studied by experts, but not the entire invasion and why
things ended up as they did. ''The wounds of Lebanon have not been healed, they
have just been bandaged up,'' said Ehud Yaari, the television correspondent.
''There really has been no thorough public discussion of what happened.''

The present establishment, said Mr. Gazit, who rebuilt Israel's military
intelligence after it was found seriously lacking by a commission of inquiry
following the 1973 war, does not want to investigate Lebanon. Too many people
and too much party politics arevolved.

''It is part of the rules of the game,'' he said. ''We should not embarrass each
other to the very end. We cannot afford to go into a commission on Lebanon and
hope to continue working together. We can't allow ourselves to be demoralized
completely. The cost is that the lessons may not be learned, but even if we have
a commission the lessons may not be learned.''

What will be the long-term significance of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon? It
is probably too early to tell. For the doves, the war only goes to prove that
Israel must find a way to understand better and come to terms with its
neighbors, and to control those within its own society who believe force can
cure every problem. For the hawks, the Lebanon experience only proves that
Israel is increasingly surrounded by dark and irrational forces with whom it is
impossible to negotiate any kind of lasting agreement and whose hostility to
Israel is unremitting.

But whether one lines up with the hawks or the doves, notes Rabbi Hartman, the
Lebanese experience marks the end of an era in Israeli political life. That era,
he noted, began with the 1967 Six Day War, gave birth to the so- called
''triumphant Israel.'' It also unleashed some of the previously repressed ultra-
nationalistic romantic tendencies within Zionism which held that force could be
a creative instrument and not just a means of deterrence. Some of these
tendencies clearly underlay the grander ambitions of the Lebanon invasion.

''In Lebanon,'' said Rabbi Hartman, ''the grandeur that started in 1967 was
exploded. Reality is now hitting on the country, not just with Lebanon but with
the economy as well, which was another form of this grandeur, living beyond our
means. Just as the Six Day War was an overdose of fantasy, we are now getting an
enormous overdose of reality. It is almost too much at once - Lebanon and the
economy together.''

The post-1967 mood has been replaced today by a post-Lebanon mood of pervasive
uncertainty about the future, whether that of the conomy or the security of the
northern border. Painful as it is, there is something healthy about the new
mood, which is nothing if not pragmatic.

But nations cannot live by pragmatism alone. ''The early na"ivete of the
pioneers, all that is gone now,'' concluded Rabbi Hartman. ''We have to find a
way to reinstitute into Israeli society a sense of joy and vision now that we
have gained some anchorage in reality. Israelis need music,'' he said, breaking
momentarily into an old pioneer song. ''There is no music in the air now. There
is just this invasion of reality.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of villagers (page 34); photo of Prime Minister Shimon Peres and
Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DIRECTOR: RUNNING THE C.I.A.

BYLINE: By Joseph Lelyveld

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7528 words


Joseph Lelyveld is a staff writer for this magazine.

FOR THE CENTRAL Intelligence Agency and its frequently embattled leader, William
J. Casey, the start of the second Reagan Administration is more than just the
halfway mark in a marathon. Ronald Reagan is the first President in 12 years to
take the oath of office for a second time, but it has been 16 years since a head
of the American intelligence community last managed to continue in office from
one Presidential term to the next. On the previous occasion, in 1969, Richard M.
Nixon reluctantly gave in to an argument that he should retain Richard M. Helms
as Director of Central Intelligence in order to safeguard the nonpartisan
character of the office. There have been five directors since, and Casey - whom
no one has ever called nonpartisan - has now survived longest of them all.

This can be regarded as a footnote, a fluke, or an indication that the C.I.A.
has essentially weathered the investigations and strictures of the 1970's, that
it has recovered much of its old effectiveness and mystique. The present
director, who would naturally favor the latter interpretation, has tried to
function as if it were so, casting himself in the mold of Allen W. Dulles and
John A. McCone, who flourished in the 1950's and early 60's, before serious
questions had been raised, on either moral or pragmatic grounds, about covert
action on a global scale. Like them, rather than like his immediate
predecessors, he has been recognized in Washington and beyond for having ready
access to the President. Like them, he has not hesitated to make his voice heard
at the White House on policy matters as distinct from intelligence evaluations.
(Indeed, he might even be said to have surpassed them in this respect, for,
serving a President who values the Cabinet as a forum, he has managed to become
the first Director of Central Intelligence ever to sit at the table as a
participating Cabinet member.) And like Dulles in particular - fondly known to
his subordinates as ''the great white case officer'' because of his consuming
passion for espionage and related games - Mr. Casey is believed to have immersed
himself deeply in the day-to- day management of clandestine operations.

Yet for an assortment of reasons - some personal, others having to do with
changing times and changed expectations of a director - no one would suggest
that official Washington has learned to view William Casey as a permanent
fixture or regard him with anything approaching the awe his seemingly legendary
predecessors inspired. Instead, the Administration's second-ranking
septuagenarian - he will turn 72 on March 13 - seems to attract caricaturists,
starting with Herblock, whose cartoons routinely show the man who is supposed to
be the President's eyes and ears groping around with a paper bag over his head.

On Capitol Hill, he becomes the object of another kind of caricature. Liberal
members of the two Congressional intelligence committees charged with oversight
of his shadowy domain tend to isolate two items on his lengthy and diverse
curriculum vitae - his role more than half a lifetime ago in World War II
running spy rings from London for the Office of Strategic Services and his later
career in New York as a tax lawyer; in their view, he is a cagey old man with an
eye for legal loopholes who is romantically and recklessly bent on reliving his
youth.

Conservative members, who can be nearly as harsh, tend to portray him as the
opposite of an activist director: that is, as a captive of a Langley bureaucracy
whose major objective, it is alleged, is to shield itself from controversy. The
two images overlap, in that neither takes him very seriously as an effective
Director of Central Intelligence or an influence on policy, either broadly on
matters of national security or narrowly on matters specific to the intelligence
community.

What is involved here is more than a clash of perceptions about Casey. It is
also a clash of perceptions about what a Director of Central Intelligence should
be and, beyond that, about how ready the United States should be to intervene
secretly - politically and, especially, militarily - in the affairs of other
countries. On both sides - those who think this director is too active and those
who think he is not nearly active enough - there is a tendency to forget the
fundamental insight that emerged from the investigations of the 1970's: that all
directors, finally, are creatures of the Presidents they serve. If Presidents
hear intelligence about the world that conflicts with what they would rather
believe, they have the option of setting it aside. But no director can ignore
the President's goals. The different ways directors interpret their jobs reflect
differences among the Presidents who picked them.

The point needs to be underscored again today because the deepening debate over
the proper role of a Director of Central Intelligence, provoked by Casey's
active involvement in the policy making of the Reagan Administration, merges
inevitably with the debate over support for the anti-Sandinista rebels in
Nicaragua. And this quickly merges into the more theological debate, familiar
from Vietnam days, as to whether the United States can afford to ''abandon'' the
side it has chosen in a regional conflict.



 WHEN C.I.A. VETERANS RATE past directors, they sometimes dwell on the way they
balanced their several functions. For instance, Dulles is said to have neglected
his responsibility to coordinate the intelligence community; McCone is supposed
to have managed it brilliantly. Helms is credited with keeping the agency's
analysis straight and well focused, especially with regard to Vietnam. George
Bush soothed Congress and restored morale, without ever delving very deeply into
the details of clandestine operations, which appear to have reached their lowest
ebb during his year at Langley. Adm. Stansfield Turner, like the former naval
engineer he served, was fascinated by the advances in technological means of
intelligence gathering.

But what the veterans seem to look for first when they are measuring their
directors is the degree of access to the Presidents they served. Nothing, after
all, is more costly or of less value than intelligence that goes nowhere.

Like medieval courtiers, some directors have resorted to guile, dropping in on a
chief executive when he was about to take a nap, studying his schedule so as to
run into him on his way back to the Oval Office at the end of a public function,
or suddenly appearing on a Saturday morning when defenses raised by the White
House staff might be slightly lowered.

With Dulles, access was fraternal, through his brother, John Foster Dulles, the
Secretary of State. McCone, who became close to the Kennedys, knew that his time
to resign had come when Lyndon B. Johnson took to making him wait in an
anteroom. Johnson made Helms a regular at his ''Tuesday lunches,'' which were
seldom on Tuesdays, but Nixon first wanted to exclude him altogether from
National Security Council meetings and then decreed that his Director of Central
Intelligence would have to leave the room before any policy matters were
discussed. (In practice, says Helms, taking issue with Henry Kissinger's
memoirs, he always stayed.)

In a tone that sounds boastful, Zbigniew Brzezinski, national security adviser
under Jimmy Carter, notes in his memoirs that Admiral Turner had ''practically
no one-on-one meetings'' with President Carter and ''all C.I.A. reporting was
funneled to the President through me.'' The admiral insists that this is simply
not so, that he saw the President alone when he needed to. But his regularly
scheduled briefing sessions for the President declined from twice to once a week
and then to once every two weeks. As his own and the President's command of
intelligence increased, he ranged further afield for compelling subjects for the
briefings until once, so the story goes at Langley, he showed up with charts of
Moscow sewer tunnels. ''Never happened,'' says Turner. But the story lives on to
show what directors will do for access.

By contrast, Ronald Reagan tried to get to William Casey before William Casey
ever tried to get to him. The Californian was the third Republican Presidential
hopeful to phone Casey at his New York law office in 1979 to seek support. In
the first two cases, those of John B. Connally and George Bush, the callers got
good wishes and checks of $1,000. In Reagan's case, a real conversation
developed, leading to breakfast and a commitment. But the two men didn't get to
know each other well until after the New Hampshire primary, when the
conservative Easterner was suddenly called on to take charge of the campaign.
The rapport established then was founded, first of all, on the campaign's
success. ''Casey's not his pal,'' explained an old New York friend of the
director. ''Reagan thinks Casey is a damn smart guy who elected him. It's the
way an actor feels about his agent. This is his agent - he has got to believe
the guy is good.''

An Administration official, attempting to interpret the President's attitude
toward Casey, said it was obviously one of fondness: ''He's a wily old guy,
tough as all get out, which the President likes.'' Whatever the feeling, it
appears to translate into job security. It is also as apparent as such things
ever are that the relationship between the Director of Central Intelligence and
the White House staff was not one of mutual admiration so long as James A. Baker
3d, who will now get his mail next door at the Treasury, was its chief. Asked to
explain Casey's staying power, a former official commented, ''He was one of the
first to realize the importance of Nancy Reagan.''

The degree to which staying power translates into influence is harder to assess.
Mr. Casey's private communications with the President appear to be mostly on the
telephone. He can see the President alone when he feels he needs to do so,
officials acknowledge, but such private meetings don't often occur. Influence
can be measured in various ways, but for the C.I.A., the value of a
''political'' director with unquestioned White House access can be measured
first of all in dollars; in the 50 percent increase in appropriations that
accrued to the C.I.A. in the first three Reagan budgets. Moreover, a senior
official at the agency asserted, the fact that he is presumed to have direct
access to the President is translated into enhanced access and influence for the
agency at all levels of government. ''Poor Stan Turner had to scheme and
maneuver to get in to see the President,'' he said. ''His lack of access and
lack of clout communicated itself from the very top to the very bottom. It is
just the obverse with Casey. We just don't have trouble getting in to see
people.''

But with the advent of Congressional oversight, access at the White House is no
longer enough to insure a director's effectiveness. In the days of Dulles and
McCone, a director who was known to have the President's confidence could handle
his Congressional relations by dealing confidentially with leaders of both
houses and key committee chairmen; less by persuading than allowing them to peer
into his hidden world. Today a director who is known to have easier access to
the President than any other director in at least 20 years, and who is presumed
to be more influential, has worse Congressional relations than any of his 12
predecessors. This could have happened only in an era in which the Director of
Central Intelligence is expected to be accountable not only to the President but
to the oversight committees; and expected, as is now apparently the case in the
Reagan Administration, to win the backing of those committees for policies that
are inherently controversial - notably support for anti-Sandinista Contras in
Nicaragua.

A veteran of many C.I.A. covert-action campaigns, now retired from the agency
but still jealous of his anonymity, as are most former agents, observed that
Casey has been expected to serve as a political point man in Congress, not only
allaying doubts, but also taking whatever fire the Nicaraguan involvement draws.
This insight appeared to be validated when an Administration official, offering
what he said was a White House perspective on Casey's stewardship of the C.I.A.,
emphasized first the need ''to achieve Congressional backing'' for Presidential
policies, especially in Central America. Choosing his words carefully, the
official dryly termed this ''an unachieved goal.'' The pressure of Congressional
oversight, in other words, has helped make the job of Director of Central
Intelligence what it was never supposed to be in the past - a political job. So
the job that once involved the balancing of only three distinct responsibilities
- serving as the President's intelligence adviser, managing the intelligence
community and running the C.I.A. in its various analytical and espionage
components - can now be said to involve a fourth, that of Congressional liaison
on behalf of Presidential policies that may or may not be publicly acknowledged.



 ASEY IS OBVIously a political man. But he seems to be singularly ill equipped
for the sort of political role in which he will be cast in the coming weeks,
when he seeks to persuade the oversight committees to remove the freeze that has
held up funds for the not-so-secret war in Central America. The arts of advocacy
and persuasion are not his forte. In private conversation, he tends to avert his
gaze as if he were speaking to someone behind him and to swallow the last words
of his sentences as he moves on impatiently to his next thought. The mumbling,
combined with an instinctive guardedness, can leave an impression that he is
being evasive even when he is speaking with notable candor.

The upshot is that he is criticized for being ''too political'' and not being
political enough, for ''politicizing'' intelligence and being politically
ineffective. But that, too, may say something about built-in conflicts and
contradictions of the job, which were already a cause for concern before
salesmanship was added to the list of the director's responsibilities. Insiders
scoffed when stationery was printed for Admiral Turner describing him as the
Director of the C.I.A.; strictly speaking, in terms of the National Security Act
of 1947, which established the C.I.A., there is no such position. The title,
Director of Central Intelligence, refers to more than just the agency. The
director is also supposed to coordinate the activities of the Pentagon-based
National Security Agency and Defense Intelligence Agency and to funnel objective
intelligence to the White House. If he is actively running one agency, it was
asked, how can he keep from favoring its estimates and defending its operations?



Thus the concern that a Director of Central Intelligence might function as an
advocate of policies was evident even before Congressional oversight helped to
make advocacy one of his tasks. The traditional idea was that the President's
intelligence adviser had to be aloof from party and competing factional
interests within an administration. Five of the first seven directors were
military officers. President John F. Kennedy made a point of retaining Dulles
from a Republican administration and, after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, replaced him
with a conservative Republican, McCone. The quintessential career man and
insider, Richard Helms, survived the transition from the Johnson Administration
to the Nixon Administration. But since oversight became a recognized fact of
life, each new President has been more concerned to have someone he regarded as
politically dependable in the job than to uphold the idea that it had to be kept
above politics.



The turning point came when George Bush, a former chairman of the Republican
National Committee and Congressman, was chosen by Gerald R. Ford to replace
William E. Colby, the last intelligence professional to hold the job. Colby, who
was blamed by Kissinger and others in the Ford Administration for being too
candid with Congressional panels then investigating the agency, now argues that
the agency functions best when run by a political man who has the President's
confidence. Admiral Turner, who did not fit that bill, was a second choice for
Jimmy Carter after his more obviously political choice of Theodore C. Sorensen
met Congressional resistance. The admiral may not have been a political man, but
he was an outsider at Langley who shared his President's initial skepticism
about covert action as an instrument of policy. Jimmy Carter, so he later told
Admiral Turner, got the distinct impression that George Bush was eager to be
retained in a Demo cratic Administration (a spokesman for the Vice President
says he was merely offering to stay on for several months) and the admiral
frankly acknowledges that he was ready to serve President Reagan. But no new
President, it now seems, wants a used Director of Central Intelligence.

HE DIFFERence with Casey is not that he is a ''political'' choice, but that he
is the political choice of an Administration that consciously wanted to restore
the capacity of the C.I.A. for political and military action in foreign
countries. His critics have seldom acknowledged that his claim on the job went
beyond political obligation. Yet in terms of qualities of mind as well as
experience in government, his credentials were at least as conspicuous as those
of his immediate two predecessors. In a sense, he has


been in the intelligence game most of his life. His first job after law school
was with the Research Institute of America, a private concern that made its mark
prognosticating on the New Deal and its laws for business subscribers. The
institute's founder, Leo Cherne, found the young lawyer to be extremely
conservative - pro-Franco in the civil war then raging in Spain - but also
indispensable, for he had a knack, almost a genius, for marshaling and analyzing
facts. Later he set himself up as a competitor in the business of packaging
business intelligence.

He made his first fortune there, processing huge amounts of legal and economic
information for corporate subscribers and leaving his name on more than two
dozen books. He made most of his subsequent fortunes as a venture capitalist,
staying alert to new markets, processes and trends. Kissinger wrote of Helms,
''He understood that in Washington knowledge was power.'' That was something
Casey already appears to have known when he first went to Washington - in 1941.

In 1968, the Nixon transition team sounded him out on going to Langley as deputy
director to Helms, with whom he had roomed for a couple of months in an
apartment on Grosvenor Street in London, in their O.S.S. salad days. But not
liking the sound of the word deputy, he chose to remain in private life until
1971, when he became chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Then,
having surprised many by proving to be an activist and reforming chairman, he
moved to the State Department as under secretary for economic affairs, a job in
which he became restless soon after Kissinger became Secretary of State.

The job of Director of Central Intelligence, his old boss Leo Cherne remarked,
is the first job he has ever had in which he is unlikely to become restless.
Obviously, he loves the role, signing the initial ''C'' to the memos that go
rocketing around the Langley headquarters, in what, as an old intelligence buff,
he must know is a copy of the eponymous signature of the head of the British
M.I. 6 (changed to ''M'' in the James Bond novels).

It may not be demonstrable that he has ''the best mind in Washington, in or out
of the Administration,'' as an official on the National Intelligence Council
claimed, with a devotion to his chief that seems far beyond the call of duty.
But it is a more interesting and better stocked mind than the one described by
Congressmen and their aides after they had heard him mumble his way through
seemingly evasive testimony in closed sessions of their committees. Casey is the
Reagan Administration's bibliophile, a voracious and eclectic speed reader with
surprising range. His reading during the last Christmas season included a book
by a Yale Sinologist about a 16th- century Jesuit in China, ''The Memory Palace
of Matteo Ricci'' by Jonathan D. Spence. When friends search for an anecdote, it
usually involves his dropping a prodigious sum in a very short time at a
bookshop or airport newsstand.

He had started gravitating back toward the intelligence field even before he
showed up in Reagan's political tent as a relative latecomer in 1979. In the
mid-70's, he chaired the subcommittee on intelligence for a Presidential
commission; and Ford - whom he supported against the Reagan challenge in 1976 -
named him to the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, which
functions as a board of directors to the intelligence community.

But the idea that he ever saw his alumnus status in the O.S.S. as a
qualification for the top job at Langley quickly gets brushed aside. ''That's so
superficial,'' he grumbled in the course of a long breakfast interview at his
Washington residence in a rich man's housing development on the edge of the old
Nelson A. Rockefeller estate. ''What I am doing now bears no relation to what we
were doing then. All we could do was pop a guy into Germany with a radio and
hope to hear from him.'' THE OPEN DEBATE in the 1970's on the proper role of the
C.I.A. more or less faded from public view once the Senate Select Committee
headed by the late Frank Church published its conclusions about covert action,
domestic surveillance and Congressional oversight. The committee said it had
considered seeking ''a total ban on all forms of covert action,'' but concluded
that the capacity to intervene secretly in the affairs of other countries should
be retained for use in cases in which it was ''absolutely essential to the
national security.'' Even then, it declared, clandestine actions must ''in no
case'' be incompatible with American principles.

The committee's findings may have implied a consensus, but beyond the question
of assassination - that, all sides seemed to concede, was naughty - there was no
consensus on the meaning of terms such as ''absolutely essential,'' especially
where the contemplated actions involved paramilitary force. The debate
continued, usually behind closed doors, as a matter for specialists with
security clearances - Congressional aides who devoted their careers to drafting
or resisting legislated guidelines for the C.I.A. that were finally shelved in
1980, or academics who tried to study the intelligence establishment from the
outside. By the end of the Carter years - following the fall of Iran's Shah and
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan - the focus of the debate shifted from the
questions of what the C.I.A. should be allowed to do and how it should be
restrained to how the intelligence agencies could be strengthened and made more
effective.

The Carter Administration resolved to keep itself to the ''absolutely
essential'' standard but took a deliberate decision in its first year to
preserve the capacity of the C.I.A. to involve itself in insurgent struggles
around the world, on the side of friendly regimes or in opposition to hostile
ones. (On a highly secret basis, it even created a parallel capability in the
Pentagon.) The Reagan Administration, recoiling from the soul-searching of the
70's, was more disposed to put these capabilities to work.

The contrasting attitudes were reflected in the last two Directors of Central
Intelligence. In obvious respects, Casey can be presented as an antithesis of
Turner. The admiral, who had to fight for entree at the Carter White House,
religiously stayed out of policy debates. At Langley, his first aim was to
impose command and control over the clandestine services. Casey disdained
bureaucratic boundaries; if necessary, he was reported to have said once, he
could ask other aides to leave the room so he could speak to the President in
confidence. He spoke of restoring the C.I.A., not of dominating it; and, with no
more qualifications than Allen Dulles would have found necessary, he saw most
third-world struggles as battles in a single secret war. ''You have to be
prudent and careful about these things,'' he observed in the interview at his
home, speaking of third-world conflicts, ''but if you're living in a world where
the Soviets and their allies are free to get involved in these things with
impunity, and people who share our values and our notions of freedom don't
respond, then you lose.''

Yet there is less antithesis and more continuity between the Turner and Casey
eras at the C.I.A. than meets the eye. The revival to which Mr. Casey likes to
call attention really started under his predecessor, propelled in part by
Carter's growing dissatisfaction with the quality of the political intelligence
he was getting and by Congressional concern that funds for the agency had been
held down too severely in the 70's. By the end of the Turner period at the
C.I.A., according to a former senior intelligence figure, the number of
authorized covert actions was at a higher level than at any time since Kennedy,
when covert operations were at their peak. According to a Reagan official, the
total of formal ''Presidential findings'' - the highly classified statements
that a President is now required by law to sign and pass on to the oversight
committees when a new operation has been authorized - actually declined in
Reagan's first term. Jimmy Carter signed nearly two such ''findings'' to every
one signed by his successor, this source said.

The comparison provokes outrage from former Carter officials, who argue that it
measures the literalness with which each administration interpreted its legal
responsibility to frame new ''findings,'' not the scope or cost of the
operations. Admiral Turner, who still lives near the Potomac, about three
minutes' drive from his former Langley headquarters, is especially roiled by
suggestions that the paramilitary involvement in Nicaragua was actually
initiated on his watch.

There was, however, a Carter ''finding'' on Nicaragua that, according to Senator
Malcolm Wallop, the very conservative Wyoming Republican who served on the
Senate Intelligence Committee until this month, explicitly declared an intention
to ''change the nature'' of the Sandinista regime. The program was intended to
support ''pluralistic'' tendencies in trade unions, the press and the
countryside, a former national security official declared. Another former
official familiar with details of the program as it evolved in both
Administrations maintained that the Carter effort was really ''small and inept''
and, moreover, that it backfired because it gave hard- liners in the Managua
Government an excuse to eliminate precisely those elements the Americans had
been seeking to promote. Nevertheless, the Reagan Administration was able to
rely on the Carter ''finding'' for nearly a year, expanding a program that was
already in place, as it was doing simultaneously in Afghanistan. The initial
impetus for assistance to the Contras, according to an official who was present
at some of the discussions, came from the State Department and Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr., who stipulated only that the aid be channeled
through a third party, which turned out to be the military government then
ruling in Argentina. Later, another official asserted, it was also State that
''tasked'' the mining of the harbor at Corinto.

Commenting from the sidelines, a former Latin American station chief for the
C.I.A. with an extensive background in covert operations said the choice of the
Argentines revealed a fatal ideological blindness; to protect the Contras from
the charge that they were puppets of the Yankee imperialists, Washington needed
to gain the support of more reputable regimes closer to Central America, he
argued. With a well-honed sense of paradox, which seems to be a byproduct of
clandestine work, the former station chief listed three qualities that he said
were essential in a Director of Central Intelligence - ''ruthlessness, duplicity
and absolute integrity.'' The first two were essential for the running of covert
operations, he said; the last for insuring that the national interest was not
narrowly conceived or damaged in the process. Ruthlessness and duplicity might
have argued for a Contra program, he implied; ''absolute integrity'' would have
excluded the Argentine junta.  ANY DIRECTOR'S ACcess and influence has an
undeniable bureaucratic value for his agency, but there remains the perennial
question of whether he should have any role in an Administration's inner policy
debates. Helms says that he conceived his role under Presidents Johnson and
Nixon to be ''one man who helped to keep the game honest,'' providing
information that bore on policy debates without taking sides or advocating a
position himself. Obviously, it was a delicate line to walk, because information
thus provided could tip the scales.

Turner committed himself on a policy question only once in four years, allowing
himself to speak against the MX missile at a National Security Council meeting.
He did so, he explains, after President Carter summed up the discussion by
saying he concluded that everyone at the table favored deployment. By contrast,
accounts of factional tugs of war over issues and personnel at the Reagan White
House routinely mention the Director of Central Intelligence.

The current director does not seek to deny that he gets into policy discussions
in the Cabinet. ''I think I'm a player,'' he acknowledged guardedly, speaking of
domestic issues, ''but I don't get much involved.'' Offering an example, he said
he might say something if an issue of economic policy came up on which he felt
he had some background. On national security issues, he went on, he is ''pretty
careful'' about the distinction between intelligence and policy, trying not to
express an opinion unless he is asked to do so. ''I recognize the distinction,''
the director declared. Whether those who are at the table find it as easy to
recognize the distinction between intelligence and opinion when this director
speaks is a question that few individuals who are not on the National Security
Council can usefully discuss. But it goes to the heart of the question of how
well President Reagan is being served by his principal intelligence adviser.

Conservative as he is - ''he is more conservative than Reagan'' in his
instinctive reactions on issues, according to a former official - he is no
diehard. He urged his candidate in 1980 not to repeat the fatal error he thought
Gerald Ford had made four years earlier in failing to put his chief rival for
the nomination, Reagan, on his ticket. Campaign manager Casey promoted the
choice of George Bush and brought James Baker, the Bush campaign manager and
later the White House chief of staff, into his own operation. Going further
back, the conservative Casey couldn't bring himself to work for Barry Goldwater
in 1964, not for any ideological reasons, but because he thought the Arizonan
was a sure loser.

Casey's conservative critics, who had an agenda for the C.I.A. they assumed he
shared, find a worrisome reflection of this pragmatic tendency in his readiness
to make his senior appointments at Langley from within the agency; the effect,
it is argued, is to reinforce bureaucratic caution. A recent report by the
Heritage Foundation urged President Reagan to ''improve intelligence leadership
by appointing to top intelligence positions highly qualified individuals'' who
share his goals. ''He simply hasn't cleared the deck and put officers on deck
who believe in where he's going,'' Senator Wallop said of Casey.

What is in question is a director's ability to dominate the institution he is
supposed to head. Turner tried, imposing what he regarded as management controls
on the clandestine service, eliminating 820 jobs at a stroke. By contrast, the
common denominator among Casey's key aides is that they rose to prominence in
the Turner years. Robert M. Gates, the deputy director for intelligence - the
official who oversees the production of the intelligence studies that circulate
among policy makers - served successively as a staff assistant in the last
Administration to David Aaron and Brzezinski at the National Security Council
and, finally, to Turner.

John N. McMahon, the deputy director of Central Intelligence and thus the
highest-ranking intelligence professional, is a veteran of 33 years at the
agency, the last 28 at Langley. Under Turner, McMahon became deputy director for
operations although he had never served in the clandestine service. A generalist
with intimate knowledge of the agency's inner workings, he is popular with the
oversight committees. But he would be first to go in an ideological purge of
those who are suspected by conservatives of not sharing their goals.

Those who worry about the agency's will and effectiveness believe that the
investigations and reforms of the 70's weakened it in three crucial areas.

First, in what are supposed to be its clandestine services, the agency has
allowed itself, they say, to become excessively reliant on official ''cover'' in
American diplomatic missions abroad; the use of nonofficial cover - recruitment
of agents among journalists, churchmen, scholars and businessmen - was
repeatedly ''blown'' in the investigations.

Second, it is alleged to have become similarly complacent about
counterintelligence, the effort to protect itself from penetration by foreign
agents.

Third, the elaborate process of preparing national intelligence ''estimates''
came under attack for submerging conflicting evidence and dissenting viewpoints.

Looking down from his perch on top of the whole secret apparatus, the director
contemptuously rejects the argument that the C.I.A. has withstood the pressure
to shape up. Asked what his biggest surprise was in four years at Langley, he
spoke of the caliber of the people he found there. ''There's a lot of resurgence
in this group of people,'' he said. ''It's the most effective apparatus in the
American Government - by a long shot.''

An outsider trying to assess the performance of the intelligence community
during the tenure of any given director is like the blind man trying to identify
the elephant. It's in the nature of the beast that officials cannot provide
evidence of their successes in acquiring agents in a rival service or
government, penetrating terrorist groups or intercepting sensitive military
transmissions. As far as any outsider can tell, the United States is no better
able today to predict or influence the actions of Islamic factions in Teheran or
Beirut than it was four years ago. But then no outsider could know.

The Casey years, it is said, have seen an intensification in the C.I.A. of
efforts to counter terrorism and the drug traffic. Maybe so, but exactly the
same claims were made when Bush and Turner were directors. Presumably they
reflect a continuing effort. What they say about the impact of a given director
is harder to assess.

Clearly, with the major increase in appropriations, output of long-term and
short- term intelligence has been stepped up dramatically. More than 50 national
''estimates'' were prepared last year, the present director likes to point out,
compared to only 12 in the last year of the Carter Administration.

But does increased quantity insure increased quality? On this score, recent
members of the Senate Intelligence Committee - from Senator Wallop on the far
right to Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who has been a
consistent Casey critic - seem willing to give the director benefit of the
doubt, acknowledging an improvement in the clarity and rigor of the agency's
studies. Others with the security clearances that are a prerequisite for
judgment say the improvement has been marginal; that while more questions are
asked of the intelligence establishment, those supplying the answers are often
limited in their exposure to the countries about which they are expected to
prophesy; frequently, it is said, they don't read or speak the relevant
languages.

Already in 1976 the Church committee was worrying about the problem of
''overload.'' The analysts were swamped with intelligence data, it said, and
they in turn were swamping the policy makers. ''There is simply too much to
read, from too many sources,'' the committee found. By the end of the Turner
years, a high official said, few National Security Council officials had time to
more than glance at the intelligence studies piling up on their desks. Still it
is a Stakhanovite boast that the output has been raised.

Casey's involvement in the policy game provokes dark suspicions about his
involvement in the analysis process, as if that were not an essential role of a
Director of Central Intelligence. The issue arose most recently with the
resignation of the national intelligence officer for Latin America on the ground
that the director had forced a change in the conclusion of an ''estimate'' on
Mexico in order to magnify the possibility of instability south of the border
and thus, it was implied, advance a Central American domino theory as
justification for support to the rebels in Nicaragua.

William Colby, defending Mr. Casey's prerogative, noted that national
''estimates'' go forward over the signature of the Director of Central
Intelligence, that it is formally his estimate; he had changed them himself, the
former director said.


The case drew sufficient attention on Capitol Hill for Casey to authorize his
analysis chief, Robert Gates, to take to the public prints with an article
defending the integrity of the process. In the article, the career man points
out that he, rather than the director, is ''the final approving official'' on
the current intelligence that goes on a daily basis to the President. Never
before had public assurances had to be offered that a director of Central
Intelligence did not meddle in the process.

On other issues, outside Central America, the C.I.A. has shown in the Casey
period an ability to furnish intelligence estimates that cut across the
policy-making grain. For instance, it told the Reagan White House that its
effort to organize a boycott by Western suppliers to the Siberian pipeline
wouldn't work. Casey, a former official said, characteristically jumps to
congenial ideological conclusions on issues. ''But,'' he went on, ''Casey
absorbs and responds to evidence very quickly; he does not discard evidence
which does not support his predetermined point of view; he assimilates it.''

Yet this director's bias, as a former venture capitalist and sometime policy
maker, is clearly in favor of action. Reminiscing in a speech about his O.S.S.
boss, William J. Donovan, he recalled his ''bouncing into London, with little or
no notice, brimful of new ideas, ready to approve any operation that had half a
chance.'' This fond portrait was drawn long before he became Director of Central
Intelligence himself, but it probably came close to describing the sort of
intelligence chief he dreamed of being.

He himself was on the move, as much as any director since Allen Dulles. He says
he is out of the country no more than 10 percent of the time and that,
scheduling his trips so he can take in five or six countries over two weekends
and one working week, he seldom is away from Washington more than 10 days at a
time. The trips have enabled him to stay in touch with intelligence chiefs in
the 15 to 20 countries that have been involved themselves in supporting
purportedly anti- Communist insurgencies. ''More than a quarter of a million
people have taken up arms against Communist oppression,'' the director said in a
speech last October, referring to Angola, Cambodia and Ethiopia as well as
Afghanistan and Nicaragua.

At both ends of the political spectrum there is the complaint that covert action
is used as a substitute for policy - the reflection of an urge to ''do
something'' - rather than as an extension of policy. The Heritage Foundation
report complained that covert action objectives in Afghanistan and Nicaragua
were ''vague and ill defined,'' then added four other countries to the
director's implied hit list - Iran, Libya, Laos and Vietnam - as desirable
paramilitary targets for 1985.

One of the Church committee's strongest proposals for restraint in covert action
was that all schemes be reviewed at a high level in the National Security
Council. In the Reagan Administration, covert action proposals are reviewed at a
higher level than ever before, in a body called the National Security Planning
Group that normally includes the President, Vice President, Secretary of State
and the Secretary of Defense. The participants meet without their aides,
according to a former high official. Sometimes the studies are undertaken at
Langley only after the program has been approved. By then a task force may
already be in motion.

The high-level group thus functions less as a filter, as the Church committee
envisioned, and more as a strategy session in which the search for ways to act
effectively in support of what are deemed to be pressing national interests
takes priority. Casey may be doubly tied to Nicaragua and other covert action
programs, as a policy maker as well as the official responsible for carrying out
the programs. But a nonpartisan director who was ordered to initiate an
operation would still be tied. And the political managers in the White House
would still want him to make the case for the involvement to the oversight
committees. There, insofar as it lacked bipartisan support, it would still make
the C.I.A. a target of mistrust and controversy. ''An ideological regime may
revel in exotic covert intelligence operations, encourage them and still keep
intelligence evaluations at arms length,'' a former chief of Israeli military
intelligence, Yehoshafat Harkabi, notes in an article in The Jerusalem Quarterly
that recently was circulated among top intelligence officials at Langley. ''Good
intelligence,'' the Israeli warned, ''is no guarantee of good policy and vice
versa.'' Nevertheless, forgetting that it was not Casey who signed the secret
Presidential ''finding'' authorizing support for the Contras, the members of the
oversight committees appear to hanker for a nonpartisan Director of Central
Intelligence, an intelligence professional - someone, after all, like Helms, as
if that would be enough to produce a consensus on covert action.

The 1976 Church committee concluded its remarks on the role of the Director of
Central Intelligence by suggesting that Congress might want to pass legislation
to relieve the President's principal intelligence adviser of his executive
responsibility over the C.I.A., thus removing him from the sphere of operations.
This would have the advantage, the report argued, of eliminating the conflicts
of interest that might bias him in favor of the C.I.A. in the interagency
competition or tempt him to justify operations on which the agency was embarked.
Besides, the committee worried, the job might be too big for any man.

As a possible solution, it advanced the idea of establishing a director of
national intelligence in the White House to advise the President and,
simultaneously, allocate tasks and funds to the various agencies. There would
then be a director of the Central Intelligence Agency, responsible for the
C.I.A. only. Although it continued to be discussed in the Carter years, it was
an idea whose time had not come, partly because Turner's interpretation of the
responsibilities of a director of national intelligence was so all-encompassing
that it scared off many of the idea's original adherents, and partly because the
pendulum was already swinging back on covert action. Others have suggested that
the Pentagon could take over the C.I.A.'s paramilitary functions, to protect the
agency from controversy and enable it to concentrate in secrecy on espionage and
analysis, its main tasks.

But William Casey doesn't buy the idea that his job is too big. In his first
year and a half at Langley, he worked out a division of turf and labors with his
first deputy, Adm. Bobby Ray Inman, in which he ran the clandestine service,
supervised analysis and advised the President, leaving his other administrative
tasks in the agency and the intelligence community to the Admiral. Now, he says,
he is much more active on community matters.

''I feel that I'm leading and I feel that I'm on top of all facets of the job,''
he says. ''I have a capacity to size up a situation once I get the facts and to
make decisions, and I've been able to get into all phases of the work. For 10
years there hasn't been anyone here long enough to do that.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Stansfield Turner (page 51); photo of William E. Colby (page
28); photo of William J. Casey and President Reagan (page 21); photo of
ammunition store (page 21); photo of Richard M. Helms and President Nixon (page
20); photo of President John F. Kennedy, John A. McCone and Allen W. Dulles
(page 20); photo of Viktor M. Chebrikov (page 19); photo of tank (page 18);
photo of rebels (page 18); photo of William J. Casey

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLEANUP OF DIOXIN ASSAILED AS 'TOKEN'

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 13, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


NEWARK THE cleanup of dioxin residue in this city's Ironbound section began last
week without much fanfare and, say those who live here, little notice.

They also say that the cleanup should have begun months ago.

''This token does little to ease our worries, let alone make us feel we are
being taken seriously,'' said Arnold L. Cohen, a spokesman for the Ironbound
Health Rights Advisory Commission, which was formed nearly 18 months ago after
the contamination was discovered at the former site of the Diamond Shamrock
Corporation chemical plant on Lister Avenue.

The initial cleanup phase is a result of an agreement between Texas- based
Diamond Shamrock, which closed its plant here 15 years ago, and the state's
Department of Environmental Protection to remove the contaminants at the
company's expense.

Diamond Shamrock, which made Agent Orange under Government contract during the
Vietnam War - dioxin is a by-product - has told the state it is willing to
commit as much as $16 million to the cleanup.

Federal environmental specialists disclosed last year that dioxin levels at the
Lister Avenue site ranged from 500 to 1,200 parts per billion. Federally
sanctioned tests indicate that one part per billion is considered dangerous to
human health.

Although the plant site plant has been sealed off, the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency has found other nearby ''hot spots.'' According to officials,
this may have come from soil runoff from rain or possibly unauthorized dumping.

Company and state and Federal environmental officials expect the cleanup to be
done by late May; however, its overall success will not be known until
September, when a report is to be filed with the D.E.P.

The areas earmarked for cleanup include residential and industrial sections
bordering the sealed plant. Contaminated soil and material will be stored
temporarily at the former site of the S.C.A. Services Company, a
chemical-treatment facility that also was contaminated by dioxin.

D.E.P. officials said median strips and parts of curbs along Esther, Euclid,
Joseph and Lockwood Streets, Lister Avenue and Raymond Boulevard would be
removed, replaced and resurfaced.

Ironbound Commission members, as well as some 75 area residents who have filed
damage suits against the D.E.P. and Diamond Shamrock, say no word has been
received on the state agency's plans for ultimate disposal of the contaminants.

''The stuff is going to be sitting in an empty plant for who knows how long,''
Mr. Cohen said. ''A lot of people here realize that any time contaminated soil
is moved around, there exists a chance of it becoming airborne right back into
the community.''

Community leaders also have asked the state to authorize independent as a sort
of ''second opinion'' on the safety and efficiency of present cleanup
procedures.

According to George Klenk, a spokesman for the state environmental agency,
independent scientists across the state, in the form of an advisory group named
by Governor Kean, have offered advice and ''effectively'' acted as a second
opinion.

Residents also are angered over what they term ''the state's foot- dragging
method'' of informing the community of cleanup plans.

''Three weeks ago, we read in the newspapers that some kind of a cleanup is
going to start,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''Four days before the work begins, the people
around here get leaflets stuffed in their mail boxes outlining the work. A
community meeting might have been a bit more appropriate.''

Mr. Klenk said residents were notified ''as soon as all the details had been
worked out'' between the state and Diamond Shamrock.

The Ironbound Commission also wants residents examined to determine if there is
dioxin in their blood. Earlier this month, the request was turned down by Judge
Reginald Stanton in Superior Court Morristown.

Such examinations have been authorized, by court order, for former employees of
Diamond Shamrock and former and current employees of surrounding industries.

''It seems to us that those charged with our protection are more concerned with
properties and buildings than the people themselves,'' Mr. Cohen said.

Joseph Bender of Freehold, who has operated a grocery store in the nearby Newark
Farmers Market for 15 years, said he might move.

The market was closed after contaminants were discovered and was allowed to
reopen only after plastic shields were installed and merchants agreed to sell
only indoors.

''The presence of dioxin here has killed everything,'' said Mr. Bender.

''A lot of the blame is being thrown around, but in the end - if an end ever
comes to this - it will be the people who will feel the effects most, not the
corporations or the environmentalists.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SCREENING BLOCKS RESETTLEMENT OF SOME CAMBODIAN REFUGEES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 20


Efforts by the United States to screen out Cambodian refugees who may have been
associated with the brutal Khmer Rouge Government could sharply curtail the
resettlement of Cambodians in the West, according to American and international
refugee officials.

Refugee workers say the screening process, which appears to have become more
stringent over the last year, is inexact and unscientific at best. They say some
innocent people denied entry to the United States because of it, as well as
relatives waiting for them there, are suffering the additional shock of thinking
that they have been tarred by the Khmer Rouge label.

Once rejected by the United States for this reason, caseworkers say, a refugee
has virtually no hope of resettlement in another country.

A staff report recently submitted to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
concludes that the screening of Cambodians is sufficiently flawed to call for a
moratorium on further interviews until precise criteria can be established and
officials can be trained and equipped to administer an improved program.

Khmer Rouge Ruled 3 Years


An American official here said no refugee is labeled as Khmer Rouge. Rejection
indicates only that refugees have failed to satisfy interviewers conclusively
that they were not associated with the Khmer Rouge Government under Pol Pot,
which ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978 and was responsible for the deaths of at
least a million Cambodians. Any foreigner who has been involved in persecution
is forbidden entry under United States immigration law.

About 38,000 Cambodians refugees remain confined to the Khao I Dang camp, in
Thailand near the Cambodian border. A quarter of a million more displaced
Cambodians who do not qualify for official refugee status live in encampments
inside Cambodia under the control of three rebel groups fighting the
Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh. About half of these are believed to
have sought temporary refuge during the Vietnamese offensive, but they are
expected to return after the fighting dies down.

A United States official said questions about Khmer Rouge affiliation arise more
often now because the refugees in the highest priority categories - those with
direct ties to the United States Government or the pre-1975 Cambodian Government
of Lon Nol, and those with close relatives settled abroad - have already been
processed and moved.

Interviewers are now down to people with more tenuous claims and sometimes
serious impediments to American residence, officials say. They estimate that
10,000 to 12,000 Cambodians will be left at Khao I Dang because they failed to
qualify for admission to the United States or other recipient countries.

20,000 May Be Rejected


Nongovernmental refugee workers estimate that the number of rejected Cambodians
will be between 20,000 and 25,000, according to Peter Pond, whose New
Hampshire-based Cambodian Crisis Committee has been working since the late
1970's to aid Cambodian exiles in Thailand and to help them adjust to life in
the United States. Mr. Pond is among the Americans working with refugees who
have been talking with rejected Cambodians in Thailand.

Private refugee organizations and Thai officials say that under a 1979
agreement, Thailand allowed the Cambodians first asylum on the understanding
that the United States and other Western nations would resettle all the refugees
abroad.

Thailand, which has served as a haven for more than 600,000 refugees since
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos were taken over by Communists a decade ago, had
sought to empty Khao I Dang by the end of last year. American officials expect
the Thais to wait about half a year before they consider sending the unwanted
refugees back into Cambodia. There are about 90,000 other Indochinese refugees,
most of them Laotians, in other Thai camps.

American officials acknowledge that there may be limitations in the present
screening program, but they say they are satisfied it is working equitably.

Interviewed 2 or 3 Times


Cambodian refugees are interviewed two or three times, depending on whether
questions are raised about associations with the Khmer Rouge.

Refugees are seen first by officials of the Joint Voluntary Agency, representing
the private and church resettlement groups in the United States. Refugees whose
accounts of their lives just before and during the Khmer Rouge period leave some
question about their affiliations are then interviewed by embassy officers.
Those officers make recommendations to interviewers from the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, who are the last to see all refugees, and who make the
final decisions. A refugee has no right of appeal; cases are reviewed only if
there is significant new evidence.

Refugee workers say they are often refused information on negative decisions
''for security reasons.'' American officials say the privacy of the refugees and
the interviewing procedure must be protected.

Officials of voluntary and international organizations say refugees fearful of
interviews often trip up by contradicting themselves or others. Refugee workers
say some Cambodians fail the test because they had once lived in a Khmer
Rouge-controlled area or cooperated in some way with the Khmer Rouge when there
was no option but death.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cambodian refugees

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHIFTING PICTURE OF CRIME BY U.S. VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1951 words

DATELINE: GARDEN GROVE, Calif.


The police in this southern California town recently encountered a teen-age
Vietnamese who had been shot outside a fast-food restaurant at 2 A.M.

When questioned, the youth insisted he had simply been getting off a bus when he
was caught in a gunfight between rival groups of blacks and whites. ''But the
buses don't run that late,'' said Lieut. Kenneth Adair of the Garden Grove
police. ''There were serious questions about his story.''

The unresolved shooting is cited by the police as part of a growing incidence of
crime among some of the 450,000 Vietnamese refugees in the United States that
has frustrated and divided law-enforcement officials around the country.

Wartime Prejudice Is Seen

The police, baffled by the language barrier and the historical Vietnamese
distrust of authority, which often make it difficult for them to deal with the
refugees, find themselves in broad disagreement on whether there is any
organization behind such Vietnamese crime.

Some officials believe there is at least a minimal link between gangs in
different cities; others contend that there may be a nationwide Vietnamese
criminal syndicate headed by former South Vietnamese generals.

Some specialists dismiss both theories as demeaning speculation based on
American prejudices from the Vietnam War era. They believe that what crime there
is among the exiles is now committed by a small number of the young, in poorly
organized street gangs, similar to other urban youth gangs. Vietnamese actually
commit less crime than other ethnic groups in the United States, said one
expert, William L. Cassidy, a private investigator.

The police do agree, however, that in the past few years there has been a shift
in the pattern of crime among Vietnamese, with a decrease in extortion against
businesses by former soldiers and a rise in armed robbery and murder by younger
Vietnamese.

Rise in Household Robberies

In the past year, for example, there has been a surge in household robberies by
heavily armed Vietnamese gangs in Orange County, the suburban area south of Los
Angeles in which Garden Grove is situated. The county now has about 90,000
Vietnamese residents, by far the largest concentration in the country.

More than 30 such armed robberies were reported, according to the authorities.
In a number of the robberies the victims had been tied up or shot, and the gangs
had later telephoned to demand further payments. Lieutenant Adair estimated that
crime by Vietnamese now accounted for 25 percent of the work of the
investigation division of the Garden Grove police. ''And it's going up fast,''
he said.

Some law-enforcement officials, like Capt. Donald Saviers of the Police
Department in Westminster, which adjoins Garden Grove, believe there must be
some form of structure behind this increase.

''They're so cockeyed mobile,'' he said. ''They can rob a shopping center in
Orange County one day, then jump in their cars and a few days later hit some
place in San Jose, Houston, or Washington, where there are other large groups of
Vietnamese. It indicates a level of organization which we just haven't
penetrated.''

Other law-enforcement authorities, as well as testimony before the President's
Commission on Organized Crime, have gone further, suggesting the organization is
nationwide in scope and is headed by Nguyen Cao Ky, the former South Vietnamese
Prime Minister. Mr. Ky has denied it.

'There Is No Vietnamese Mafia'

Oliver B. Revell, the assistant director of the criminal investigative division
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, is among those who dispute that theory.
''The Vietnamese have not reached the point of having any kind of nationwide
organized crime,'' he said.

Mr. Cassidy put it even more strongly in a speech in November to the seventh
annual conference on Asian Organized Crime in Washington. ''There is no
Vietnamese Mafia, no Vietnamese godfather, no convenient single explanation for
Vietnamese criminal activity,'' he said. Mr. Cassidy works in Orange County,
speaks Vietnamese and has worked as a consultant on Vietnamese crime for police
departments around the country, the Department of the Treasury and the Senate.

In the view of Mr. Cassidy, ''What we are really fighting is not a war of cops
versus robbers but a war of cultural assumptions, just like we did in Vietnam.''

''You must remember that when the first Vietnamese refugees came to the U.S. in
1975 and police began to hear reports about crime among them, we were
conditioned to believe the worst about Vietnamese,'' he added. ''There were all
those lurid stories about corruption in Saigon, South Vietnamese generals
selling drugs and refugees escaping with suitcases loaded with gold.''

1979 Report Is Cited

This thinking, Mr. Cassidy asserted, culminated in a confidential report in 1979
by Louis Spalla, an officer of the Arizona Narcotics Strike Force, who had
served in Vietnam as an adviser to the South Vietnamese police. The report,
which Mr. Spalla said was based on a three-day trip to Los Angeles and San
Diego, said there was a nationwide Vietnamese ''Mafia-type organization'' known
as the Association.

As Mr. Spalla described it, the group was headed by Mr. Ky, who he said had
escaped from Saigon with $600 million in gold and diamonds. He said it also had
networks of former South Vietnamese soldiers who served as enforcers with exotic
names like the Frogmen and was engaged in crimes from drug smuggling and
extortion to prostitution and murder.

Mr. Spalla's report was widely circulated to police departments around the
country, was later used by some newspapers and television programs about Mr. Ky.


Report Called 'Discredited'

Mr. Cassidy, in a confidential report last year on Vietnamese crime for the
Intelligence Studies Foundation in Oakland, Calif., termed Mr. Spalla's work
''now totally discredited.''

Mr. Spalla was asked in a telephone interview if he still believed that his
report was accurate. ''I cannot assess the report now,'' he said, because ''I
haven't worked on that in a lot of years.''

But at its hearings on Asian organized crime in October, the President's
Commission on Organized Crime heard a hooded, unidentified witness who described
a similar Vietnamese criminal syndicate with 1,000 members in 15 states. He
testified he had been told the organization was headed by Mr. Ky, with four to
five former South Vietnamese generals under him.

James D. Harmon, the commission's chief counsel, said later that the witness was
an ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, not a Vietnamese. Mr. Harmon said he had no
comment on the similarity between the Spalla report and the testimony of the
witness.

Ky Has Declared Bankruptcy

The local police in southern California, where Mr. Ky now lives and works,
running a liquor store, say they have no evidence the former South Vietnamese
leader is involved in criminal activity.

''If he's a godfather, he's the poorest godfather in America,'' remarked Jon D.
Elder, Chief of Police in Monterey Park, a Los Angeles suburb. In fact, Mr. Ky,
who is 55 years old, declared bankruptcy last year and has put his house, valued
at $250,000, up for sale.

''I've denied having any involvement in crime again and again,'' Mr. Ky said in
an interview, his face rounder and his hair thinner than when he was Prime
Minister.

Rise in Youth Crime

Some officials who came to believe that Mr. Ky and other South Vietnamese
generals might be behind the crime cited as one reason the extortion committed
by former South Vietnamese soldiers who arrived in this country after Saigon was
captured in 1975 and who had difficulty adapting to life in this country.

In Garden Grove, up to 70 percent of Vietnamese businesses paid protection
money, Lieutenant Adair said, ''but now they've begun to trust the police more
and realize they don't have to pay that 'Vietnamese tax.' ''

Instead, in the past three years, Lieutenant Adair explained, crimes like armed
robbery, car theft and murder committed by younger Vietnamese have become more
common.

The new criminals, typically 15 to 23 years old, were too young to have been in
the war. In Garden Grove these criminals have banded together in loose groups of
4 to 50 members, although the police have not been able to deduce what
structure, if any, they have, Lieutenant Adair said.

Mr. Cassidy says the tendency of these Vietnamese to move from city to city is
largely a reflection of their lack of family roots rather than evidence of a
criminal organization.

He says most of these youthful gang members came not with the first wave of
Vietnamese exiles but with the people who left by boat after 1977.

''The boat people were poorer, didn't speak as much English, had trouble finding
good jobs in the States and often arrived without other family members,'' Mr.
Cassidy said. ''It was the classic background for juvenile gangs.''

Money Laundering Is Reported

Another problem is the large-scale illicit transfer of dollars to Vietnam by the
refugees through ''underground collection centers disguised as commercial
enterprises,'' Mr. Cassidy said. In hearings in June before the Senate Banking,
Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, Mr. Cassidy asserted that the exiles were
sending $200 million a year, half of it through these illegal enterprises, to
relatives in Vietnam. The money cannot be sent directly through legitimate
channels because Washington maintains an embargo on trade with Vietnam.

He said the ''collection centers'' usually charged a commission of 15 to 25
percent and that he feared they may be fronts for other criminal activities,
using some of the money to buy guns or to operate drug rings.

The authorities are also divided on whether any of the anti-Communist groups
that have sprung up recently among the Vietnamese refugees are involved in
crime.

Resistance Group Rebuts Charge

Tran Minh Cong, a spokesman for the National United Front for the Liberation of
Vietnam, the biggest such group, said his group did not participate in extortion
or other crimes, as some reports have asserted. ''There's no proof, but people
keep talking about a Vietnamese Mafia and it hurts the image of the refugees,''
he said. ''It fits into Hanoi's claim that anyone who flees Vietnam is just a
criminal.''

Mr. Cong's view was buttressed by several Vietnamese journalists, teachers and
doctors in Orange County who are not associated with the front.

Still, some Vietnamese sympathetic to Hanoi say that anti-Communist groups use
the threat of violence to silence them.

Nguyen Van Luy, a 72-year-old restaurant owner in San Francisco who was an
antiwar activist in the 1960's, was shot and his wife killed last spring by a
man who spoke Vietnamese. A group calling itself the Vietnamese Organization to
Exterminate Communists and Restore the Nation took responsibility, as it did for
the 1981 killing of a pro-Hanoi journalist in San Francisco. Mr. Luy says he was
shot by ''right-wing reactionaries.'' But the San Francisco police say they can
find no evidence the group exists and that there are possible personal motives.

Mr. Cassidy is concerned that the effort by some law-enforcement agencies to
find a ''Vietnamese Mafia'' is ''missing the embryonic organized crime that may
be there.''

Mr. Cassidy, who noted that some Vietnamese who fish for shrimp on the Gulf
Coast are now suspected of using their boats to smuggle cocaine for American
organized crime, says he fears the Vietnamese may eventually learn too much from
Americans. ''If a Vietnamese Mafia comes into existence, it will be because we
helped create it,'' he said.

 Next: The Japanese.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Second of three articles on crime among Asian immigrants

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut. Kenneth Adair; photo of Capt. Donald Saviers

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENTS AND PRIVACY

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1155 words


In 1969, when it upheld 15-year-old John F. Tinker's right to wear a black
armband to class to protest the Vietnam War, the United States Supreme Court
reflected on the constitutional status of students.  ''Students in school as
well as out of school are 'persons' under our Constitution and are possessed of
fundamental rights which the state must respect,'' the Court held in Tinker v.
Des Moines Independent Community School District. Young people do not, it
stated, ''shed their constitutional rights at the schoolhouse gate.''

Last week, the rights of students were once again before the Supreme Court,
which ruled that a Piscataway (N.J.) High School official had acted properly
when he searched the purse of a student.

In doing so, the Court ruled for the first time that the Fourth Amendment's
protection against unreasonable search and seizure applied to schoolchildren.

'Reasonableness' Unclear

But by allowing the New Jersey search and by setting standards that, in the
opinion of many legal experts, teachers can meet in all but the most extreme
cases, the Court raised doubts about how far these newly recognized protections
actually extend.

A search is justified, Justice Byron R. White wrote, when there are ''reasonable
grounds'' to suspect that it ''will turn up evidence that the student has
violated either the law or the rules of the school.'' Such a search, he added,
must not be ''excessively intrusive in light of the age and sex of the student
and the nature of the infraction.''

Applying that standard to the Piscataway case, the Court held that it was not
unreasonable for the school official to examine the purse of the student,
identified only as T.L.O., who was suspected of violating school rules by
smoking cigarettes in a lavatory. The search turned up a package of cigarettes,
cigarette rolling papers and some marijuana.

The ''reasonable grounds'' standard has been invoked by many lower courts,
including the New Jersey Supreme Court when it heard the Piscataway case. But
reasonable people can disagree on what ''reasonable'' means. The New Jersey
court, in fact, had invalidated the very same search on that ground.

'Spongy and Unhelpful'

In reversing that decision, the high court called the New Jersey court's view of
reasonableness ''crabbed,'' but offered few clues of its own as to what would be
considered reasonable - leading Prof. Yale Kamisar of the University of Michigan
Law School to call the Court's opinion ''extraordinarily spongy and unhelpful.''

''The Court is telling school authorities 'We're sympathetic with your problems;
take the ball and run with it,' and it's unclear how far they really can run,''
he said. ''I don't know how anyone can figure out what this opinion says.''

Nor did the ruling in any way connect the scope of a permissible search with the
gravity of the suspected offense, a point raised by Associate Justice John Paul
Stevens in an astringent dissent.

''For the Court, a search for curlers and sunglasses in order to enforce the
school dress code is apparently just as important as a search for evidence of
heroin addiction or violent gang activity,'' he wrote.

The American Civil Liberties Union had filed a friend-of-the-court brief in
behalf of the student. Burt Neuborne, the group's legal director, predicted that
the ruling would have few consequences. The Supreme Court, he said, ''is simply
continuing what the lower courts have done for the last 15 or 20 years.''

Wider Searches Feared

But some advocates of juvenile rights and authorities on the Fourth Amendment
fear that what they termed the imprecision of the ruling, coupled with the
Court's approval of the search in the case before it, would be construed by
school officials as an invitation to conduct still more invasive student
searches. Such searches might include groups as well as individuals, and lockers
and desks as well as purses and clothing.

Lower courts have already upheld as reasonable searches conducted because a
student was found in a hallway rather than in an assigned class, or because a
student put his hand in his pocket as the school's principal approached.

''The decision is apparently written in good faith, but where it is wrong and
disappointing is in the trust it places in school officials,'' said an authority
on the rights of juveniles, Martin Guggenheim of the New York University Law
School. ''What it really means is that school officials have a license to do as
they wish.''

'' 'Reasonable suspicion' in the courts is no more than a hunch, and I don't
think this is an appropriate standard when student rights are involved,'' said
Gerald Lefcourt, a New York lawyer who handles many search-and-seizure cases.
''If school officials take an aggressive approach, students' privacy rights will
almost evaporate.''

Rulings Back Students

The Piscataway case is the latest in a long line of Supreme Court decisions
delineating the constitutional rights of children. The process began implicitly
in 1923, when the Court held in the landmark case of Meyer v. Nebraska that
states could not prevent instruction in German. In the 1942 case of West
Virginia v. Barnette, it ruled that students could not be forced to salute the
flag, and in 1969 it issued the Tinker ruling.

The most important decision, however, came in 1967, when the Court ruled in In
re Gault that juveniles charged with criminal offenses were entitled to the same
procedural protections in juvenile courts - the right to counsel, to
cross-examine witnesses, to remain silent - as enjoyed by adults in criminal
courts.

In the majority opinion in the Tinker case, however, Associate Justice Abe
Fortas wrote that schools were special places, and that civil liberties had to
be balanced against ''the need for affirming the comprehensive authority of the
states and of school officials, to prescribe and control conduct.''

Thus, while the Court may have sided with school officials in the Piscataway
case, the kind of balancing it engaged in was nothing new.

Of course, the eventual impact of a Supreme Court decision is not always
instantly apparent. It was, after all, a rule laid down in Korematsu v. United
States - a much-discredited case that upheld the internment of Japanese-
Americans during World War II - that the Court used in another era to strike
down numerous racially discriminatory laws.

Similarly, the Piscataway decision rejected the idea that teachers enjoy the
same powers over children as their parents - a notion known as in loco parentis,
and one that Professor Kamisar called ''a Latin phrase meaning 'to violate
people's rights.' ''

Potentially still more important was the Court's reasoning that the Fourth
Amendment applied to students.

''It's a continuation of the Court's recognition,'' Mr. Guggenheim said, ''that
kids are people.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS WITNESS DENIES PROFITING FROM TROOP DISPUTE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words


Lawyers for Gen. William C. Westmoreland suggested yesterday that Samuel A.
Adams had a financial interest in ''the whole controversy'' surrounding his
thesis that the military had lied about enemy strength estimates in South
Vietnam in 1967.

But Mr. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who was a paid
consultant for a 1982 CBS documentary on the subject that is now at issue in
General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against the network, denied he
had profited from the dispute.

Completing his cross-examination of Mr. Adams at the 15-week-old trial of the
suit in Federal District Court in Manhattan, David Dorsen, a lawyer for the
general, recalled that Mr. Adams had said he was ''proud of the documentary.''

Q. And hasn't this whole matter of order of battle been rather profitable to you
as well?

A. Profitable?

Q. Profitable.

A. No, it has not.

Received Book Contract in 1976

Mr. Adams, who wrote a magazine article on his thesis in 1975, testified that he
received a book contract in 1976 and had collected $20,000 against a $40,000
advance on royalties if the book is published.

He also said that he was paid $25,000 as a consultant to CBS during the
preparation of the documentary in 1981 and that, on Sept. 13, 1982, when General
Westmoreland filed suit, he was rehired by the network ''for services'' at $200
a day.

Q. Plus expenses?

A. Plus expenses, that is correct. I maintain a residence in Virginia and I am
renting a house down there even though I don't live there.

Which hotels, Mr. Dorsen asked, had Mr. Adams stayed at in New York at CBS's
expense?

''I have stayed at the Plaza Hotel,'' he said, ''at the Essex House, I have
stayed at a couple of Hilton hotels.''

Billed CBS for $12,000

Mr. Adams said the only other ''job'' he has had since 1976 was working his
250-acre farm in northern Virginia. Although his work on this case had occupied
him ''virtually full time'' since September 1982, he said, he had billed CBS so
far for only 60 days, or $12,000.

Q. And if you put in for it, how much will you receive from CBS?

A. I don't know how much I would receive, but I have not put in for it.

Last week, on direct examination, Mr. Adams stressed that his interest in the
controversy over enemy strength estimates derived from his belief that thousands
of American soldiers had died unnecessarily in Vietnam and that this country
still had much to learn from how the military had ''misled'' it.

Mr. Adams, who will continue on redirect testimony today, is a defendant in this
case.

Yesterday, the start of court was delayed for nearly two hours because the cold
weather held up two jurors who live north of the city. When the morning session
finally began at 11:45, Judge Pierre N. Leval expressed to the jury his ''warm
appreciation'' - ''I wish it could be warmer,'' he said, rubbing his hands - for
coming at all and for normally being punctual.

For hours thereafter, the courtroom was frigid. Jurors, spectators and reporters
wore coats and gloves and scarfs and when Mr. Dorsen, at one point, asked the
judge whether it was a convenient time to break for lunch, the judge did not
hesitate.

''Yes, very,'' he allowed, as everyone ran for the doors.

Program Charged Conspiracy

General Westmoreland commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

The 90-minute CBS Reports documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception'' - charged a ''conspiracy'' by the general's command to show progress
in the war by minimizing the size and nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong
forces in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968. As a result of that
''conscious effort,'' the broadcast charged, President Lyndon B. Johnson and
American troops, as well as the public, were caught ''totally unprepared'' for
the scope of the Tet attack.

The documentary specifically accused the military command in Saigon of
''suppressing and altering critical intelligence'' on the enemy and of imposing
an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy size, mainly by deleting
the Vietcong's part-time self- defense forces from the official listing of enemy
strength known as the order of battle.

The removal of approximately 120,000 self-defense forces - done, according to
General Westmoreland, to ''purify the order of battle'' by separating ''the
fighters from the nonfighters'' - was opposed by Mr. Adams and some C.I.A.
colleagues in 1967.

But, yesterday, Mr. Dorsen confronted Mr. Adams with a statement he had made six
years later during his testimony at the 1973 ''Pentagon Papers'' trial of Daniel
Ellsberg.

Mr. Adams confirmed that he had said, ''The problem was in Vietnam to sort out
who was a soldier and who wasn't. A person that lays a grenade on a path with a
trip wire had, for some purposes, in the earlier order of battle, say in 1966,
been considered worthy of being put in the order of battle. Now, whether you
consider this man a military man or a civilian I couldn't say.''

Mr. Dorsen suggested that Mr. Adams and George Crile - the producer of the
documentary and a defendant as well - had put a sinister but unjustified
interpretation on General Westmoreland's action.

Q. Isn't it a fact, Mr. Adams, that you and Mr. Crile took a debate over whether
the Administration had or had not been leveling with the press, the public and
the Congress and converted it into a serious allegation that General
Westmoreland had lied to his superiors?

A. We did not, sir.

Letter to Colonel Cited

Mr. Dorsen questioned Mr. Adams about a letter he had sent a retired Army
colonel on Jan. 20, 1982, three days before the broadcast, in which he had said
''there's a major problem: the documentary seems to pin the rap on General
Westmoreland when it probably belongs higher than that.''

The problem, Mr. Adams explained yesterday, ''was not with the broadcast's
accuracy or importance but that it did not tell the whole story.'' Mr. Adams
said he felt ''at the time that there may have been pressure on General
Westmoreland'' to falsify evidence ''and this was a story that bore following
up.''

But wasn't it true, Mr. Dorsen asked, that Mr. Adams was ''uneasy with the word
'conspiracy' in the sense of a group of people sitting around a table?''

''Not really,'' said the witness. ''I believe there was a conspiracy, there was
an attempt to do wrong with the numbers, that a group of people did it and did
it in secret.''

Mr. Dorsen also raised questions about a 1969 West Point textbook, on which CBS
relied during the preparation of the documentary, that said the Tet offensive
represented ''an allied intelligence failure ranking with Pearl Harbor.''

Mr. Dorsen asked Mr. Adams whether he knew before the broadcast that the
textbook had been discontinued or revised by the mid-1970's, and Mr. Adams said
he was unaware exactly when it had been in use.

''I may be wrong on this,'' he said, ''but my understanding is that the book
indicated that the attack at Tet had been the biggest surprise to the American
military since Pearl Harbor and this was not apparently something that they
wanted to tell the West Point cadets at some time later.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

photo of Dr. Emillio Perez Souto and patient;
THE CUBANS IN ANGOLA: THEY'RE NOT ALL SOLDIERS

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words

DATELINE: LUANDA, Angola


Emilio Perez Souto paused from examining a rash on the chest of 5-month-old
child and explained why he left Cuba in October to work for two years in a
hospital here.

''If it wasn't for the Cuban doctors many of these children would die,'' the
lanky pediatrician from Havana said. Dr. Souto, 29 years old, said four of the
eight doctors working at the Augusto N'Gangula Hospital are Cuban.

Treating 50 children a day at N'Gangula's walk-in clinic, Dr. Souto is an
''internationalist volunteer'' in what is perhaps the largest Peace Corps style
program of civilian aid in the world. Cuba adopted the program in the 1970's as
a key element of its foreign policy and now maintains about 16,000 teachers,
doctors, construction engineers and other aid workers in 22 third world
countries.

The United States Peace Corps, the largest program of its kind by a Western
country, has 5,200 aid workers in 59 countries. The United States Agency for
International Development maintains 1,200 United States citizens in 70
countries, and private religious and charitable agencies support many thousands
of other Americans in humanitarian work.

The Program's Centerpiece

Cuban aid workers are in Angola, Benin, Burundi, Cape Verde, Congo, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique, Sao Tome, Seychelles, Tanzania,
Algeria, Iraq, Libya, Southern Yemen, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Guyana and
Nicaragua. Angola and Nicaragua have the largest numbers of Cuban workers, about
5,000 each.

Cuba's foreign aid program took shape in Angola a decade ago. Today this country
is held up as the program's centerpiece.

Cuba's civilian aid workers came here on the heels of a Cuban military force
that arrived late in 1975 to help a Marxist guerrilla army, the Popular Movement
for the Liberation of Angola, take power. Today there are believed to be about
35,000 Cuban soldiers garrisoned here, about seven soldiers for every civilian.

The Cuban technicians came to ease a shortage of skilled workers caused by the
flight of 90 percent of Angola's Portuguese population at independence. Angolans
say that independence left them with a population of seven million and one
doctor.

In what appears to be a typical case, nine years after independence N'Gangula
Hospital has a medical staff of four Cubans, one Russian, one Pole and two
Angolans.

Cooperation Called Important

Across town, at the geology department of Angola University, Jose Nicolas Munoz
Gomez, 38, of Holguin, Cuba, teaches geology to 44 Angolan students. Mr. Munoz,
who is here for 10 months, said in an interview that he is the fifth professor
from Cuba's Higher Institute of Mining and Metallurgy to teach in Angola.

''Every year I make a request several months in advance,'' Eduardo Morais, the
Angolan head of the geology department, said of the Cuban professors. ''This
cooperation we receive from foreign specialists is very important. About 80
percent of our faculty are foreigners.''

On the elementary school level, Xiomara Guerra Mora, 33, of Santiago de Cuba
teaches science to first through fourth graders at Luanda's May 1 Elementary
School. She said that 33 of the 75 teachers at her school were Cubans, 22 were
Angolans and the rest were from Portugal and Brazil.

''Almost all the students want to go to study in Cuba,'' Miss Mora said in an
interview conducted in the presence of an official from the Cuban Embassy. She
said that every year 12 of the school's best students win scholarships to study
at boarding schools on Cuba's Isle of Youth.

How They Are Employed

Officials from the Cuban Embassy, situated on Che Guevara Avenue here, declined
to say how many Cuban civilians work in Angola. The activities, conducted in
about half of Angola's 18 provinces, include house building, mapping and helping
to run farms, sugar cane factories and harbor installations.

A feel for the life of the estimated 40,000 Cubans here can be had by reading
''Verde Olivo en Mision Internacionalista,'' an Angolan edition of a publication
of the Cuban armed forces.

Recent issues gave extensive coverage to such events as a playoff between Cuban
baseball teams in Angola, a ceremony bestowing Internationalist Worker medals on
130 workers returning home, and a ceremony honoring the first anniversary of the
deaths of ''the Cuban construction workers who fell heroically in Grenada during
criminal Yankee invasion.''

Designed for reading by soldiers as well as civilians, ''Verde Olivo'' maintains
a cheery tone and carries no obituaries. A rare hint of trouble could be seen in
an article headlined ''Beautiful Morning of Solidarity.'' The article described
a morale-boosting visit by young women to Cuban and Angolan war wounded
recuperating in Luanda's Military Hospital.

Pro-Western guerrillas of the Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or
Unita, have targeted Cuban workers for kidnapping and assassination. Last April
a car bomb exploded outside the Cuban military headquarters in Huambo, killing
35 people.

Security Is Tightened

In the aftermath of the car bombing, the Cubans tightened security and were
reported to have withdrawn some workers from more exposed projects in the
interior.

''We patrol our buildings at night and don't let unknown cars park in front,''
said Dr. Souto. Three Cuban aid workers interviewed said they had had firearms
training for self-defense. When Unita guerrillas overran the coastal city of
Sumbe last year a group of armed Cuban civilian aid workers drove them out.

Unita's terror campaign has left the Cubans edgy. When Cuban military convoys
break down on highways here, soldiers refuse to let Angolan drivers pass for
fear they will alert guerrillas to set ambushes down the road. When guerrillas
cut off Luanda's power supply in October, a Western aid worker here noted that
guards at a nearby Cuban apartment building, marked by a huge poster of Fidel
Castro, asserted their presence through the night by firing automatic rifle
bursts in the air.

Castro Expresses Joy

On a personal level, some Angolans say they are tired of the Cubans, many of
whom speak a salad of Spanish and Portuguese known as portunhol. But cultural
and racial affinities remain high. At parties here, Angolans often break into
the merengue that they imported from Cuba in the 1950's.

''They dance just the same as we do - salsa, merengue, La Guantanamera,'' said
Dr. Souto.

On the governmental level, the Cubans are highly valued by the Popular Movement
for the Liberation of Angola, which first established links with Cuba's
revolutionaries over 25 years ago.

When a Cuban work brigade in Cabinda Province surpassed a quota of cutting 100
million cubic meters of lumber last October, Mr. Castro sent a letter to the
brigade expressing his ''real joy.'' Manuel Alexandre Rodrigues, Angola's
Interior Minister and de facto vice president, traveled to the remote forest
where he helped the Cuban Ambassador bestow Internationalist Worker awards on
the 296 Cubans.

Underlining his dependence on the Cubans, Angola's President, Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, said in a letter to the United Nations in November that a withdrawal of
the Cuban soldiers would be ''suicide for the national integrity.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CALENDAR

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


Tuesday

With all the hoopla of the inauguration behind him, President Reagan will be
back at work today, meeting with Congressional leaders and holding the first
Cabinet meeting of his new term.

March for Life: Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, will be among
the speakers at a March for Life anti-abortion assembly on the Ellipse before
the group parades to the Capitol. Noon.

Homeless Veterans: Thomas Bird, director of the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble
Company, will discuss formation of a committee dealing with homeless veterans.
11 A.M., 425 Second Street NW.

Leadership Parlay: Legislative leaders from 21 countries open a three-day
conference on long-range collaboration among free societies in the Americas. 4
P.M., Room 2170, Rayburn Office Building.

Wednesday

President Reagan meets with Secretary of State George P. Shultz and key economic
advisers to plan participation in the seven-nation economic summit meeting to be
held in Bonn in May.

Foreign Policy: Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, will discuss the direction of foreign policy. 12:30 P.M.,
National Press Club.

Political Wit: Representative Morris K. Udall of Arizona will provide fellow
Democrats with a bit of political humor as he looks at the President's second
term, ''There He Goes Again.'' 7 P.M., Woman's National Democratic Club.

Tax Assessment: Joseph Pechman will discuss his new study, ''Who Paid the Taxes,
1966-1985?'' 10:30 A.M., Brookings Institution.

Whither Women?: Jihan el-Sadat, widow of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt, will
conduct an American University symposium on ''Women in a Changing World.'' 8
P.M., Metropolitan United Methodist Church, Nebraska and New Mexico Avenues NW.

Immigration: Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, will discuss
prospects for revising the immigration laws at a conference at the National
Museum of American History. Noon.

Science Course: George Washington University will sponsor a two-day seminar on
science for new members of Congress. 9 A.M., National Academy of Science, 21st
Street and Constitution Avenue NW.

Press Breakfast: Aquilino Pimentel Jr., chairman of the Philippine Democratic
Party-Laban, will address a press breakfast sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace. 8:30 A.M., 11 Dupont Circle N.W.

Job Discrimination: Representative Lynn Martin of Illinois and other House
Republicans will discuss their proposal to ban job discrimination in Congress
and the Federal judiciary. 11 A.M., Room H-313, Capitol.

Thursday

Award: The National Women's Economic Alliance Foundation's board of governors
will present its annual leadership award to Margaret M. Heckler, the Secretary
of Health and Human Services. 6 P.M., Vista International.

NATO Strategy: David M. Abshire, United States permanent representative to the
North Atlantic Council, will speak on ''A Grand Strategy for NATO.'' 5:30 P.M.,
Inter-Cultural Center, Georgetown University.

Beirut Violence: Dr. Samir Khalaf of American University in Beirut will discuss
the impact of civil violence there. 6 P.M., Johns Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies, 1740 Massachusetts Avenue NW.

World Peace: Dr. Jerome B. Weisner of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation will announce a program to strengthen international security studies
around the world. 10:30 A.M., National Press Club.

Minority Business: Arthur Teele Jr., president of the National Business League,
will discuss the impact of the Reagan Administration's proposed budget cuts on
economic development in minority businesses. 2:30 P.M., Howard Inn.

Friday

President Reagan will address the Executive Forum, a group of top Administration
appointees, at Constitution Hall.

Home Mortgages: A Neighborhood Issues seminar will examine the home mortgage
disclosure act. 10 A.M., 2129 Rayburn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: schedule

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'TRACERS,' DRAMA OF VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words


AT the beginning of ''Tracers,'' the new arrival at the Public Theater, a
snaking line of Vietnam veterans gyrates about the stage to a driving rock beat.
It's an unexpectedly energizing sight. ''Tracers'' is a play about a grim war,
written and performed by men who were there, and yet this opening sequence
provides the electric lift of the Jets' song in ''West Side Story.'' The pride,
fellowship and shared tribal codes of these men - expressed only in kinetic body
language and fraternal glances, not in words - fuse into a palpable spiritual
force. It doesn't make any difference what ideological side we chose during the
war - we're on the side of these veterans as soon as we meet them.

Those initial feelings compound steadily throughout the evening. There is, one
could say, nothing new in ''Tracers.'' It's a blunt, free-flowing documentary
collage in which a platoon of all-American ''grunts'' once again stumbles
ritualistically through the terrors of free-fire zones, trip wires, body bags,
''subterranean rat-infested bunkers'' and search- and-destroy missions - only to
return home, if they return at all, to a country that would rather forget. Even
the accompanying period rock songs (''Sympathy for the Devil,'' ''Higher,''
''Fixin' to Die Rag'') are exactly the ones we would expect. But the piece is no
less powerful for that. When a nation's horror tale is told by its actual
witnesses - and told with an abundance of theatricality, a minimum of self-pity
- it can still bring an audience to grief.

''Tracers,'' whose title is a metaphorical reference to tracer bullets, was
devised in 1980, in workshops at the Odyssey Theater in Los Angeles. Its authors
are the eight veterans who initially appeared in it - two of whom, Richard
Chaves and Vincent Caristi, are still with the show at the Public. The original
director, John DiFusco, has guided the current production, and, under the
auspices of New York's Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, has enlisted
six new actors, also veterans, to replace the departed original cast members.


Many of the play's segments are straightforward oral history, but such was the
nature of Vietnam that its oral history will always have an arresting ring. When
the soldiers describe their adventures in the jungle or in Saigon bordellos,
they do so in a jivey, at times funny, language that combines timeless military
lingo with rock-and-roll cadences, drug jargon, pidgin Vietnamese and English
and an almost surreal litany of profanity. It's an authentic form of stylized
diction, ideal for the theater, that few playwrights could invent from scratch.

Yet ''Tracers'' doesn't settle for just its vital language, or for enacting its
now-familiar anecdotes. Mr. DiFusco and his dramaturge, the playwright David
Berry (author of the Vietnam drama ''G. R. Point''), have artfully stirred the
fragments into a hallucinatory dramatic whole. In one typical sequence, a
boot-camp drill instructor (J. Kenneth Campbell) terrorizes his raw recruits by
barking sadistic orders; it's an archetypal scene, but when it's over the
sergeant surprises us by suddenly stepping out of character. No longer a
blowhard but a withered harbinger of doom, the sergeant softly reminds us that,
of his young charges, ''80 percent are targets, 10 percent are fighters and one
in a hundred may become a warrior.''

Once we're in the war itself, the inventive Mr. DiFusco uses sound effects,
skillful lighting (by Terry Wu thrich) and balletic movement - but little
scenery - to make us smell the stench of death. In one scene, the actors mime a
''blanket detail'' - in which they try to solve the macabre ''jigsaw puzzle'' of
reuniting their dead comrades' torsos with their severed fingers and arms. While
the gore is left to our imaginations, we can't help sharing one soldier's urge
to vomit. Even crueler, perhaps, is the play's double-whammy ending - during
which two alternative destinies for the platoon, both faithful to history, merge
into a single, bleeding mural commemorating the war's legacy.


One war that is not refought in ''Tracers'' is the battle over the conflict's
origins and validity. The few explicit political statements flow naturally from
the action - as when one veteran, now an Army lifer, sardonically describes
recent American casualties in Lebanon as another example of ''the unwilling''
being ''led by the uneducated to do the impossible for the ungrateful.'' In
general, the concerns in ''Tracers'' are more primal than polemical. ''How does
it feel to kill somebody?'' is the unsettling question that ricochets like an
incantation throughout the play.

As good as the entire cast is, the two original players are exceptional. Mr.
Caristi, as a scrawny recruit from Brooklyn, starts off as a naive figure of
fun, then is transfigured by battle into a survivor who rationalizes his absurd
wartime experience as ''a party.'' But it's a party, Mr. Caristi's increasingly
glassy eyes tell us, whose revelers are mostly ghosts. The open-faced Mr. Chaves
has many disturbing solo turns. Aghast to find himself overwhelmed by his first
trigger-happy ''frenzy of killing,'' he soon loses another kind of innocence
when a first shot of ''skag'' reduces his fit body to that of a crab-like rodent
scuttling about mindlessly on the barracks floor.

At the play's conclusion, Mr. Chaves and his colleagues revivify themselves for
a musical finale that, like the opening, is a prideful anthem of solidarity.
''In my dream, we've all come home together,'' explains one of the men. That
dream of peace is long dead, but the survivors of ''Tracers'' heroically honor
its memory and demand its renewal by keeping the Vietnam nightmare alive.

Fixin' to Die

TRACERS, written by the original cast of Vincent Caristi, Richard Chaves, John
DiFusco, Eric E.  Emerson, Rick Gallavan, Merlin Marston and Harry Stephens with
Sheldon Lettich; conceived and directed by Mr. DiFusco; scenery by John
Falabella; costumes by David Navarro Velasquez; lighting by Terry Wuthrich;
dramaturgy by David Berry; sound by Mr.DiFusco; production stage manager,
Michael Chambers; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen. Joseph Papp presents
the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, Thomas Bird, artistic director.
At 425 Lafayette Street. WITH: R. J. Bonds, J. Kenneth Campbell, Vincent
Caristi, Richard Chaves, Anthony Chisholm, Josh Cruze, Brian Delate and Jim
Tracy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vincent Caristi and Richard Chaves

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
STUDENTS ARE MIRRORS OF SOCIETY

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


COLLEGE students are among the most analyzed, praised and criticized of all
groups of Americans. At regular intervals they are labeled, like so many
laboratory specimens: silent, rebellious, selfish, liberal, conservative.

Why this fascination? The answer may be partly adult envy of youth, and partly
that these young people serve as a mirror in which older generations recognize
their strengths and weaknesses, virtues and follies. Perhaps most important, we
discover in the students' fluctuating values a reflection of changes in our own
attitudes that we often would rather not admit to ourselves. Chastising young
people is more comfortable than admitting our own wrong turns.

The latest analysis of the most recent batch of students illustrates all this.
The 19th annual survey of freshman attitudes has polled more than 180,000
freshmen on 345 campuses. ''The American Freshman: National Norms for Fall
1984'' was conducted jointly by the University of California at Los Angeles and
the American Council on Education.

The overwhelming majority of freshmen are concerned with material matters and
financial security. In a success- and security-oriented society, this should not
come as a shock. Seventy-one percent considered being well off an important
goal, compared with only slightly more than 43 percent in 1967. It is enough to
make the older folk (but not the students' parents) shake their heads in dismay
and to ask, What's becoming of young people today?

Actually, what's becoming of them is what has always become of young people:
They look out of the campus and react to the realities of the moment. They watch
their elders and come to rational conclusions. In 1967, many college students
hoped to escape being shot at in Vietnam. At the same time, a policy of guns and
butter at home freed them of excessive worries about finding jobs. Now, after a
major recession, several years of shrinking job markets and much talk among
adults about the importance of job-oriented education, only the most courageous
or foolhardy students ignore the economic impact on their futures.


Society sends out the message to them that rich is better. They need not look
far afield. The survey shows that the percentage of freshmen getting direct
Federal grants toward their college education is down to 19.8 percent in 1984
from 31.5 percent in 1980. As for the adult complaint that too many students
choose vocation- oriented courses over the liberal arts, students are aware
that, while board chairmen tend to extol general knowledge, their personnel
directors more often ask: ''What can you do?''

American society has become more polarized, and so have the students. Slightly
fewer, though still the majority, consider themselves middle- of-the-road.
Slightly more - 22.1 percent compared with 19.7 percent in 1981 - think of
themselves as liberal/left. And also slightly fewer - 20.5 percent, compared
with 20.7 percent two years ago, describe themselves as conservative or
far-right. But the fact that in 1971, more than 38 percent said they were
liberal/left is a more important indicator of how students reflect the change in
American attitudes.

On specific issues, too, students reflect general trends. Abolition of the death
penalty is supported by only 26 percent, compared with more than 57 percent in
1971. Only half as many favor legalization of marijuana as in 1977 when slightly
more than 50 percent supported it.

Like the population at large, students are ''highly selective in their attitudes
toward social issues,'' says Prof. Alexander W. Astin, who directed the survey.
''While being more conservative on matters of taxes, crime and drug use, they
are more liberal than ever on matters of equality for women, school integration
and student rights.'' For example, only 22.4 percent today support the position
that ''the activities of married women are best confined to the home and
family,'' while 56.6 percent thought so in 1967.

Indications are that students do not lead society in radical directions, but
keep pace with most of society's turns. As they make those turns, they speak up
louder and with fewer inhibitions then their elders. For example, the 1960's
revolt against academic requirements, though ultimately taken up undergraduates,
was first mounted by adult revisionists, including Ivan Illich, the educator-
priest who advocated the ''deschooling of society,'' and by New Left education
reformers who charged that the schools were prisons and teachers the keepers.

These views were given much visibility and approval by adult commentators long
before the student generation, which had only recently been chided for being
''silent,'' took them on as its own. Even in opposition to the Vietnam War,
where the students had an obvious self-interest, adult leadership had set a
course before it became a major campus cause.


None of this suggests that the students' voices should be ignored. Students
often speak more forthrightly than their more cautious elders.

The point is that if adults do not like what they see in student attitudes, they
might ask how to make the picture prettier by improving society. If they do not
like the students' excessive concern with material values, then changing social
attitudes is better than lecturing to youth. On the other hand, if students'
support of school integration is praiseworthy, adults might do better emulating
the young instead of merely praising them.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Namath and Staubach in Pro Hall

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


Joe Namath, the former Jet quarterback whose spectacular passes and outsized
personality helped to establish the old American Football League and paved the
way for its merger with the National Football League, was elected to the Pro
Football Hall of Fame yesterday.

Also elected were Roger Staubach, O. J. Simpson, Frank Gatski and Pete Rozelle,
the N.F.L. commissioner.

Staubach, the former Dallas quarterback who led the Cowboys to two Super Bowl
victories, and Simpson, the former Buffalo Bills running back who in 1973 became
the first in the N.F.L. to gain 2,000 yards rushing in a season, were elected in
their first year of eligibility, five years after retirement.



Honored for Contributions

Gatski, an offensive lineman who played in 11 title games in 12 seasons with the
Cleveland Browns and the Detroit Lions, was named in the old- timer category for
players out of the game at least 25 years.

Rozelle, who has served as commissioner for 25 years, was selected in a category
for those who have made significant contributions to the game.

The five will be inducted into the hall in Canton, Ohio, on Aug. 3 before the
annual Hall of Fame exhibition game. They were among seven finalists selected
last week by a panel of 29 writers and broadcasters representing each of the 28
N.F.L. teams and one representing the Pro Football Writers Association.

The only two finalists who did not get the 24 votes required for induction were
Fran Tarkenton, the former Giant and Minnesota Viking quarterback, and Paul
Hornung, the former running back for the Green Bay Packers.

''I'm very proud and thrilled,'' said the 41-year-old Namath, who ended his
13-year career in 1977, when he played for the Los Angeles Rams. ''I'd like to
congratulate the others, too. I'm just sorry Fran didn't make it again. He
certainly had the stats.''

Tarkenton holds several league passing records, including most attempts (6,467),
completions (3,686), yards (47,003) and touchdowns (342).



Flamboyant Style

Namath, once described by his Alabama coach, Bear Bryant, as ''the greatest
athlete I ever coached,'' may not have matched Tarkenton's statistics, but his
flamboyant style was regarded as a key factor enabling the A.F.L. to win a
merger with the N.F.L. in 1966.

A celebrity from the moment he signed a then-startling $400,000 contract with
the Jets in 1965, Broadway Joe, as Namath was soon known, became the A.F.L.'s
rookie of the year. Two seasons later, he became the first quarterback to pass
for more than 4,000 yards in a season.

He elevated himself to a football legend in January 1969, when he publicly
guaranteed that the Jets would defeat the heavily favored Baltimore Colts in
Super Bowl III. With his prediction having produced a roar of ridicule, he
proceeded to lead the Jets to a 16-7 victory.

Namath, who was plagued by knee problems throughout his career, had 1,886 pass
completions for 27,663 yards and 173 touchdowns. He is the first Jet player
named to the hall. His Jet coach, Weeb Ewbank, was elected in 1978.

Staubach, who completed 1,685 of 2,958 passes for 22,700 yards and 153
touchdowns, called his selection ''the greatest honor of my career.'' The winner
of the 1963 Heisman Trophy as a junior at Navy, he did not begin his pro career
until after he had served four years on active duty, including a stint in
Vietnam.

''I'm thrilled to be included with players like Joe and Roger,'' said Simpson,
who won the 1968 Heisman as a running back for Southern California, then had a
spectacular N.F.L. career that included four rushing titles, five consecutive
1,000-yard seasons and five Pro Bowl selections. In 11 seasons with the Bills
and the San Francisco 49ers, he accounted for a total of 11,236 yards rushing.

Simpson and Staubach are the first Heisman winners to make the hall.

Gatski, who is 62, was a center and a linebacker. He played three seasons at
Marshall and one at Auburn before joining the Browns, then part of the
All-America Football Conference, in 1946. He anchored the Cleveland line that
cleared the way for pro football's most powerful offense in the 1940's and
1950's.

During his career, he played on eight championship teams, including the Detroit
Lions in 1957, his last season, when he earned his eighth championship ring by
helping the Lions rout his old team, the Browns, by 59- 14 in his final game.

Rozelle negotiated the first N.F.L. television contract in 1962 and later
presided over the merger with the A.F.L. He is the third commissioner named to
the hall of fame, following Joe Carr, who served from 1921 to 1939, and
Rozelle's immediate predecessor, Bert Bell, who served from 1946 to 1959.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Hornung; photo of Fran Tarkenton; photo of Roger
Staubach; photo of Joe Namath; photo of Pete Rozelle; photo of O.J. Simpson

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS WITNESS LINKS U.S. LOSSES TO VIETNAM SELF-DEFENSE FORCE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words


George W. Allen, a former deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central
Intelligence Agency, testified yesterday that the Vietcong's self-de fense
forces may have been responsible for as much as ''40 percent of American
losses'' in Vietnam.

Mr. Allen, who is 58 years old, took the stand in Federal District Court in
Manhattan as the second witness for CBS in the $120 million libel trial brought
by Gen. William C. Westmoreland against the network.

The suit stems from a 1982 CBS documentary that charged a ''conspiracy'' by the
general's command to minimize the true size and nature of enemy strength in
South Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968. The
broadcast - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - accused the military
of deliberately distorting enemy capabilities by deleting the Vietcong's
self-defense units from the official listing of forces known as the order of
battle.

Mr. Allen, who appeared on the documentary, is regarded as a particularly
important witness for the network. Both George Crile, the producer of the
broadcast, and Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who was a paid
consultant for the program, have told the jury that Mr. Allen was the ''dean''
on Vietnamese issues. Mr. Allen himself said yesterday that he had more
experience on Indochinese matters as an American intelligence officer - more
than 17 years - than any other person, civilian or military.

'Concept' Twisted

On the documentary, Mr. Allen said the removal of the ''paramilitary'' self-
defense forces from the order of battle twisted ''our concept'' of the war.

''We were skewing our strategy,'' he said on the broadcast. ''We were not
acknowledging that indeed there was an important indigenous South Vietnamese
component; that, indeed, it was a civil war.''

Mr. Allen followed Mr. Adams to the stand around 4:15 P.M. yesterday, an hour
before court adjourned. Mr. Adams completed his testimony by recalling his many
years of efforts to bring to light what he called the ''embarrassing but
significant'' story of military ''deception'' in Vietnam.

Mr. Adams said the military's ''dishonest'' position regarding enemy strength in
1967 was the ''kind of thing that people want to put out of their mind.

''It was the kind of thing people almost have to confess to,'' he said, telling
of his repeated attempts to pry the story loose from former military
intelligence officers and to acquire information that was still in classified
documents.

Senior C.I.A. Analyst

Mr. Allen - who served as a senior analyst at the C.I.A.'s station in Saigon
from 1964 to 1966, when he became deputy head of the agency's Vietnamese affairs
staff at Langley, Va. - said he had been Mr. Adams's ''mentor on order of battle
problems since we first met'' in January 1966. At that time, Mr. Adams had
worked for six months of a two-and-a-half year assignment on the Vietnamese
affairs staff.

''I sometimes wished I had the courage of my convictions as Sam had,'' Mr. Allen
told the jury. ''I regard Mr. Adams as one having an unusually high sense of
professional integrity.''

Mr. Allen said that Mr. Adams's integrity ''was commensurate with the biblical
passage engraved in the entrance to C.I.A. headquarters - 'Ye shall know the
truth and the truth shall make you free.' ''

Earlier in this trial, George Carver, the chief of that C.I.A. unit, testified
for General Westmoreland and portrayed Mr. Adams as someone who was ''seldom in
doubt, often in error.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from January
1964 to June 1968, contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had lied to
President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about enemy strength
in 1967.

Arbitrary Ceiling

The documentary specifically charged that General Westmoreland had imposed an
''arbitrary ceiling'' on reports of enemy strength, mainly by the deletion of
the part-time, hamlet- based self-defense forces from the order of battle, and
had disregarded reports from his officers of a higher Vietcong presence and a
higher rate of North Vietnamese infiltration than was made known.

General Westmoreland testified that he removed the self-defense forces - then
newly estimated at 120,000 - because they were inconsequential militarily and
their inclusion in the order of battle at a high figure would mislead Washington
and the press. He said he also wanted, in 1967, to ''purify'' the order of
battle by ''separating the fighters'' - such as North Vietnamese regulars and
Vietcong guerrillas - from what he called the ''nonfighters,'' such as the
self-defense units.

At a series of conferences in 1967 between representatives of the military and
various intelligence agencies, Mr. Adams and some C.I.A. colleagues
unsuccessfully opposed the deletion of the self-defense forces in the order of
battle. But it was not until early 1973, shortly before he resigned from the
C.I.A., that Mr. Adams first publicly accused the military of willful deception.

Besides being used for the order of battle, the enemy strength figures settled
upon in late 1967 were used for a 25- page special intelligence estimate for
President Johnson and other senior officials. That document - which listed a
total enemy military strength of 223,000 to 248,000 - said, in a paragraph, that
the self-defense forces might have numbered 150,000 in 1966 and, though
declining and not ''offensive military forces,'' still ''constitute a part of
the overall Communist effort.''

Yesterday, on re-direct examination by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, Mr. Adams
said that document was ''not an honest statement'' of full enemy strength.

But his interpretation was challenged on re-cross examination by David Dorsen, a
lawyer for General Westmoreland.

Q. Are you suggesting that people like Secretary of Defense McNamara would not
be aware that self-defense forces were not in the strength totals?

A. I believe he might be aware, but if he read that paragraph he wouldn't get a
proper idea of what those people did.

When Mr. Dorsen suggested that Mr. Adams had ''mixed feelings'' about describing
the self-defense units as ''military,'' Mr. Adams said that ''para- military''
might be an acceptable term but that he never doubted the need to include them
in enemy strength totals.

Mr. Allen testified that the self-defense forces ''were responsible for sniper
fire, preparing booby traps and terrorist-type grenades and sometimes they would
actually engage in a firefight.'' He said they were killing South Vietnamese and
American troops ''and were terrorizing civilians. They were an integral part of
the enemy's military strength.''

He said he recalled ''figures as high as 40 percent of American losses being
inflicted by militia self-defense elements.''

Mr. Allen, who said he was one of a dozen intelligence analysts who devised the
first American order of battle for enemy forces in Vietnam in 1962, said he
agreed with Mr. Adams that the military's position on enemy strength figures
five years later was not ''in good faith.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Samuel A. Adams

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS SPENT CAREER IN INTELLIGENCE

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 251 words


George W. Allen, who testified for CBS yesterday in the libel suit brought by
Gen. William C. Westmoreland, is a 58-year-old retired Government official who
spent his professional life in intelligence.

He retired in 1979, but still works under contract with the Central Intelligence
Agency.

By the time of the 1967-68 controversy over North Vietnamese troop figures, Mr.
Allen had spent more than 15 years studying the conflict in the area.

He joined Army intelligence as a civilian employee in 1949, shortly after
graduating from the University of Utah with a degree in political science. A
year later he was assigned to work as a military intelligence research analyst
on Indochi na. For the next decade his principal duties involved obtaining
current intelligence on Vietnam and the Far East.

In 1963 he moved to the C.I.A. as a senior analyst in the Office of Current
Intelligence, dealing with the Far East. The next year he went to Vietnam and
was asked to stay on as a senior intelligence adviser. When the American Embassy
in Saigon was bombed in 1965 Mr. Allen was wounded. He remained in Vietnam until
1966, when he returned to C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., as deputy special
assistant to the director, Richard M. Helms, for Vietnam affairs.

Born into an Army family at Fort Banks, Mass., he was raised on Army posts and
served for three years in Navy amphibious forces in the Pacific during World War
II. He is married, has four daughters and lives in Williamsburg, Va.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR ALSO HAUNTS CANADIANS WHO VOLUNTEERED



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1827 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL, Jan. 20


They are invisible veterans of an unpopular war, so reticent about their
experience that next-door neighbors may never know that they served in Vietnam.

Yet 56 of their comrades died in that war. They were the Canadian volunteers.

The Pentagon cannot say how many Canadians served in the United States armed
forces. Though they share the problems of other Vietnam veterans, many do not
receive rehabilitation and other benefits because they live across the border.
Their country is remembered more for harboring Americans who fled service in
Vietnam than for producing volunteers for the confict.



No Law Barring Foreigners

''Canadians are never considered because nobody even knows about us,'' said
Arthur B. Diabo, of Caughnawaga, Quebec, who served with the United States
Marines. ''Yet during the war they were more than happy to take us.''

There is no law barring foreigners from enlisting in the American armed forces.
''If a fellow comes in and doesn't have a criminal record, the fact that he is a
Canadian or Mexican citizen doesn't prevent us from taking him,'' said Col. J.
Robert Shields, an information officer for the Department of Defense.

Mr. Diabo, a Mohawk Indian, went to Vietnam in time for the battle for Hue. His
left arm was shattered by a bullet as he walked as patrol point man into an
ambush near Da Nang in June 1968.

But ''I'd do it again tomorrow,'' Mr. Diabo said. ''The camaraderie was closer
than what you find back on the street.''



Eligible for Most Benefits

The United States Veterans Administration says the Canadians are eligible for
most of the benefits available to American Vietnam veterans, although some
benefits, such as housing loans, are limited to United States citizens.

Also, free medical care must be sought at a Veterans Administration hospital or
other approved American facility. That means Canadian veterans seeking care must
leave their jobs and travel sometimes long distances, paying their own way.

The guesses about how many Canadians served with the United States in Vietnam
range from a few thousand up to the tens of thousands.

Colonel Shields said the Defense Department had no figures because the records
of soldiers who served in Vietnam had been retired.



Estimates Vary Greatly

Roderick Engert, chief of the reference branch of the Center of Military History
at the Pentagon, said the number might be only 2,500 to 3,000. He extrapolated
his figure from the casualty ratio in the war, in which 2.7 million Americans
served and 58,000 died. A Canadian Government official said he doubted that more
than 5,000 Canadians had served in Vietnam.

But Douglas Clark, a writer in Fergus, Ontario, who is working on a book about
the Canadian veterans, said there were at least 20,000. The veterans themselves
assert that the total runs much higher than those given by officials because
some volunteers were listed as being from such border recruiting centers as
Plattsburgh, N.Y.

They signed up for many reasons. Some said they wanted to learn to fly
helicopters or pick up other skills that they could carry back home. Others said
they hoped to gain American citizenship.

Douglas Cassidy of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, said he had joined the Marines
because ''I was a spoiled brat and I thought I needed that sort of discipline
and I wanted to fight against what I thought was Communism.''

His unit, the Third Battalion of the First Marine Division, at one point
included 56 Canadians out of about 800 soldiers, he said.

Some Wanted Adventure

Others went to fight, often in such elite units as the Marines or Army
paratroopers, for the adventure. ''When you're 18 or 19 years old and full of
spit and fire and there's a big war going on, you want to be part of it,'' Mr.
Diabo said.

The Mohawk Indian reservation at Caughnawaga, just south of Montreal, produced
about 25 Vietnam veterans - and 20 more Vietnam-era veterans who served
elsewhere - out of a close-knit community of 4,500 residents, he reported.

''There's never been any border for Mohawk people,'' said Teddy Canadian,
another Marine veteran. ''To us, it's all one continent.''

Fifty-six Canadians were killed in Vietnam, including two who were listed as
missing in action and later declared dead. Among those killed was Richard
Dextraze, the youngest son of the former Canadian Chief of Defense Staff, Gen.
Jacques A. Dextraze.

Cool Reception

But the reception they came home to was, if anything, even less sympathetic than
that given to returning American servicemen. Canada had given refuge to
thousands of American draft resisters, who influenced the climate of
disapproval.

''The non-Indian community told us that we were a bunch of fools, that it wasn't
our war,'' said Mr. Diabo, who said he got a better homecoming on the
reservation.

The Canadian veterans responded by bottling up their experiences, said Jack
Kusiewicz, a Montreal high school teacher who organized a talk group for local
Vietnam veterans, both Canadians and Americans, living around Montreal. He
estimated the city had at least 400 Canadian veterans.

''I could almost pick out the Canadian Vietnam veteran,'' Mr. Kusiewicz said.
''He is more shy about his role. He doesn't speak about it easily. The element
of pride is missing.

Different From U.S. Veterans

''The American Vietnam veteran had a lot of neighbors,'' Mr. Kusiewicz said.
''He knew other veterans. I think practically all the Canadian veterans did not
tell anyone who didn't already know. Some said they only started to talk about
it after they joined the group.''

There are Canadian veterans who say they have had no problems readjusting. ''I
have an independent character and I have to make it on my own all the time,''
said Claude Martin, a Montreal salesman who fought with the Marines near Phu
Bai.

But others describe the kind of post- Vietnam trauma that many American soldiers
underwent. The difference, they say, is that they have suffered it in isolation.

''The public is going to say: 'Why did you go to Vietnam? You volunteered, so
don't complain,' '' said Mr. Kusiewicz.

Several veterans told about one friend who they said was a pill-popping former
paratrooper who insisted on walking around Montreal armed.

''Some of these guys are still in Vietnam,'' said Mr. Canadian. ''They are in
bad shape but they won't admit it.''

Mr. Canadian said he began seeing a psychiatrist after his marriage collapsed.

'It's Coming Back More Often'

Mr. Diabo said he had thought more about his experiences recently than he had
right after he left Vietnam. ''Initially, Vietnam didn't faze me,'' he said,
''but in the past two or three years, it's coming back more often. I guess it's
because I think about it too much.''

Mr. Cassidy, who says that he served two tours as a marine in Vietnam, is candid
about his breakdown.

''I was going to go into a friend's house and get his gun and blow myself away,
but he wasn't home,'' he said. ''Then I tried to get drunk and I couldn't. So I
walked out of the bar when it closed and I checked myself into a hospital.''

Mr. Cassidy and others complain that Canadian doctors are unfamiliar with the
post-Vietnam stress disorders that American doctors have begun to recognize.

''The doctors in Canada don't understand it,'' he said. ''They want to commit
you or incarcerate you.''

Government Doesn't Help

The Canadian Government says that the plight of Vietnam veterans is not its
problem.

''Canada was not involved in the Vietnam War,'' said Vern Murphy, a spokesman
for the Canadian Department of Veterans Affairs. ''The case of those that have
medical problems because of that war cannot be a burden on the Canadian
taxpayer, because we weren't involved in it.''

Canada, somewhat reluctantly, did send 290 soldiers to South Vietnam in 1973 as
part of a four-nation team charged with supervising a cease-fire during the war.
The soldiers were pulled out after several months as the truce began to
collapse.

No U.S.-Canadian Agreement

The United States and Canada agreed to treat each other's veterans after World
War II, but no such arrangement exists for the Vietnam War.

''Since Canada was not a party to that conflict, their veterans do not have
access to Canadian benefits under the bilateral agreement,'' explained a
consular officer at the United States Embassy in Ottawa.

Shane Pollock, a former marine who was shot in the knee in Vietnam, drives up to
18 hours from his home in Waskesiu Lake, Saskatchewan, to get free treatment at
the closest Veterans Administration hospital, in Fargo, N.D.

Yvon Roy, also of Caughnawaga, went out on reconnaissance patrols for the Army
101st Airborne Division in Vietnam. He said that he was discharged from the Army
after 12 years of service because he had diabetes and that he later had two
heart attacks. Mr. Roy said it took three years to get his permanent disability
status from the Veterans Administration.

Act of Congress Needed

David A. Brigham, deputy director of the Veterans Assistance Service, said
Congress would have to act if there were to be a change to allow the Canadian
veterans to be treated in Canada at American expense.

Canadian veterans of Vietnam contend that their greatest need is for
''outreach'' centers like those set up for American veterans. Mr. Diabo has
urged that a counseling center be set up in Montreal.

Mr. Cassidy wants one in Calgary. Until now, he said, his only support has come
from infrequent encounters with fellow Vietnam veterans in Canada.

''You sit for a couple of hours and cry like babies, because you finally get it
out of your system,'' he said.

The Canadian veterans have tried to publicize their situation, but without much
success. A contingent went to Washington last autumn to attend the ceremony at
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

Last summer, Mr. Cassidy set out to walk from Saskatoon to Washington, about
2,000 miles. After eight days, he stopped in Fargo because of what was later
diagnosed as a potentially crippling degeneration of the spine.

Last July, veterans in the Montreal area got permission to open a chapter of the
Disabled American Veterans, the first recognized organization for Vietnam
veterans in Canada. Mr. Diabo, its service officer, said the chapter would lobby
for the full range of benefits offered American veterans.

''We made a big sacrifice during a time of need for the U.S. and we've come back
and been shafted,'' Mr. Diabo asserted. ''We've been ignored long enough and my
job is to see that something is going to be done.''

Yet none of the Canadians interviewed regretted having volunteered and gone to
Vietnam.

''I still say I was a damn good marine,'' said Mr. Cassidy. ''I have a lot of
admiration for the Marine Corps and the United States and I'd never turn my back
on them.''

He added, ''It's a damn good country to fight and die for.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of volunteers (page A6); photo of Arthur B. Diabo (page A6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR LUGAR SEEKS TO DEFINE POLICY ABROAD



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


The new chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today called on
Americans to forge a new consensus on United States vital interests around the
world and whether they should be defended with military force.

In his first policy speech since taking over the committee this month, Senator
Richard G. Lugar said that as a result of the Vietnam War, ''the United States
has been and continues to be uncertain about the use of force in the conduct of
American foreign policy.''

Before that involvement, he said, ''some widely shared assumptions were held
about the national interest and potential threats to it.''

''Some consensus was apparent on appropriate remedies to our problems,'' he
said. ''One of the costs of Vietnam was the breakup of this consensus.''

To Open Hearings Jan. 31

Mr. Lugar, an Indiana Republican, has announced that the committee will open
hearings on American foreign policy Jan. 31 with appearances by Secretary of
State George P. Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger. The
hearings are to last more than a month as dozens of former and current officials
and public figures testify.

Senator Lugar indicated today that the hearings would seek to determine in
detail American commitments abroad and when the use of force was appropriate to
defend them.

His comments recalled those of a former chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, J. William Fulbright, Democrat of Arkansas, who argued in the late
1960's that the United States had made too many direct and indirect commitments
to protect foreign governments without taking into account the price of meeting
those commitments.

Mr. Lugar, in a speech to the National Press Club, said that too often Americans
want a policy of ''containment without cost,'' of maintaining commitments
without wanting to enforce them.

''In poll after poll, Americans express their concern about hostile governments
which imperil our interests in Latin America and elsewhere,'' he said. ''But in
these same polls, Americans display an equal and overwhelming opposition to any
course of action which might actually frustrate governments which are harmful to
us.''

Questions Aid to Nicaragua Rebels

In response to questions after the speech, Senator Lugar said covert aid to the
anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua was not a workable program because it was
not possible to keep the aid secret. He said he opposed open assistance because
that would be tantamount to declaring war on Nicaragua, which Americans did not
favor.

He said he hoped the Administration and Congress could produce an original
formula to substitute for the covert aid.

In his prepared remarks the Senator said, ''It is important to restore a greater
degree of consensus about our interests and commitments around the world and
about our willingness to defend them.

''Do we really have vital interests all around the globe?'' he asked. ''Do we
have the economic and military capabilities and the political will to support
these interests with a safe margin of risk? Do we have a long-term, substantial
and correct view of the Soviet Union? Do we have an appropriate understanding of
the economic, political and spiritual forces that move nations?''

He did not answer his questions but said at the end of his speech that after the
committee hearings, ''we will have a better idea of the military forces needed
to meet our obligations and the economic resources required to sustain those
commitments.''

Points of Accord Predicted

''We will probably agree on containment of Soviet adventurism, the value of
nuclear reduction negotiations, the importance of worldwide economic growth, of
fewer trade barriers, greater building of democratic constitutions and human
rights guarantees,'' he said. ''The foreign policy consensus that we seek is not
simply one of a few dedicated senators, but a coming together of the American
people at the grass roots.

''Questions about commitments and the proper use of force must be resolved in
the coming years and strengthen the heart of American foreign policy,'' he said.

In discussing the Soviet Union, Mr. Lugar seemed skeptical about the value of
detente and of arms control agreements in reducing tension.

''A substantial majority of Americans in both political parties now maintain a
high degree of realism about the Soviet Union,'' he said. Although many
Americans continue to hope for agreements to reduce nuclear arms, he said, it is
important to recognize that ''they cannot alone contribute substantially to the
balance we require for our security.'' Backs 'Star Wars'

In the past, chairmen of the Foreign Relations Committee have favored arms
control agreements to reduce East-West tension. But Mr. Lugar's comments were
much more in keeping with those of conservatives in the Administration who want
to give priority to research on a space-based missile defense known officially
as the Strategic Defense Initiative and informally as the ''Star Wars'' program.

''I firmly believe that without the introduction of the new Strategic Defense
Initiative, we would have little reason to hope for any substantial or positive
development in arms control negotiations,'' he said.

In response to questions, Mr. Lugar repeated his concern, first voiced in late
November, about South Africa's policy of racial separation.

''I think the South African Government is making an awesome mistake in failing
to move and move very rapidly'' to ease tension in that country.

''Our goal must be to persuade the South African Government to share power with
black citizens in South Africa and move rapidly for the good of that country and
for the good of the Western strategic position,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Richard G. Lugar (page A8)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA-VIETNAM ATTACKS GROW

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 441 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 23


China said today that its forces had counterattacked against Vietnam in recent
days after weeks of ''provocations'' along the border.

The Foreign Ministry statement today gave no indication of the scope of the
military actions undertaken by Peking in recent days, nor any other details.

But officials said that the military actions were continuing, and were on a
scale greater than has usually been the case in the sporadic fighting since
1979.

For the moment, Western diplomats here said that a new war seemed unlikely. They
noted that Chinese military leaders told a visiting American military delegation
last week that Peking did not intend to prejudice its domestic economic growth
with military ''adventures.''

Heavy Losses in 1979

Moreover, the diplomats said, it was far from clear that Chinese prospects in a
new war would be any better than in 1979, when Peking incurred heavy losses
against stiff Vietnamese defenses.

Nonetheless, there were signs that tensions in the region had increased to a
dangerous degree as a result of recent Vietnamese attacks on Chinese- supported
guerillas in Cambodia, which has been occupied by Vietnam since 1978. Among
other things, the attacks have sharpened longstanding animosities between China
and the Soviet Union, Vietnam's ally.

As the fighting between China and Vietnam has developed, Peking and moscow have
sent high-ranking envoys to reaffirm their stands.

The Chinese Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, was in Bangkok, Thailan, today, where
he was reported to have told his Thai counterpart, Sidhi Savetsila, that China
would ''teach Vietnam a lesson'' if Vietnamese troops carried their attacks on
Cambodian guerillas into Thailand. The phrase was the same as that used by
china's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping, to justify the 1979 attack on
Vietnam.

Meanwhile, a Soviet Deputy Prime Minister, Nikolai V. Talyzin, is visiting
Vietnam on a mission that has been officially described in Hanoi as one of
support for Vietnam's ''defense'' and ''economic reconstruction.''

Western military experts here noted that a hint of some Chinese action came
earlier this month when five additional Chinese infantry divisions were moved
into forward areas, along with several hundred additional combat aircraft.

A Vietnamese Foreign Ministry statement issued five days ago indicated that a
focal point of the fighting was in an area that the two armies contested
vigorously last April. The statement said that for three days last week Chinese
forces occupying hills inside Vietnamese had bombarded surrounding areas, firing
more than 500,000 shells and mortar rounds.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHIVES FOR PAPERS OF THE FAMOUS AND NOT VERY

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 963 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Two decades ago Howard B. Gotlieb went to work for the library at Boston
University and began collecting the personal papers not only of distinguished
20th-century authors but also of journalists, mystery writers, cartoonists,
movie actors and similar figures, many less than famous.

When Dr. Gotlieb moved to Boston University from a job as archivist and curator
of historical manuscripts at Yale, few other university librarians in the early
1960's believed, as he did, that birst drafts of potboilers and the private
correspondence of semi-stars and news commentators might deserve shelf space
among the papers of Nobel Prize winners. But the world has changed.

The history of everyday life, for example, has grown more fashionable among
academic historians. Truly rare old books and manuscripts, the glory of the
greatest university libraries, have risen radically in price. The clothes, wars
and sensibilities of the 1940's, 1950's and other recent decades have become
objects of historical nostalgia, and the celebrity of television anchors now
rivals that of statesmen.

An Embodiment of Change

In a sense, the collection that Dr. Gotlieb has masterminded at Boston
University, the Twentieth Century Archives, reflects all these changes.

He has had less money to use than, say, the University of Texas or other places
with comparable modern collections. Moreover, persuading people to give him
their documents became more difficult after 1971, when Federal laws ended tax
deductions for the charitable donation of one's own papers. Yet the collection
keeps growing.

Its two floors in the university's Mugar Memorial Library are starting to seem
cramped. The archives now make up two-thirds of all of the university's rarer
books and papers, and Dr. Gotlieb, the director of these special collections,
has been looking for someone to finance a new building for them. ''Something
elegant but modest,'' he said in an interview.

What would be housed are papers not only by H. G. Wells, Samuel Beckett, George
Bernard Shaw, D. H. Lawrence, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., John W.
McCormack, who was Speaker of the House, and other significant figures, but also
the letters, diaries, notebooks, manuscripts, fan mail, contracts and so on of
Dan Rather, Harold Robbins, Oriana Fallaci, Gael Greene, Euell Gibbons, Bette
Davis, Robert Redford and scores of far less celebrated figures ranging from
Harry Richman, a song-and-dance man who was a friend of J. Edgar Hoover, to
Reginald Hill, Richard Grayson and Herbert Burkholz, all mystery writers.

1,323 People Represented

The collection by now includes at least some of the papers of 1,323 people.

Dr. Gotlieb, a modern historian by training, has in some cases spent years
persuading potential ''collectees,'' as he calls them, to give their papers. He
has publicized the collection with flair, using a New York public relations
company and occasionally appearing on television talk shows.

Television interviewers always ask him what is in Mr. Redford's diary. It is
sealed, he answers, saying he accepts ''any reasonable restrictions'' on the
sensitive papers of other donors. But the point of the collection, he said, is
not to provide a splendid repository for tidbits but rather to help future
scholars interested in details about the film industry.

Those he asks for their papers often wonder, ''Why me?'' In 1965, for instance,
when Dr. Gotlieb approached David Halberstam, then a reporter for The New York
Times, ''I thought he was joking,'' Mr. Halberstam says.

But Dr. Gotlieb thought Mr. Halberstam's coverage of the war in Vietnam might
yield personal papers of potential value to historians, and Mr. Halberstam sent
along boxes of material.

Vietnam Reporters Represented

Other Vietnam reporters followed, including Frances FitzGerald, Gloria Emerson
and Tom Tiede. And, although Miss FitzGerald recalls that it seemed ''absolutely
miraculous that anyone would take all this junk from me and catalogue it,'' the
system had real advantages. The donors could clean out their offices. Historians
gained new documents. There was honor all around.

Who uses the collection? Scholars, students, biographers, all sorts, more than
4,000 people a year, Dr. Gotlieb said. A social historian from Sweden recently
dug through the original papers and cartoons of Harold Gray, creator of Little
Orphan Annie. Hermann F. Eilts, a former senior American diplomat and now a
University Professor at Boston, sat down one afternoon in the archives' glass
cage for visitors and examined the papers of Ladislas Farago, a writer on the
Middle East.

Some Wrote Only Trash

It was suggested to the archivist that one or two writers in his collection had
published nothing but trash. He said future historians might nonetheless be
curious. Some trash is important.

Might it not be useful, he was asked, to collect the private papers of a few
ordinary and obscure citizens?

Such items are certainly valuable when they date back centuries, Dr. Gotlieb
said, for periods with few other windows on ordinary life. ''But with the advent
of the 20th century it's no longer necessary to collect the John Joneses,
because they're already collected.'' Private citizens and public institutions
keep stacks of papers; ordinary lives are reflected in countless ways by new
technologies.

Dr. Gotlieb said he had never even considered collecting John Jones. But one
day, he recalled, he and Isaac Asimov, one of his most prolific subjects,
imagined the papers of a real nobody. ''We would create a person who did not
exist, from youth to maturity,'' he said, and the archivist and the versatile
author would maneuver a student into doing a thesis on this archivoid.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of archives vault; photo of Howard B. Gotlieb

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS JURY TOLD OF C.I.A. 'SELLOUT' IN '67

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1320 words


George W. Allen, a former deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central
Intelligence Agency, testified yesterday that the C.I.A. had ''sold out'' to the
military in 1967 on the issue of enemy strength in South Vietnam and that
President Lyndon B. Johnson had been given a ''dishonest and misleading''
estimate that fall.

Mr. Allen said in Federal District Court in Manhattan that Gen. William C.
Westmoreland was ''ultimately responsible'' for ''this prostitution'' and that
the C.I.A., by ''going along with it,'' had ''sacrificed its integrity on the
altar of public relations and political expediency.''

As a result of this ''mistake of the century,'' Mr. Allen testified, Washington
was left ''essentially with an inadequate understanding of what we were up
against'' in Vietnam.

During the Tet offensive of January 1968, Mr. Allen said, ''the chickens came
home to roost.'' He estimated that at least 400,000 armed troops took part in
that attack - perhaps 100,000 more than the total enemy acknowledged by the
military and the C.I.A. at that time. Mr. Allen said that, during 1967, he and
some C.I.A. colleagues had actually argued for an enemy force estimate of about
500,000.

Mr. Allen, who retired from the C.I.A. in 1979 but still works under contract
there, appeared as the second witness for CBS in the trial of General
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against the network.

25-Page Estimate for President

The suit stems from a 1982 CBS documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception'' - which charged that the general's command engaged in a
''conspiracy'' in 1967 to show progress in the war by minimizing the size and
nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces. As part of this ''conscious
effort,'' the broadcast said, the general removed the Vietcong's part-time,
hamlet-based self-defense forces from the listing of enemy strength known as the
order of battle and refused to allow a current count for them in the 25-page
special estimate for the President in November 1967.

Mr. Allen - who testified Tuesday afternoon that the self-defense forces might
have accounted for as much as 40 percent of American casualties in Vietnam -
said yesterday that it was a ''lie'' that those units could not be counted
accurately.

''We existed,'' he said, ''to make estimates.''

Mr. Allen seemed on the verge of laying part of the blame for the C.I.A.'s
''sellout'' on Richard Helms, who was then Director of Central Intelligence and
who signed the estimate for the President.

Mr. Helms, he said at one stage, ''made it clear to our staff that he was not
prepared . . .'' Judge Pierre N. Leval cut the witness off and called the
lawyers to the bench for a private conference. Later, Mr. Allen said only that
he heard Mr. Helms ''express himself on more than one occasion'' about the
conflict with the military over the figures.

'Highest Quality of Analysis'

Mr. Helms is not expected to testify at this trial. In a pre-trial affidavit
solicited by General Westmoreland's lawyers, he said that the ''disagreement''
over enemy strength was not ''fundamental to the conduct of the war,'' that he
was under no pressure from ''the military or any other source'' to accept low
numbers and that the estimate he signed ''represented the highest quality of
intelligence analysis given the 'softness' of much of the data.''

Mr. Allen said that, in 1975, when a Congressional inquiry was conducted into
the dispute, he was told by William Colby, who had succeeded Mr. Helms, to be
''very guarded'' in his House testimony. Mr. Allen recalled driving to Capitol
Hill with Mr. Colby and others on the day of their appearance. Mr. Colby, he
said, looked at him and said he ''didn't want to put ourselves in the position
of attacking the military.''

''I was expected to toe the line like a good soldier and participate in what
amounted to a a cover-up, a whitewash'' Mr. Allen told the jury, ''and I regret
I conformed. I just did not feel that I was prepared at that time to wash my own
and the agency's dirty linen in public.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from January 1964
to June 1968, contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had lied to the
President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the true size of the enemy.

Denied Setting 'Arbitrary Ceiling'

The general denied a charge on the broadcast that he had imposed an ''arbitrary
ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength. He testified that he deleted
the self-defense forces - newly estimated at 120,000 by his intelligence chief
in 1967 - because he believed that they were insignificant militarily and that
their inclusion at a higher number in the order of battle or the estimate for
the President would be misleading.

Until the summer and fall of 1967, when the C.I.A. and the military quarreled
over a new estimate, the military listed the enemy size at 298,000, including
about 70,000 self-defense forces and the Vietcong's political cadre as well. The
new estimate - which George Carver, who was then chief of Vietnamese affairs for
the C.I.A., has testified was a ''compromise'' - put enemy military strength at
223,000 to 248,000, excluding the self-defense forces. Moreover, the political
cadre was relegated to a separate listing, numbered at 75,000 to 85,000.

Yesterday, in response to a question by Judge Leval, Mr. Allen questioned the
diversion of the political cadre. ''They were armed and part of the enemy's
command and not just a group of politicians carrying weapons,'' he said. ''They
would fit the term paramilitary, as I construe the term.''

Earlier in the 15-week-old trial, Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, retired director
of the Defense Intelligence Agency, testified that only 85,000 to 90,000 enemy
troops took part in the Tet offensive. Other witnesses for General Westmoreland
used a similar figure.

Figure Based on Trip

But Mr. Allen said yesterday that his figure of 400,000 troops was based on a
trip he made to Vietnam in February 1968 with Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Philip Habib, a State Department official. The
military's estimate for the units in the January offensive, Mr. Allen told the
jury, was ''a gross understatement'' and excluded hundreds of assaults on
hamlets by forces not listed in the order of battle.

Mr. Allen said he learned on his trip that in one region in Vietnam, where an
intelligence officer in the field had reported that all but 3 of 33 enemy
battalions had been wiped out before Tet - with the remaining 3 ''cowering in
sanctuary in Cambodia'' - 45 battalions actually participated in the offensive
''at essentially full strength.''

''In essence,'' he testified, ''not only had 30 of them not been wiped out, but
the 33 had been reinforced by 12 more.''

Mr. Allen, who was calm and deliberate through most of his testimony, suddenly
became agitated when he recalled an incident in April 1968 involving General
Graham, who was then a colonel in General Westmoreland's command.

By then, Mr. Allen said, the C.I.A. had ''broken the constraints'' of the
military and was insisting, at a conference in Washington, on higher enemy force
estimates. But Colonel Graham, he said, ''embarked on another rambling attempt''
to portray the self-defense forces as unarmed ''old women and young preteen-age
kids with no military potential whatsoever.''

Leaning forward in the witness chair and nearly shouting, Mr. Allen said he had
challenged this characterization. ''Danny, I don't think you believe that for a
minute,'' he recalled remarking.

''Of course I don't believe it, but it's the command position and I'm sticking
to it,'' he said the colonel replied.

''That example of intellectual prostitution,'' Mr. Allen told the jury, was ''a
low point of my career - I got up and left the conference.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


THURSDAY, JANUARY 24, 1985 International

Philippine prosecutors accused the armed forces Chief of Staff and 25 other
people of complicity in the 1983 assassination of the opposition leader Benigno
S. Aquino Jr. All but one of the accused are soldiers. Most of them were members
of the Manila Airport detail on duty when Mr. Aquino was fatally shot as he
stepped off a plane after three years in the United States. (Page A1, Column 6.)


A new consensus on global interests of the United States and whether they should
be defended with military force should be forged by Americans, according to the
new chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The chairman, Senator
Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, said the nation had been uncertain about the use of
force in the conduct of foreign policy since the Vietnam War. (A1:5.)

56 Canadians died in Vietnam.  The thousands of Canadians who joined United
States forces are reticent about their participation in an unpopular war. Though
they share the problems of other Vietnam veterans, many of the Canadians do not
receive any benefits. (A1:5-6.) National

James A. Baker 3d won support from all members of the Senate Finance Committee,
virtually assuring that the Senate will confirm his nomination to be Treasury
Secretary. Mr. Baker, who is leaving the White House after four years as
President Reagan's chief of staff, encountered bipartisan misgivings about a
simplification of the income-tax system proposed by the Treasury. (A1:1.)

Methyl isocyanate has been released accidentally 28 times from the Union Carbide
plant in Institute, W.Va. over the last five years, the Environmental Protection
Agency reported. The chemical killed more than 2,000 people in Bhopal, India.
(A1:2-3.)

Thirteen sanctuary movement leaders pleaded not guilty in Federal Courts in
Tucson and Phoenix to illegally smuggling Central Americans into this country.
Meanwhile, about a hundred refugees they helped bring in gathered in a Tucson
synagogue for a two-day symposium condemning United States policy. (A10:1-2.)

Florida citrus crops that survived last winter's cold snap have not been so
lucky this year, as arctic temperatures have destroyed some orange and
grapefruit groves in the Indian River section on the state's east coast. The
only way growers can salvage frozen citrus is to get it quickly processed into
juice concentrate before warmer weather returns to rot the fruit. (A1:2-4.)

Administration policies on charities have prompted leaders of the nation's
nonprofit organizations to open a nationwide lobbying campaign. They say that
Federal grants to their programs have been cut by $13.5 billion in the last four
years. And now the Treasury has urged changes in tax laws that they fear will
reduce annual giving by individuals from $59.5 billion to $47.7 billion.
(A1:1-2.)

The Mayor of San Diego , Roger Hedgecock, testifying on charges that he
illegally funneled more than $350,000 into his 1983 campaign, said any financial
gain he did not disclose occurred because of oversights or without his
knowledge. (A13:1-3.) Metropolitan

Ten properties in the New York City region have been contracted by the MacArthur
Foundation of Chicago to be sold for nearly half a billion dollars. The sale,
which experts said represented the largest residential real- estate transaction
in the region, involves buildings in Manhattan, Queens and Nassau County.
(A1:4.)

A 10-alarm fire engulfed an eight- story warehouse on West 43d Street in
Manhattan last night, destroying a nearby firehouse and spreading embers to
buildings more than three blocks away. Fire officials summoned more than 300
firefighters and 60 vehicles to the area. (B3:2-5.)

Reducing low-level street crime, which in turn should curb violent crime, is the
goal of an expanded police program dealing with prostitution, drug dealing and
vandalism, Commissioner Benjamin Ward announced. The program aims to put more
emphasis on neighborhood crime control and less on the centralized 911 emergency
system. (B3:5-6.)

The police took two homeless people to municipal hospitals against their will
under a new city policy to get homeless people off the streets in extremely cold
weather. (B3:6.)

Virtually all the immigrants now arriving in New York City are Asians, blacks or
Hispanic people, according to the city's Office of Immigration Affairs. The
agency is preparing a study that lists the largest groups of newcomers from 1975
to 1980 as Dominicans, Russians, Chinese and Jamaicans. But the influx of Soviet
Jews has slowed in recent years to a trickle. (B4:6.)

James Beard, the chef, died of cardiac arrest in the New York Hospital- Cornell
Medical Center at the age of 81. Mr. Beard, a cookbook writer, was one of the
country's foremost authorities on food and drink. (B6:1-3.)

The new 22-cent stamp, issued by the Post Office in New York, bears the face of
the composer Jerome Kern. The new stamp went on sale, although the cost of a
first-class letter will not increase from 20 to 22 cents until Feb. 17. A ''D
series'' stamp worth 22 cents will also be issued. (B1:3-5.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AWARDS FOR BROADCAST JOURNALISM

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 478 words


Two continuing series, ABC's ''Nightline'' and PBS's ''Frontline'' won Alfred I.
duPont-Columbia University Awards for excellence in broadcast journalism last
night at Columbia's Low Library.

''Nightline,'' the nightly news-focus program whose award was picked up by its
anchor, Ted Koppel, was cited for its ''lasting contribution to television
journalism.'' ''Frontline,'' the regular hourlong series produced for public
television by the Documentary Consortium, was called ''the very best in
documentary journalism.''

Eleven other programs, including shows produced by CBS and NBC, and local radio
and television stations also won awards at the 43d annual presentation, as did
two other programs produced for public television, including WGBH-TV's 13-hour
''Vietnam: A Television History.''

CBS's ''60 Minutes'' won for its story about a man unjustly convicted to a life
sentence for robbery; ''NBC Nightly News'' won for an expose on financier Robert
Vesco; ''ABC World News Tonight'' won for its series on Soviet-American
relations.

The duPont-Columbia Award committee said of ''Vietnam: A Television History''
that ''the power and importance of this series will endure.'' A third PBS award
was won by ''The First Fifty Years: Reflections on U.S.-Soviet Relations,'' an
hourlong program combining archive film and new interviews.

Group W television and Medvideo, Limited won an award for their ''Whispering
Hope: Unmasking the Mystery of Alzheimer's.''

The first award given to a cable- produced program was won by Suburban
Cablevision of Avenel, N.J. Allan Wolper, the producer, accepted an award for
''Hillside: A Desegration Story,'' an episode in the service's ''Right to Know''
series. And Gabe Pressman, of WNBC-TV won a citation for his reports that
''sensitize viewers through incisive, informative accounts of city life.''

The ceremonies were hosted by John Chancellor of NBC News, and the silver baton
awards were handed out by Bryant Gumbel of NBC, Peter Jennings of ABC, Charles
Osgood of CBS, Judy Woodruff of PBS's ''MacNeil Lehrer Report,'' and R. E.
''Ted'' Turner, the chairman of the board and president of the Turner
Broadcasting System, which owns the Cable News Network.

Other awards went to: KOSU radio, Stillwater, Oklahoma, for:

''Selling the Public Spectrum;'' KRON-TV, San Francisco, for: ''Climate of

Death;'' WJZ-TV, Baltimore, for: ''Baby Boom: The

Pig in the Python;'' WJXT-TV, Jacksonville, Fla., for: ''The

Smell of Money;'' WCAX-TV, Burlington, Vt., for: ''Patterns of

Practice;'' NBC News, for: ''First Camera: Leader LaRouche.''


Citations were given to: KFGO radio, Fargo, N.D., for: ''The Blizzard

of '84;'' WCBS radio, New York, for: ''The Phone

Mess;'' KDFW-TV, Dallas, for: ''Emergency Call for

Help;'' WBBM-TV, Chicago, for: ''Elevator Rip-

Off;'' WBZ-TV, Boston, for the I-Team.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BANGKOK DISPLAYS VIETNAM SOLDIERS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 24


Huynh Quoc Tuan, his rumpled shirt too big for his small frame, was barefoot and
trembling this morning when Thailand's top military chiefs paraded him before
the press.

A week ago this 18-year-old plumber from Saigon who did not want to be a
soldier, came over Ampil's Bridge No. 3 and deserted the Vietnamese Army.

According to Thai authorities, more than 30 of Mr. Tuan's fellow soldiers have
done the same since early January, when the Vietnamese took the Ampil border
camp, the headquarters of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front. The
Thais say the defections have become regular; two more were recorded Wednesday.

Today Mr. Tuan and five other Vietnamese defectors, two of them officers, were
put on display in the Thai Supreme Command's cavernous briefing room in Bangkok.
Under the glare of televison lights, they were encouraged to tell their stories.


Insights Into Hanoi Strategies

Thai officers say defectors like these have given them valuable insights into
Hanoi's strategies in this year's dry- season offensive. No high-ranking
officers are reported to have deserted, however, so reports coming in are mainly
from lower-level personnel in the field.

The six young men at today's briefing, none older than 24, were all from the
south of Vietnam. They said they had been sent to the Cambodian front to battle
the three armed groups trying to overthrow the Phnom Penh Government because
forces from the north of Vietnam, who had previously done the job, were being
moved to the Vietnam- China border.

The defectors reported through their spokesman, Second Lieut. Nguyen Van Hung
(who in turn spoke through a Thai Army interpreter), that the Vietnamese had
been told to clear out the Cambodian resistance camps this year so that the
border could be turned over to Cambodian troops.

The Vietnamese said they had been ordered to dig canals or trenches along the
Cambodian side of the border to obstruct troops and equipment entering Cambodia
from Thailand. ''We were told to prevent these Cambodians from geting into the
country,'' they said.

All six, flanked by a Buddhist shrine and a portrait of the King of Thailand,
and carefully numbered and identified for the reporters and cameras, said they
wanted a new home ''anywhere where someone would take us.''

Restricted Military Areas

A spokesman for the Thai Supreme Command said after the briefing that defectors
were being kept in restricted military areas, ''not prisons,'' and no decisions
had been made about their futures.

In the past, deserters from the Vietnamese Army in Cambodia, which Hanoi's
troops invaded in 1978 to overthrow the Khmer Rouge Government of Pol Pot, have
sometimes found their way to border camps where anti-Vietnamese Cambodians, or
exiled Vietnamese civilians have taken refuge. There have been attacks on these
Vietnamese troops by other camp inmates, refugees say.

Along the Thai-Cambodian border today, Vietnamese forces were reported to be
continuing to reinforce their positions near the Khmer Rouge strongholds in the
mountains southeast of the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet. There were also
Thai Army reports of sporadic fighting farther north between the Vietnamese and
the forces of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front near the Rithisen and
Nong Chan camps, which fell to Hanoi's troops last month.

The Khmer Rouge, meanwhile, was reported to have struck again at Vietnamese
supply lines in Cambodia along a 30-mile stretch of road between Poipet and
Sisophon, according to Thai officers.

Reports about Khmer Rouge activity are difficult to confirm, since the Communist
forces do not maintain links with the press, as do their two non- Communist
partners in the Cambodian opposition coalition. Information on Khmer Rouge
activities is therefore often drawn from their own clandestine radio broadcasts
or Thai military reports.



Vietnamese Attack Camp

ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Friday, Jan. 25 (AP) - Vietnamese poured artillery
barrages into the last civilian camp of a guerrilla group, forcing the flight of
more than 21,000 people into Thailand, relief officials said today.

The International Committee of the Red Cross said 14 people were killed and 26
wounded in the strike against the Dong Rak camp of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front. The casualties, all civilians, were taken by ambulance to the
Red Cross hospital at Khao-I-Dang, an hourlong drive.

Relief officials, who asked not to be identified, said the Vietnamese opened
fire at 6 P.M. Thursday and continued the bombardment for three hours.

The refugees were reported moving south from the camp toward an evacuation area
known as Site 2.

The officials said the artillery attack was not followed by an infantry assault.
It was not known if the Vietnamese later entered Dong Rak, which had few if any
defenders.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Condemns Private Raids Into Laos for Missing G.I.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


The United States Government said today that it strongly opposed private raids
into Laos in search of Americans still missing from the Indochina war.

''Such missions are illegal, counterproductive and serve neither the interests
of our country nor the families of the missing in action,'' the State Department
spokesman, Bernard Kalb, said.

''The spoiling of crash sites by private groups jeopardizes future
identification of remains,'' Mr. Kalb added.

He said the statement was prompted by news reports suggesting that a privately
organized raid had taken place or might take place later. He said he had no
details.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. AIDE TELLS JURY OF 'SELF DECEPTION' BY U.S.

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


George W. Allen, a former deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central
Intelligence Agency, testified yesterday that the production in late 1967 of a
''misleading'' intelligence estimate on enemy strength in South Vietnam was part
of a broader ''self deception'' by the Administration of President Lyndon B.
Johnson regarding progress in the war.

Mr. Allen, testifying for CBS in the trial of the libel suit brought by Gen.
William C. Westmoreland, said the White House had tried to ''head off mounting
public opposition to the war'' in the summer of 1967 through a ''massive
public-relations campaign to influence, exaggerate and misrepresent.''

It was in this context, Mr. Allen said on cross-examination in Federal District
Court in Manhattan, that he once described a dispute over the enemy strength
estimate as ''making a mountain out a molehill.''

''I was referring to the fact that the production of this dishonest estimate was
only a small part of that bigger issue, that bigger exercise by the
Administration, which in fact, caused its loss of credibility,'' Mr. Allen told
the jury. And that effort, he said, ''produced an area of self-deception to the
extent that neither the Congress, nor members of the Administration, nor the
population was prepared for the psychological impact mounted by the Communist
forces on an unprecedented scale'' during the Tet offensive in January 1968.



Played 'the Good Bureaucrat'

Mr. Allen, who retired from the C.I.A. in 1979 but still works under contract
for the agency, portrayed himself as someone who had compromised his own
integrity in 1967 and played ''the good bureaucrat'' until this case forced him
to ''cross the Rubicon'' and confront his own failings and those of the
Government.

But David Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, suggested that the
58-year-old witness had tailored his testimony to help Samuel A. Adams, a former
C.I.A. colleague who is one of the defendants at the trial before Judge Pierre
N. Leval.

Q. Isn't it a fact, Mr. Allen, that you are here testifying in order to help
your old protege, Sam Adams?

A. That is not the case at all, Mr.  Dorsen. I did not come to this courtroom
simply to defend or come to the aid of a beleaguered former colleague of mine.

Mr. Allen, who completed his testimony yesterday as the second witness for CBS,
said he wanted to assist the jury and the public in understanding ''the
responsibility that many officers in the intelligence community have, to
insuring that honest estimates are presented to the policymakers.''

Verified the Oath

Mr. Dorsen then brought out that, at the start of the second day of a pre-trial
deposition in August 1983, Mr. Allen had asked to have the oath ''to tell the
truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth'' repeated for him. It was
''the whole truth'' part that he wanted ''verified,'' Mr. Allen said then.

Yesterday, Mr. Allen explained that he told the truth on the first day of the
deposition but hadn't listened to the oath when it was read. He said he had
''lain awake'' all the previous night ''reviewing the seriousness of the
situation and the events of the last 15 years,'' during which time, he said, he
had ''rationalized and been evasive'' regarding the 1967 estimate on enemy
strength in Vietnam.

Having the oath ''reaffirmed'' on the second day of the deposition, he said,
''was a symbolic gesture by me that the time had come to stop dissembling, no
matter what the personal embarrassment to me.''

General Westmoreland's suit stems from a 1982 CBS documentary - ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - which charged that the general's command had
engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to minimize North Vietnamese and Vietcong
capabilities. As part of this ''conscious effort,'' the broadcast said, the
general removed the hamlet-based self-defense forces from the official listing
of enemy strength known as the order of battle and refused to allow a current
count for them in a 25-page special estimate for President Johnson in November
1967.

Military 'Insignificance'

General Westmoreland contends that the documentary defamed him by saying he had
lied to the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the true size and
nature of the enemy. He testified that he deleted the self-defense forces -
newly estimated in 1967 at 120,000, an increase of 50,000 - because he had come
to believe that they were insignificant militarily and that reference to the
higher number would mislead Washington and the press.

In addition to Mr. Adams, who served as a paid consultant for the documentary,
the individual defendants in the case are George Crile, the producer of the
broadcast, and Mike Wallace, its narrator.

Under questioning yesterday by Mr. Dorsen, Mr. Allen acknowledged telling Mr.
Crile in early 1981, when the producer's investigation was getting under way,
that he would not appear on the documentary if it attacked the C.I.A. Mr. Crile,
Mr. Allen said, assured him that that was not his intention.

''Did Mr. Crile tell you that 'I'm a journalist and I can't make any promises
till I hear all the evidence?' ''

''Not as you worded it,'' Mr. Allen said. ''But he told me that he had gathered
considerable evidence against the military and was not at that time targeting
the C.I.A.''



'Arbitrary Ceiling'

Like Mr. Allen, Mr. Adams favored the inclusion of the self-defense forces in
the order of battle and argued, at a series of conferences with representatives
of General Westmoreland in 1967, that the total strength of the enemy should be
estimated at about 500,000. The military successfully advocated a total of about
300,000 - which the documentary described as an ''arbitrary ceiling.''

Yesterday, as he had on Wednesday, Mr. Allen accused his superiors at the C.I.A.
of ''caving in'' to the military.

Mr. Allen said the military had let the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies
know of the higher estimate for the self-defense forces. But the important
thing, he said, was that the military would not permit that number to be
included in the estimate for the President.

Mr. Allen conceded that he had not discussed the order of battle with General
Westmoreland in 1967 and that, unlike Mr. Adams, he had not complained to a
review board about the estimate for the President before it was signed and sent
to the White House.

He also acknowledged writing a draft statement for an inquiry into the dispute
in 1975 by the House Select Committee on Intelligence in which he said ''I am
not aware of any instance in which the C.I.A., as Mr. Adams suggests,
deliberately modified its assessments on Vietnam to accommodate the policy
interests of any administration.'' And he admitted testifying before the
committee that he was ''able to accept the final agreed-upon figures as
reflected in the estimate'' in November 1967.

But Mr. Allen said that, under ''instructions'' by William Colby, then the
Director of Central Intelligence, he had been ''less than candid'' with the
committee.

''Make them dig,'' Mr. Allen said he was told by Mr. Colby and by Mitchell
Rogovin, the C.I.A.'s general counsel.

The remark brought smiles to the faces of both Mr. Dorsen and David Boies, the
lawyer for CBS.

''Had you on other occasions spoken to lawyers who gave you similar comments?''
Mr. Dorsen asked.

Not like ''make them dig,'' said Mr. Allen.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'FALCON AND SNOWMAN,' STORY OF 2 SPIES

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words


IN January 1977, Christopher

Boyce and Daulton Lee, who

had gone to school together in

the upper-middle-class southern California community of Palos Verdes, were
arrested on charges of having sold - over a period of two years - top-secret
United States Government documents to the Soviet Union through the Russian
Embassy in Mexico City. Both men, then in their 20's, were eventually convicted
and packed off to prison, Lee with a life term and Boyce for 40 years.

Unlike Robert Lindsey's factual book on which it is based, John Schlesinger's
new film, ''The Falcon and the Snowman,'' has the effect of being less about the
vagaries of international espionage than about the all- pervasive
second-rateness of United States Government functionaries and of the society
that produced Boyce and Lee.

This is apparent in the muddled, often contradictory motives of the young men,
in the kinds of lives lived by their well-to-do, remarkably permissive families,
in the spies' dubious aspirations and accomplishments, in the epic sloppiness of
the Government's security system and, especially, in the ease with which Boyce
and Lee seem to have outwitted the Government for so long.


This may well be the real point of Mr. Schlesinger, the director, and of Steven
Zaillian, who wrote the screenplay. ''The Falcon and the Snowman,'' which opens
today at the Coronet and other theaters, is a very curious though effective
entertainment, a scathing social satire in the form of an outrageously clumsy
spy story told with a completely straight face. Boyce and Lee are as lightweight
in their cynicism as their society's role models are in their patriotism.

Of the two young men, the more complex is Boyce (Timothy Hutton), born and
raised in a practicing Catholic family and, until the late 1960's, committed to
the conservative views of his father (Pat Hingle), an ex- F.B.I. man. Eventually
disenchanted by what he sees to be the Government's duplicity in Vietnam, Boyce,
like many others of his generation, begins to nurture aimlessness as a kind of
protest, his only abiding passion being falconry.

Boyce gives up plans to study for the priesthood and reluctantly takes a job,
arranged by his father, in a company working under contract to the Central
Intelligence Agency, monitoring information from and about spy satellites.

His best friend, Lee (Sean Penn), is the sort of guy who has probably been
hustling, one way or another, since he was in the nursery. At the opening of
''The Falcon and the Snowman,'' Lee is living at home, at least most of the
time, pushing drugs and being regularly busted and just as regularly put on
probation by local authorities who appear to be less benign than totally stupid.
Even Lee's parents are lenient to the point of lunacy, believing that Lee's
little drug transactions are simply ''a phase.''

In the course of his job, Boyce realizes that the C.I.A. is not only collecting
defense information but is also busily involved in attempting to influence the
internal affairs of Australia, where one of its most important
satellite-monitoring stations is located. This knowledge supposedly leads to a
cynicism so profound that he decides to pass top-secret information to the
Russians, not only to hit back at the United States Government but also to make
some spare cash.

Though Lee's abiding passion is drugs - for his own use and for sale to his
friends - he agrees to join Boyce in the espionage scheme for the money they'll
make. With amazingly little trouble, the two men set up their operation. Lee
makes the initial contact with the Russians in Mexico and subsequently acts as
courier for the material that Boyce smuggles out of his job with no
interference.


The fascination in ''The Falcon and the Snowman'' is not in why the two men
behave the way they do - Boyce's idealism is not especially convincing, though
Lee's manic, drug-supported dreams of glory are - but in how they managed to get
away with their operation for so long. One of the points suggested afterward,
but never proved, is that the C.I.A. was on to them long before their arrest.
Had this been substantiated, the two might have claimed entrapment and got away
with lesser sentences.

Lee hangs around the Russian Embassy so brazenly that even a dozy cabdriver
might suspect that something unsavory is up. When he makes one of his whirlwind
visits back to Palos Verdes, where he is wanted for probation violations and
other unfinished legal problems, he throws fancy parties at his parents' house
and brags about his Mexican drug connections and his dealings with the Russians.

The discipline in the office where Boyce works is hilariously lax. Being
available only to those few people with top clearance, the office, called ''the
black vault,'' becomes the scene for daily hijinks. These include impromptu
cocktail parties, drug-smoking and, when they're really bored, game-playing
(including a World War III board game called Risk), all of which allow Boyce
time to go about his private business.


Though the movie would seem to want to make Boyce a more appealing character
than is possible, Mr. Hutton is quite fine in a role that must remain
mysterious. His Boyce seems to be well-meaning but more than a little
muddle-headed. Even so, he's a model of rectitude compared to the loose-talking,
heroin-hooked Lee, the biggest, most flamboyant role Mr. Penn has yet done. It's
Mr. Penn who dominates the screen with a performance that, like the film, is
arresting in its bizarre details and as cold as ice.

Very good in supporting roles are Mr. Hingle, David Suchet as the spies' main
contact at the Russian Embassy in Mexico, Lori Singer as Boyce's girlfriend and
Dorian Harewood as one of Boyce's colleagues in ''the black vault.'' Mr.
Schlesinger's usual discipline falters only once, when, toward the end, Boyce
goes by the theater where Miss Singer is selling tickets and bids her goodbye
under a marquee announcing Bunuel's ''Exterminating Angel.''

''The Falcon and the Snowman'' makes no reference to the epilogue that Mr.
Lindsey, who is Los Angeles bureau chief for The New York Times and covered the
story for The Times, added to the book's paperback edition - about Boyce's
escape from prison. That tale, and the story of Boyce's eventual recapture, are
the subject of Mr. Lindsey's second book, ''The Flight of the Falcon.''


Friends and Felons

THE FALCON AND THE SNOWMAN, directed by John Schlesinger; screenplay by Steven
Zaillian, based on the book by Robert Lindsey; director of photography, Allen
Daviau; edited by Richard Marden; music by Pat Metheny and Lyle Mays; produced
by Gabriel Katzka and John Schlesinger; released by Orion Pictures.  At Coronet,
Third Avenue and 59th Street; Movieland, Broadway and 47th Street; 34th Street
East, near Second Avenue; 23d Street West Triplex, between Eighth and Ninth
Avenues and other theaters. Running time: 125 minutes. This film is rated R.
Christopher BoyceTimothy Hutton Daulton LeeSean Penn Mr. BoycePat Hingle Mrs.
BoyceJoyce Van Patten Dr. LeeRichard Dysart Mrs. LeePriscilla Pointer David
LeeChris Makepeace AlexDavid Suchet LanaLori Singer


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Timothy Hutton and Sean Penn

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'FANDANGO,' COMING OF AGE IN 1971

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


THE GROOVERS, a pack of college buddies, turn graduation into the occasion for
one last blowout in ''Fandango,'' which takes place in the shadow of the Vietnam
War. The year is 1971 and draft notices have arrived for several of the group's
members, so their antics have both fraternity-house humor and a hysterical edge.
Kevin Reynolds, who wrote and directed ''Fandango,'' is for the most part making
just another coming-of-age film. But at its best, his debut feature has an
appealing boisterousness, and it successfully walks a fine line between
sensitivity and swagger.

''Fandango,'' which opens today at the Gemini, takes place in Texas, which means
the characters drink endless beers and call one another ''son.'' Chief among
them is Gardner Barnes, played dashingly by Kevin Costner, who suggests what the
Tom Cruise of ''Risky Business'' might look like after a six-month bender.
Gardner and four friends - one who's a scold (Judd Nelson), one who's just
canceled his wedding (Sam Robards), one who's nearly comatose (Brian Cesak) and
a huge, quiet one who shows equal interest in ''The Prophet'' and ''The
Incredible Hulk'' - embark on a long, dusty journey.


They sleep beside the wreckage of an old movie set, because Gardner thinks James
Dean was there to shoot ''Giant.'' They bathe in a car wash. They force one
Groover to take parachute-jumping lessons from a hippie (Marvin J. McIntyre)
whose habit of talking with his mouth full is one of the film's low points and
whose casual, utterly indecipherable diagram of flight instructions is about its
highest.

The note of hip nihilism on which ''Fandango'' begins is eventually balanced out
by sentimentality. And there are moments, particularly those revolving around a
speechless character known only as ''The Girl'' (Suzy Amis), when Mr. Reynolds
goes way overboard on the sentimental side. Gardner used to love her; we know
that from a sequence in which he frolics with her in a field of wildflowers.
Then he lost her; we know that when we see him leave her on a sand dune, holding
a kite string.


Mr. Reynolds isn't adroit with this sort of thing, but he does have a way with
the sight gags and off-the-wall humor that make this a notable debut. And he
brings a good deal of feeling to the moments in which the film's twin specters -
Vietnam and maturity - intrude upon the frantic festivities.

''Fandango'' is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It contains brief
nudity on the part of the story's various practical jokers.



Growing-Up Pains

FANDANGO, directed and written by Kevin Reynolds; director of photography,
Thomas Del Ruth; film editor, Arthur Schmidt; music by Alan Silvestri; produced
by Tim Zinnemann; released by Warner Bros. At Gemini Twin, 64th Street and
Second Avenue. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is rated PG. Gardner
BarnesKevin Costner Phil HicksJudd Nelson Kenneth WaggenerSam Robards
DormanChuck Bush LesterBrian Cesak JudyElizabeth Daily The GirlSuzy Amis Truman
SparksMarvin J. McIntyre


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AUTHOR IS CALLED AGENT FOR TAIWAN

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: TAIPEI, Taiwan, Jan. 25


A senior Taiwan official said today that Henry Liu, a Chinese-American author
killed in California last October, had been a paid informant for the Nationalist
Government for more than three years before his death.

The official, who asked not to be identified, said Mr. Liu supplied the Taipei
Government with information about China, mainly military intelligence, based on
four trips he had made to the mainland.

Earlier this week, Mr. Liu's widow, Helen, denied unconfirmed reports that her
husband had been a paid agent of the Taiwan Government or an informer for the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

The Taiwan official said he was making the disclosure to show that Mr. Liu was a
''complicated identity'' and that the Taiwan Government had no motive to have
him killed.

Book Criticized Taiwan's Leader

Mr. Liu was the author of a book critical of Taiwan's President, Chiang
Ching-kuo.

Prosecutors in California have issued an arrest warrant charging a purported
Taiwan underworld figure, Chen Chi-li, in connection with the murder, and the
F.B.I. has asked that he be extradited from Taiwan.

The issue of the Taiwan Government's involvement in the Liu murder arose from
testimony Mr. Chen gave Taiwan investigators on Jan. 13, stating that three
officials in the Military Intelligence Agency were involved in the case. The
nature of their involvement has not been disclosed.

Shortly thereafter, the Government announced the arrest of Chen Hu-men, a
colonel in the intelligence agency, and the suspension of Vice Adm.  Wang
Hsi-ling, chief of the agency.

The Taiwan official who spoke today said Mr. Liu's last report as a paid agent
was a handwritten memorandum, dated Oct. 1, 1984, discussing Chinese troop
movements along the China-Vietnam border.

The official added that Mr. Liu's report was mailed from Redwood City, Calif.,
and signed with an alias, Liu Hsiang Chen.

Mr. Liu, an American citizen, was shot to death last Oct. 15 at his home in Daly
City, Calif., a suburb of San Francisco.

''Two weeks before he was shot, he was still providing information to us,'' the
Taiwan official said.

In the Oct. 1 memorandum, the official added, Mr. Liu wrote of a
''division-size'' offensive on April 20, 1984, by China against Vietnamese
forces. The official also produced photocopies of a report that he said was
written by Mr. Liu and a deposit slip for a few thousand dollars, purportedly in
payment for the information, from a San Francisco bank. He asked that the name
of the bank and the exact amount not be mentioned.

No Extradition Treaty

Another senior Taiwan official said the chief suspect in the murder, Mr. Chen,
who is purported to be the head of the Bamboo Gang in Taiwan, a crime syndicate,
will not be deported to the United States.

''He will be charged here,'' said James C. Y. Soong, a top Government official.
There is no extradition treaty between the United States and Taiwan. The two do
not have official diplomatic relations.

Despite this, State Department officials expressed the hope that Mr. Chen could
be deported to stand trial in California. ''Henry Liu is an American citizen,
murdered in the United States,'' an American official said. ''We think justice
ought to be done.''

Since 1979, when Washington switched its diplomatic recognition from Taipei to
Peking, there have been no official relations between the United States and
Taiwan, but the actual relationship between the two countries is sizable and
growing. Taiwan is now America's third-largest trade partner. In addition,
Washington still sells Taiwan large amounts of military hardware.

All these relations, American officials point out, are based on practical
interests, not narrow legalistic grounds, which they say Taiwan seems to be
applying in the Liu murder case.



'That's a Lie,' Widow Says



SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 25 - Mr. Liu's widow, asked about the Taiwan official's
comments today, denied that her husband had been a paid agent.

''That's a lie,'' she said.

Asked about the purported alias, Liu Hsiang Chen, she said, ''My husband never
used that name.''

She said that she had seen a copy of the letter in the Chinese press and that
the signature was not her husband's style of writing.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.N. Chief Seeks Talks On Fighting in Cambodia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 26


Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar called today for negotiations to end
the ''suffering, destruction and agony'' in Cambodia, and prepared to visit
refugees from a Vietnamese offensive against rebel camps near the Thai border.
About 62,000 Cambodians have recently been moved to the camp after fleeing the
fighting.

The United Nations leader, who will also visit Vietnam during his trip, said at
a banquet given by Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda that he would ''do my utmost
to bridge the differences and facilitate the search for a peaceful resolution''
to the fighting between Vietnamese soldiers and Cambodian rebels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
CAMELOT REVISITED, WITH ALL THE ICONOGRAPHY

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words


''Robert Kennedy and His Times'' is good of its kind. Hagiography is served, but
the conventions of respectable biography aren't entirely flouted. The seven-hour
CBS mini- series sentimentalizes Mr. Kennedy, without quite sanctifying him. It
dramatizes his life, without making it unrecognizable. At the same time,
familiar icons are brought forth while history is revisited. Sometimes this is
like a processional: Here are the Freedom Riders; then comes the Cuban missile
crisis; now President Kennedy is shot in Dallas. Touch football in Hyannis Port
is interspersed. Robert Kennedy, as played by Brad Davis, is an upper-class
urchin, a tough kid with a veneer of arrogance, who finds wisdom with the years.
Camelot is very much on display here, only in this televised version it is the
death of Robert, not John, that we mourn. He is the king who would have saved us
all.

The three-part mini-series, which begins tonight at 8 with a three-hour episode,
is adapted from Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.'s biography. This means that history
is not dealt with lightly, and that's a strength of the production. In a curious
way, it's a weakness, too. Robert Kennedy wasn't really at the center of great
events; the great events happened around him. His brother was President, and in
the years between Dallas and his own death almost five years later, he was heir
apparent. His mark in history is dependent not so much on what was, but on what
might have been. ''Robert Kennedy and His Times'' suggests there would have been
greatness.


Therefore, the mini-series sees Mr. Kennedy's life as something like a moral
journey. Perhaps it was; many people, even some of his critics, believed he grew
in stature. The television production, meanwhile, applies hindsight. In the
first hour tonight, Robert Kennedy, 26 years old, meets Nehru in India. It is
1951. ''You must start demanding change and stop fearing it,'' Nehru says,
referring to what the United States must do about Indochina. Mr. Kennedy looks
thoughtful. An instant later, Robert and John Kennedy, then a Congressman, are
in Saigon. John Kennedy is on a fact-finding tour; Robert is his aide. Robert
Kennedy disputes a French colonel. It is clear he finds colonialism abhorrent.

Thus, the message: If Robert Kennedy had lived and taken his rightful place in
the White House, he would have opposed colonialism. Therefore, there would have
been peace with honor in Vietnam. Indeed, Vietnam is a skein in the television
production, and it's also a problem for Marvin J. Chomsky, the director, and
Walon Green, the scriptwriter. They must distance the Kennedy Administration
from the war. They must also prove that Robert Kennedy was enlightened. It's
tricky. The mini- series doesn't mention the Bay of Pigs, the disastrous
American-sponsored invasion of Cuba in 1961; it doesn't fit in with the approved
hagiography. But Vietnam is different. It's too big to be ignored.

So, how did we get into Vietnam? A general tells President Kennedy - vapidly
played by Cliff De Young; he's the president of a college fraternity, not of a
country - that the United States must send 8,000 troops to help Ngo Dihn Diem.
(The Administration's apparent connivance in Diem's assassination in 1963 isn't
mentioned, either.) Clearly, it's the military that involved us in Vietnam.
Neither the President nor his brother had anything to do with it. When the
general makes his request, Mr. Davis's Robert Kennedy looks skeptical; it's the
same look he gave the French colonel. Obviously, Robert Kennedy knows better
than to send troops, but for reasons of his own he's not speaking out.


And so it goes; history isn't really bent, but it is burnished. Tomorrow night's
episode begins with old newsreel film labeled ''Vietnam, 1966.'' A narrator says
it's the Tet holidays, and there's a ''massive Communist offensive.'' (In fact,
the Tet Offensive was in 1968, but no matter.) Then we see Lyndon Johnson (G. D.
Spradlin) pleading for national unity. Robert Kennedy, however, gives a
different kind of speech. ''I don't believe,'' he says, ''the use of military
force can solve the problem of poverty in Vietnam.'' No one ever said it would,
of course, but that's besides the point. An instant later, Mr. Kennedy is in
Paris, talking to a French official. He is told that if the United States stops
the bombing, Hanoi will negotiate. Mr. Kennedy brings the message to Washington,
but Lyndon Johnson ignores it.

That's tricky, too, and ''Robert Kennedy and His Times'' is simplifying. It's
saying that if President Johnson had only listened to Robert Kennedy the world
would have been different; he alone had the key. In real life, however, the
Canadian diplomat Chester Ronning carried a similar message about the bombing to
Washington; so did various unofficial emissaries. Vietnam scholars today still
debate the significance of these messages. The times were more complicated than
the television production would have us believe.


Similarly, the production, by omission, suggests that Mr. Kennedy, alone among
senators, had doubts about Vietnam. Wayne Morse, wherever he is, must be
furious. Then, when Mr. Kennedy does decide that he'll run for the Presidency,
the mini-series insists that politics has nothing to do with it. In real life,
Mr. Kennedy announced his candidacy four days after Eugene McCarthy came within
300 votes of winning the New Hampshire primary and proving that Lyndon Johnson
could be beaten. In the mini-series, it doesn't happen quite that way.

Thus, Mr. Kennedy makes his decision before the New Hampshire primary. He and
Ethel Kennedy (Veronica Cartwright) are saddling a horse. She asks him if he'll
run; he says he doesn't have public appeal. ''You mean the appeal Jack had,''
Mrs. Kennedy says. Mr. Davis's Robert Kennedy looks thoughtful and mounts the
horse. Away he rides, faster and faster. Music swells; trees and fields slip by.
The visual message is clear: He is riding to the rescue of his fellow Americans.
When he returns to the barn, he dismounts. ''I'm going to do it,'' he says. Mrs.
Kennedy, looking pleased, hugs the horse.

Perhaps it really did happen that way, although in a television series like this
that's inconsequential. Since ''The Missiles of October,'' an ABC film in 1974,
there seems to have been a new production about the Kennedys each season. The
iconography is what's important. It's meant to look good and resonate in our
memories: living rooms with chintz sofas and family photographs in silver
frames, the compound at Hyannis Port, sailboats, touch football, even pillbox
hats. In ''Robert Kennedy and His Times,'' Mr. Davis almost always appears with
his shirt sleeves rolled up. Brutus, the Labrador retriever, snuffles about.
Small children frolic at Hickory Hill. All that's part of the iconography, too.


At the same time, famous people tumble in and out. Mr. Spradlin's Lyndon Johnson
isn't nearly as forceful as the real President Johnson was, and Ned Beatty's J.
Edgar Hoover seems like a nebbish. On the other hand, Roy Cohn (Joe Pantoliano)
hyperventilates and gets hysterical. Part of the attraction in all the Kennedy
films is seeing how the film makers will show us the famous people, even though,
by now, some of the roles are standardized. ''In Robert Kennedy and His Times,''
Jack Warden is Joseph Kennedy Sr. and Beatrice Straight is Rose Kennedy. He is
cranky and stern; she is smiling and wise. That's how we expect them to be.

Meanwhile, Mr. Davis isn't bad, especially when he's being cocky, and after a
few minutes he really does begin to look like Robert Kennedy. His part is
underwritten, but that's also a convention of Kennedy films. Most parts are
underwritten. History weighs heavily on television writers, and there's
something like an approved version for productions about the Kennedys. Only the
nuances are allowed to change. ''Robert Kennedy and His Times'' is produced by
Rick Rosenberg and Robert Christiansen.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
TAKING COMEDY SERIOUSLY

BYLINE: By Walter Kerr

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1502 words


Comedy is perfectly all right in its place, but it's got to mind its manners.
If, for instance, you are going to have a serious play about a young man haunted
by his experience of Vietnam (again) and about the obtuseness of parents who
never will understand what the boy is going through (again), you can't get a
real dramatic wallop at the end of the evening if you are going to spend the
first hour of the enterprise kidding audiences into thinking they've bought
tickets to a farce.

That, I'm afraid, is what director Michael Attenborough and playwright James
Duff tried to do with ''The Home Front,'' possibly hastening that play's recent
demise. I have mentioned Mr. Attenborough first because I suspect that's where
the first blame lies; it's conceivable that if Mr. Duff's dialogue had been read
through-and- through straight it might have been less than thrilling but it
would surely have made more sense. As things stood, even so fine an actress as
Frances Sternhagen (mother of the family) had been forced to giddy up the
proceedings until she seemed a calliope in hair-curlers, flouncing about the
premises as though the piece had been written 40 years earlier and been turned
down by Billie Burke.

Along with father Carroll O'Connor, Miss Sternhagen was occupied with a lot of
keep-out-of-the-icebox domestic dithers that in no sense paved the way for an
ultimate scene in which the young veteran - gun gripped in both fists -
threatened to kill the lot of them. The tone was all awry.

I know it's risky to try to apportion responsibility for this sort of mismatch,
and I could easily be doing Mr. Attenborough a disservice. However, I'll give
you a reason why I feel on fairly solid ground. Mr. Attenborough seemed
strangely inattentive to the reality of what was going on in ''The Home Front.''
Example. Between scenes in the second act, some relatives - for whom Miss
Sternhagen had been decorating the living room with paper statuettes of Pilgrims
- did indeed arrive. We didn't see them, but after a scene-break we were told
that they'd been there. They'd apparently arrived for the holiday gala, the
festive board had been laid out, there'd been a fracas about the proper way to
carve the turkey, Mr. O'Connor had become agitated enough to cut himself with an
electric carving knife, and the newcomers had huffily marched off home again. As
I say, since all of this reportedly took place while the curtain was down, we
saw none of it.

But, heavens to Betsy, shouldn't we have seen some evidence that guests had come
and gone? Somewhere in that cathedral-raftered, immaculately kept living room
shouldn't there have been a chair that had been moved slightly, a sofa pillow
bunched up because someone had used it, an unwrapped gift brought along for the
occasion, maybe salt and pepper shakers or even a wrinkled tablecloth still left
on the visible table? Mind you, I'm not asking for anything as extravagant as
blood stains on the wall, testifying to Mr. O'Connor's mishap. But I would have
liked to believe that a few people had gathered here, and that while they were
gathered some untoward things happened. It would have helped me to believe - not
crucially, but somewhat - if there had been just one lonely glass half-filled
with watered bourbon and melting ice, left on the floor beside a settee.

Alas, the stage picture told us nothing. There it stood, as tidy and untouched
as a furniture display in a department store show window, virtually defying us
to imagine that a doorbell had rung and someone had answered it. And if we
couldn't believe a little thing like that, how were we going to get through the
big blowoff that came when comedy had been abandoned and the need for sober
reckoning was upon us? Tough.


On the other hand, what I like best about Whoopi Goldberg's comedy is that she
knows when to bid it goodbye. Miss Goldberg has been doing her one-woman show at
the Lyceum for some weeks now, and I'm sure everyone's heard how character-funny
she can be. Doing an extended bit as an ''educated junkie,'' she is pleased to
inform us that she has, for the sake of her habit, managed to purloin some
''gold-plated digital escargot forks,'' and she's so lofty about it that you can
imagine her using them the minute she's finished shooting up. She has, I
believe, more than the usual number of fingers on both hands, and those fingers
keep floating about like the tentacles of a lost octopus as she details, with a
drool, the history of her journeys, foreign and domestic, through a slightly
blurred world.

She is extremely accurate as a 14-year-old strewing ''you knows'' and ''likes''
and ''hang outs'' through her giddily cluttered sentences, and every once in a
while a satisfying irony makes its appearance. I especially liked her throwaway
reassurance that in Jamaica ''we all wear straw hats.'' And I was quite
unexpectedly cheered by her confident ''I know I look good,'' a statement she is
prepared to validate by giving herself a resounding kiss on the shoulder.

Her sketches do tend to run on a bit, and I flatly didn't believe that, as a
junkie in Amsterdam, she'd touched a certain book on the shelves of the attic
that once sheltered Anne Frank and immediately found the wall opening wide to
disclose the Frank's family quarters. That room was either open to the public or
it wasn't, and I couldn't credit - in an evening filled with caricature - the
fortuitous disclosure. As the teen-ager, she rather belabors a joke in which she
uses the initials PG to indicate that she is pregnant, whereas everyone (a
priest, a nun, her mother) takes the initials to mean that she's talking about
the movies (Parental Guidance, I guess). That's a reach, and it's overworked. I
think she tends to use all of the jokes she can think of on a given subject,
when a little weeding out would do wonders.

But she is often working her way to a transition from humor into seriousness,
and she is so skillful at this that she seems to transform one mood into the
other as subtly and silently as a motion picture dissolve. She is also at her
very best when she gets there. The gawky youngster who gets herself into trouble
winds up as a figure of genuine emotional concern. There is also a sequence in
which a cripple - one arm locked against her chest, one hip misaligned, feet
frozen into cross purposes - is suddenly released from her physical prison into
bird-like flight that is quite wonderful. It strikes me that Miss Goldberg is at
least as much actress as entertainer. Perhaps someone will write a play for her.


I keep reading that rehearsals for the still-running ''Noises Off'' go on and
on, partly because road companies need to be put together, partly because there
is a constant need for replacements at the Broadway home base. It is of course
not surprising that this breakneck farce, composed almost entirely of physical
accidents on stage and off, should want replacements. (Actors do get tired, and
snap ankles, and sprain thumbs, and they need time off to go to the drugstore
for more Mercurochrome.) Neither am I surprised to read that the backstage prop
that creates the greatest amount of difficulty for perspiring performers is the
large fire ax they are required to snatch from a case on the wall and wield
mightily, in all directions, thereafter. Obviously that ax is heavy and no cinch
to swing about. I venture to suggest, however, that the problem is as much
psychological as physical.

You see, a good joke always needs to begin reasonably, losing its way into
irrationality later on. First Groucho Marx needs a light for his cigar, and then
he can use a cigarette lighter which he airily throws away like a used match. (A
trivial example, but we need to set the premise.) First Buster Keaton needs to
disguise his girl in order to get her through enemy lines, and then he can stuff
her into a gunny sack as though she were so many pounds of potatoes.

Anyway, my objection to that fire ax in ''Noises Off'' is that it is given no
reasonable, or logical, First Use. No one has to get it off that backstage brick
wall. There isn't a possible fire, or a locked door, or any other emergency,
that requires it. The only reason it is wrestled out of its case is to add,
deliberately, to the confusion that reigns on stage, which it does. But it does
so, I think, with a heart that is as heavy as it is, because an actor who has to
do something gratuitous - or, God save the mark, unmotivated - is a troubled and
distracted actor who is almost certainly going to sprain his thumb at the
earliest opportunity. Perhaps it isn't too late, even now, to cook up a sensible
reason for setting that prop in motion, after which it's on its own.

And perhaps I am merely being picky. But if comedy is expected to mind its
manners and keep its place, it also deserves to be treated as though it had a
trace of common sense. Just let it begin logically. It'll find its own way to
turn into lunacy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM WAR AS THEATER AND AN ACT OF EXORCISM

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 885 words


When John Di Fusco came back from the Vietnam War, he bought himself a sports
car with his earnings, and then drove it over a cliff. He did not succeed in
killing himself, although the car was demolished; but the feelings that had
propelled him did not go away, and he repeatedly broke both hands smashing them
through walls.

When Thomas Bird got home from Vietnam, somebody called him a ''war criminal''
one day at a college anti-war demonstration. He punched the man, breaking his
jaw. Mr. Bird saw himself as defending his honor, but he was convicted of
assault; instead of being sent to jail, the former high school football star was
sentenced to a treatment program that kept him drugged on Thorazine for two
years. He was also deemed a ''violent threat to the campus community'' and
thrown out of school.

For years, Mr. Di Fusco, Mr. Bird, and thousands of other veterans kept their
feelings about Vietnam to themselves, learning through bitter experience that
most people did not want to hear about what they'd been through. But each was
haunted by the need to communicate what the war had meant to him, and both found
their way into the theater as a means of dealing with it.

In New York, Mr. Bird founded a group called the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble
Theater Company (VETCo), which began to produce plays involving issues of war
and peace, performed by actors who were also veterans. Meanwhile, in Los
Angeles, Mr. Di Fusco found himself increasingly gripped by the idea of getting
together a group of veterans to create a theater piece based on their own
experiences in Vietnam.


The result was a collaborative effort called ''Tracers,'' which opened at the
Public Theater last Monday to reviews full of praise. The work was originally
performed in 1980 at the Odyssey Theater in Los Angeles; its cast was a group of
six veterans assembled by Mr. Di Fusco, its subject their individual stories.

Last year Mr. Di Fusco and Mr. Bird joined forces and began to rework
''Tracers'' for its New York premiere at the Public Theater. This production,
which is presented by VETCo, features two of the original cast members - Richard
Chaves and Vincent Caristi - and six new actors who are also Vietnam veterans.

''I guess the motivation for the piece is the fact that you were there, and it's
probably the most important thing that ever happened to you in your life, and if
you're an artist you've got to deal with it,'' says Mr. Di Fusco, who directed
both the Los Angeles and the New York productions. ''The idea started to really
bug me about five years before I finally initiated it. I ran an ad for actors
who were Vietnam vets, I selected six, and we went to work.''

For six months, the group met five nights a week, for no pay, to talk about what
had happened to them in Vietnam and how it had affected their lives. ''We told
stories we've never told anyone,'' says the 36-year-old Mr. Caristi.

Through improvisations and other exercises, they began to develop characters
that were in many ways autobiographical, although not strictly so. ''We made a
promise to each other from the very beginning that we would not disclose who had
which experience, so that we could express all our feelings and yet still keep
our privacy - and also our professionalism as actors,'' explains Mr. Chaves, who
is 33.

They ended up staging ''Tracers'' at the Odyssey Theater, where it ran for nine
months.


Mr. Bird, who is 38, had been interested in the play from the beginning, having
founded VETCo in 1979. For him, theater offered ''a means for healing,'' he
says. ''It provided me with a place to start to exorcise my thoughts and
feelings, and to do it in a socially accepted and constructive and creative way.
I finally decided to start my own theater, and use it as a place where I could
deal with what was bothering me the most, which was being a Vietnam veteran in
America, and with what I think is bothering America most, which is the Vietnam
War, which they're being silent about.''

Mr. Bird retains harrowing memories of his time in the infantry, which he
describes as ''hell on feet.'' He was particularly struck by the central motif
of ''Tracers,'' which echoes throughout the play. ''The first time I killed
somebody, it transformed my whole life,'' he says. '' 'Tracers' deals with that
question: 'How does it feel to kill somebody?' I wanted to produce that
question, so to speak.''

Originally a one-act play, ''Tracers'' in its New York incarnation has become a
complex two-act work that weaves in and out of time, connecting each character's
wartime experiences with present-day ''tracers'' that explain what has happened
to him in the years since.

''For veterans, I hope this can be a purging experience,'' says Mr. Di Fusco,
who is 37. ''When Vietnam vets come to see this play, especially combat vets, it
is upsetting, but it's therapeutic. For the uninitiated, I hope it's
informative. I hope they understand some things about the war they didn't
understand before, and I hope they understand some things about veterans. My
work on this play has made me sane, but there are a lot of guys walking around
who are walking time bombs.'' He pauses, then adds softly, ''I have also
considered it to be a tribute to the guys who didn't make it back.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cast of 'Tracers'

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEXTRON STILL HAS TAKEOVER FEVER

BYLINE: By THOMAS J. LUECK

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2157 words


PROVIDENCE, R.I.

IF the 1960's were the Age of the

Conglomerate, as the decade has

often been called, then the Textron Corporation was the father of an age.
Throughout the 1950's, right through his retirement in 1965, Royal Little,
Textron's now-legendary founder, bought and sold companies at a breakneck pace.
He transformed Textron, once a textile manufacturer, into the nation's first and
most widely emulated conglomerate, with businesses ranging from helicopters to
lawn mowers to buzz saws.

''I'd just get it in mind to do something,'' Mr. Little, now 89 years old, said
the other day, ''and I'd go ahead and do it.''

But times have changed. Takeovers are difficult and costly - and often
unnecessary, many believe. Analysts and academics no longer revere the Royal
Littles, Harold Geneens and other conglomerateurs who bought and sold companies
on a whim. Today, conglomerate stocks often sell below what their subsidiaries
could command as stand-alone units. The 1980's have become the Era of Synergy,
in which conventional wisdom dictates that corporations limit their acquisitions
to companies that complement their core businesses.

That theory does not sit well at Textron. In fact, Beverly F. Dolan, the
company's courtly, 58-year-old chief executive, is concerned that even 30
percent of Textron's operating income comes from any one business - in this
case, Bell Helicopter. And although it has been more than five years between
major acquisitions for Textron, Mr. Dolan makes it clear that the company's
quiescence reflected lack of opportunity, not a changed strategy. Textron, he
insists, is ''by no means abandoning the conglomerate theory.''

This month Mr. Dolan, who Stanley Fishman, an analyst for Fahnstock & Company,
calls the ''politest manager in America,'' proved his point. Textron made its
largest acquisition ever, buying the Avco Corporation for $1.4 billion. Now Mr.
Dolan plans to sell $1.1 billion in assets over the next 12 months to pay off
Textron's new debt for the Avco purchase, and to then buy more unrelated
properties.

''The first order of priority is to reduce the debt,'' he said. '' Once that is
done, we are going to grow again.''

Textron is a conglomerate being reborn. Avco's portfolio of financial services
bears no resemblance to any part of Textron's already diverse product line. Mr.
Dolan, like Mr. Little, says that a good manager can manage anything. That
modern management theorists disagree does not bother him at all. ''All my life
I've been a contrarian,'' he said.

Textron last week announced a preliminary agreement to sell its Jones & Lamson
Company, a small machine tool maker based in Cheshire, Conn., for an undisclosed
sum to a group of private investors. Mr. Dolan will not hint at which other
Textron assets he may divest, but analysts speculate that Bridgeport Machines,
Waterbury Farrel and Speidel watch bands may be on the block.

Avco's assets, which include insurance, consumer lending and other financial
services, are not on Mr. Dolan's list of potential divestitures. That means that
Textron, despite its temporary emphasis on retrenchment, will simultaneously be
moving into unfamiliar lines of business.


WHAT Avco and Textron lack in product synergy, they make up for in historical
similarity. Both are widely diversified conglomerates with highly acquisitive
track records. And last year, both were the targets, not the perpetrators, of
hostile tender offers.

Textron easily rebuffed a $1.6 billion offer by the Chicago Pacific Corporation
in October. Avco felt more threatened by an unwanted $1.3 billion bid from Irwin
L. Jacobs, the Minneapolis multimillionaire investor. It turned to Textron as
its white knight, happily embracing that company's $1.4 billion offer.

Many analysts say the merger was motivated more by self defense for both
companies than by strategy.

''You have to wonder who comes out ahead, management or the shareholders?'' said
Donald P. Jacobs, the dean of Northwestern University's Kellogg School of
Management.

Both Mr. Dolan and Mr. Little, who is no longer a major Textron stockholder or a
board member but remains a much-sought-after adviser, bridle at such questions.
Mr. Little, particularly, noted that since the early 1980's he had been
concerned that Textron was growing complacent and was vulnerable to takeover
itself. ''I told them they needed to merge with another big conglomerate,'' he
recalled.

In fact, in October 1982 Mr. Little proposed that Textron merge with Northwest
Industries, the Chicago conglomerate built by Ben W. Heineman, another prominent
conglomerateur. Mr. Heineman agreed to a merger that would be financed through a
stock swap, but only if Northwest shareholders received convertible preferred
shares of Textron. Textron refused, and the deal fell through.

''They wanted us to guarantee the dividend for Northwest shareholders and put
them ahead of our own,'' Mr. Dolan, a native of Georgia who retains a lush
southern accent, recalled. ''I said to hell with that.'' And he adds: ''Royal
Little used to pick up companies for a song. You can't do that any more.''


AFTER the Northwest Industries

merger fell through, Textron

began a methodical quest for another acquisition candidate. The company and its
investment bankers compiled a list of large, highly diversified conglomerates.
Textron stood prepared to play friendly suitor if any of the listed companies
were threatened with a hostile takeover. Analysts speculate that the list
included Teledyne, Cheesborough Pound, Litton Industries, Brunswich, U.S.
Industries - and, obviously, Avco.

When Mr. Jacobs made his bid for Avco, Textron moved in. The two companies held
a hastily-called meeting in the Manhattan law office of Martin Lipton, a leading
takeover specialist who represented Avco. Both Mr. Dolan and Robert P. Bauman,
Avco's lanky, 53-year-old chairman, said the negotiations between their lawyers
and investment bankers - more than 30 of whom were filling Mr. Lipton's suite -
became so heated that they went to a small outer office to work out the final
details themselves.

According to Mr. Dolan, buying Avco solves many problems for Textron. For one
thing, he says, it doubles Textron's size, thus making the company less
dependent on its Bell Helicopter subsidiary. Bell Helicopter experienced rapid
expansion throughout the 1970's, benefitting from huge military contracts during
the Vietnam War and from orders for hundreds of helicopters from the Shah of
Iran. Later in the decade, Bell's business was buoyed by the boom in offshore
oil drilling, since companies used helicopters to transport employees to the
offshore rigs.

''All that was nice for Bell,'' said Mr. Dolan. ''But I don't want Textron to be
dominated by a single business, and that was happening.''

Indeed, suffering from the sharp cutback in offshore oil drilling, and with no
wars or foreign governments generating big new demands for its product, Bell's
earnings declined steeply last year. For the first nine months of 1984, Bell
contributed operating income of $22 million on revenues of $448.6 million,
compared with income of $36 million on sales of $540.3 million the year earlier.
Over- all, Textron's net income increased 20 percent for the first nine months
to $79 million, or $2.16 a share, from $65.8 million, or $1.78. Revenues
increased 8 percent, to $2.3 billion.

Until the Avco merger, Textron had been carrying very little debt. And that also
made Mr. Dolan nervous. If it raised all its new captal through divestitures,
''we would have had a balance sheet so clean that it would have made us much
more vulnerable'' to hostile takeover attempts, said Mr. Dolan. The takeover
attempt by Chicago Pacific underscored that concern.

In hindsight, Avco's management recognizes that its own quest for a clean
balance sheet probably made it ripe for a takeover. When Mr. Bauman became
Avco's chairman in 1981, the conglomerate's debt was 37 percent of its equity.
In an attempt to get the debt/equity ratio down to its current 28 percent, Mr.
Bauman has sold off more than a dozen Avco units, including a farm equipment
manufacturer, a laser weapons research company and 2,400 acres of prime
California real estate.

''My first concern was the interests of shareholders, and that meant reducing
debt,'' said the lanky executive, who had been executive vice president of the
General Foods Corporation before joining Avco four years ago. ''If that also
made this company a more attractive target - and it clearly did - then so be
it.''

Mr. Bauman is likely to have a large voice in Textron's strategies in the
future. He has been named vice chairman of Textron, a position that makes him
the most logical successor to Mr. Dolan. If past practice is followed at
Textron, Robert P. Straetz, Textron's chairman, will retire when he reaches his
65th birthday in two years. Most insiders believe that Mr. Dolan will move up,
and Mr. Bauman will take his job.

Mr. Bauman has made a clear commitment to the newly-merged company. Last week he
said he would rescind a ''golden parachute'' clause in his contract with Avco.
The clause would have entitled Mr. Bauman to three years' pay had he left the
company rather than joining Textron. Mr. Bauman was paid $610,000 by Avco last
year.

''A merger this big has got to be a lot easier to pull off when you have
cooperation from the other side, and so far, Bob Bauman has been with us all the
way,'' said Mr. Dolan.

The coming year or so of retrenchment and divestiture promises to be more
painful, if not more difficult, than the absorption of Avco into Textron. In the
years since Mr. Little's retirement, Textron had been run by a succession of
lawyers and accountants who paid little attention to the day-to-day operations
of the subsidiaries and delegated virtually all operational decisions to
divisional vice presidents. A notable example is G. William Miller, the former
Secretary of the Treasury under President Jimmy Carter, who had been Textron's
chairman from 1968 to 1978, and who came under intense political fire after a
Securities and Exchange Commisson investigation found that the company had
bribed foreign officials to win contracts for Bell.

Analysts say that Mr. Dolan and Mr. Straetz, by contrast, are true ''operating
managers'' who got personally involved in the operations of the subsidiaries and
are more comfortable with improving ailing business lines than with selling
them. Still, Mr. Dolan insists that selling huge chunks of Textron ''has simply
got to be done and we won't hestitate.''


A GROWINGDISILLUSION WITH CONGLOMERATES


''The thinking used to be that once a conglomerate was put together, the whole
was more valuable than its parts,'' said Donald P. Jacobs, dean of the Kellogg
School of Management at Northwestern University. ''Now the parts seem more
valuable than the whole. We are likely to see many old-line conglomerates break
apart.''

It already is happening. Esmark and Avco have been taken over. Gulf and Western
and IC Industries are the subject of takeover rumors. And I.T.T. is desperately
selling unrelated business lines. The Textron Corporation continues to operate
as though bigger is better, but even Royal Little, Textron's founder,
acknowledges that ''a lot of people think we'd be worth more dead than alive.''

It is a far cry from the 1960's, when conglomerateurs such as Mr. Little were
considered business geniuses. They believed that good managers could manage
anything, that small staffs could efficiently oversee numerous unrelated
businesses, and that a diverse stable of products would make their companies
immune to business cycles.

In the boom years of the late '60's, everything the conglomerates touched did
seem to yield profits. Wall Street was impressed. ''Analysts didn't really
understand them, but put a premium on their stock,'' said Kathy Harrigan, a
professor of management at Columbia University.

The business climate of the 1970's was less forgiving, however. The economy
turned down, the oil crisis hit, and foreign competition ate at American
markets. Many of the conglomerateurs were too far removed from their individual
businesses to understand the changes in their markets, and many found their
sales and profits diving.

Moreover, by the 1980's the merger game had taken on an unpleasant edge.
Corporations now must fight for plum takeover targets with arbitragers and
speculators - who often bid up the target's stock price to an unaffordable
level. Also, companies are learning to fight off unsolicited tender offers,
through such tactics as buying back their stock and seeking other suitors.

The net result is that, while companies continue to diversify, they rarely do so
for the sake of growth alone. As Mrs. Harrigan put it: ''The conglomerates have
decided to sit back, sell what they don't want, and make a little more sense of
things.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Beverly Dolan; photo of Robert Bauman; photo of Royal Little

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUNDLING THE MILITARY BUDGET

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3757 words


RARELY has any industry enjoyed a better operating environment than the nation's
military contractors do today. Not since the Vietnam War has there been such
heavy demand for weapons. The Reagan Adminstration has been progressively
increasing budgets for military hardware since it arrived in Washington four
years ago, and the Pentagon, for its part, has been working overtime to help
contractors overcome their reputation for gross industrial backwardness and
woefully inefficient production.

Yet, after four years of Pentagon nurturing and Reagan Administration budgetary
largess, a dizzying procession of highly publicized cost and quality fiascos has
left the industry's image more tarnished than ever. Why, critics ask, can't the
industry find a way to remedy its mistakes and stop wasting billions of taxpayer
dollars?

There is a litany of woes. The explosion earlier this month of a Pershing 2
missile in West Germany, which killed three American soldiers when its motor
caught fire, shocked Europe. Eight governmental units are investigating the
Navy's nuclear submarine building program, looking into allegations of
multi-million dollar abuse. Other inquiries are focusing on possible illegal
overcharges at Ford Aerospace and kickbacks at Hughes Aircraft. The armed
services are rejecting shoddy products from military contractors at an
unprecedented rate, including fighter jets from McDonnell Douglas, missiles from
Hughes Aircraft and semiconductors from Texas Instruments. And cost increases
and cost overruns persist, with inflation in the defense sector running 2
percentage points above the overall inflation rate.

''The problem is a Federal system that rewards high costs,'' says Senator Chuck
Grassley, an Iowa Republican. ''The bureaucrat gets promoted by raising a larger
budget from Congress. And the government contractor, whose profit is a
percentage of costs, has an incentive to raise his costs.''

Several critics have concluded that hefty defense budgets, which were once
touted as a cure for an industry allegedly starved by fiscal neglect, are now
hurting it instead. At Texas Instruments, growing orders from the Pentagon have
overwhelmed quality control systems. The crush of expedited production schedules
has produced costly and dangerous design failures, such as the tail crack in
McDonnell Douglas' F/A-18. And with money flowing, contract chicanery can become
a problem, as evidenced by charges against General Dynamics.

''There's no incentive for change,'' said A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a civilian
employee of the Air Force who investigates charges of waste and abuse. ''There's
too much money in the system.''

Proponents of reform insist that measures taken by the Pentagon to increase
efficiency, including the appointment two years ago of an Inspector General to
weed out fraud and abuse, are insufficient. The critics, an unlikely alliance of
small-business men who want more contracts, Democratic politicians and
government bureaucrats, say real progress can come only by scrapping such costly
systems as the MX missile, the Army's division air defense (Divad) system, the
Army's beleaguered Bradley Fight Vehicle and the Air Force's Maverick, a
heat-seeking air-to-surface missile. Only then, they say, can the military
establishment focus on reducing costs and flaws in its other systems.

The Department of Defense ''has a major problem in allocating money'' among its
many programs, says Nathan Higginbottom, manager of corporate programs for
McDonnell Douglas. ''Their budgets are bigger but they have a lot more programs
to fit into that budget. They have to make some decision about allocating it
more efficiently.''

He says McDonnell Douglas could achieve significant savings per aircraft if the
Government ordered planes in greater volume. As it stands, the company has
costly excess plane- building capacity - and the Pentagon, because it misjudged
requirements, pays for it.

Still, military contractors have more money and more complicated weapons systems
than ever before. Spending for military hardware and research has almost doubled
in the last five years, growing to $123.5 billion in fiscal year 1984 from $69.6
billion in fiscal 1980 (constant 1985 dollars).

Much of that spending will take place later in the decade. About $198 billion is
in the pipeline now, guaranteeing the industry a steady stream of revenues and
profits for years to come. And defense budgets are set to continue growing, with
spending set to total $1.6 trillion between fiscal years 1985 and 1989.

Though the largess - too much money and too many projects - may be the root of
the industry's ills, military experts cite several auxiliary causes. Mainly,
they say, the industry sorely needs the discipline of more competition. The
Pentagon encourages vigorous competition for research contracts but when those
contracts reach the production stage, only 6 percent are let competitively,
largely because there are so few prime contractors, according to the General
Accounting Office. Only two companies, for example (Tenneco and General
Dynamics), have the capability to build nuclear subs.

''We need creeping capitalism'' in the defense industries, says Paul Hoven, a
researcher for the Project on Military Procurement, a Washington-based public
interest group. The 100 biggest military contractors (out of thousands of
companies) get about 70 percent of the procurement dollars.

Those companies, like the military branches they serve, tend to be tradition-
bound and resistant to change. Many are desperately in need of modernization. In
the aerospace segment of the industry, computer-aided-design is used in only 30
percent of design work and computer-aided-manufacturing is used only only 10
percent of the output, according to the Air Force. That's better than
manufacturing in general, but far behind the electronics and auto industries.

And Pentagon executives who oversee acquisitions have usually been very close to
the industry. Critics say such close ties have taken their toll in the form of
high costs and poor quality.

In recent years, the quality problems have been compounded by a sense of urgency
in moving quickly from the development to the production stage. National
security and arms control negotiations have generally been cited by contractors
as reasons for the haste.

The Pentagon is gradually acknowledging the problems of managing the production
and funding of so many costly and complicated systems at the same time. A memo
last summer from Thomas Christie, the deputy director of the Pentagon's office
of program analysis and evaluation, asked Pentagon's officers to nominate weapon
systems as candidates for termination.

''The trick is to guard the front door so that no more get in and to kick some
out of the back door,'' says G. Wayne Glass, a defense department procurement
analyst.

At the same time, the Pentagon is honing its cost control and quality control
initiatives. Thirty multi-year contracts to build entire systems have been
awarded since 1982. That's expected to produce savings of $4.5 billion through
1991 compared with the old year- to-year contracting method, spokesmen say.

In addition, contractors are under tough new requirements to supply warranties
for their products. And some of the country's most revered industrial giants
have come under agonizing scrutiny from the Inspector General's office and other
watchdogs. Payments were cut back to General Electric for engine work in
progress because of faulty workmanship. Similar action was taken against Hughes
Aircraft for its misfiring missiles. The government is suing Westinghouse,
trying to get posession of management documents as it searches for evidence of
''mismanagement'' and ''mischarging'' at its military electronics center in
Baltimore.

Carrots are being offered as well as sticks. A new handbook, ''Building in
Quality,'' rolled off the Pentagon presses last month. In cookbook fashion it
tells contractors how to move from the development phase into production, how to
plan the acquisition of tools and production equipment and how better to analyze
labor requirements.

The concern for quality and reliability is growing as United States military
forces continue to increase their dependence on finicky, high-technology weapons
systems while downgrading the importance of such conventional - and less costly
- arms as rifles and tanks.

''This is the military equivalent of the quantity versus quality argument,' says
the Pentagon's Mr. Glass, ''The risk that we incur is this reliability problem.
We're putting all our money on quality. And if quality doesn't work we're up a
creek.'' McDonnell Douglas


DOZENS of Hornets, the nickname for the Navy's F/A-18 aircraft, are parked on
runways and sitting idly in McDonnell Douglas hangars at the company's
manufacturing compound in St. Louis. They are a graphic reminder of the risk
involved when the Pentagon demands fast production of complex, high-performance
systems.

The Hornets, the initial products of a nine-year-old Pentagon plan to spend
$39.9 billion on the combination fighter-attack aircraft, are awaiting their
turn to roll into the cavernous, St. Louis assembly plant. Machinists and
riveters will reinforce each of the plane's two tailfins with three turquoise
L-shaped cleats, thereby correcting one of the most notorious cracks in the
history of Pentagon buying.

Last summer, McDonnell Douglas and the Navy noticed that cracks were suddenly
appearing at the spot where the tail is joined to the fuselage. The Navy was
furious.

''They were all over us like a chicken on a June bug,'' says John Capellupo, the
company's program manager for the F/A-18, which officially entered operational
service two years ago. The Navy stopped accepting delivery of Hornets in August
and ordered the company to fix the 148 it had shipped already.

The Navy says the problem has dealt it a ''small setback'' in modernizing its
fleet. And McDonnell Douglas, which designed the plane, has accepted full
responsibility and will absorb the $25 million cost of the retrofits, even
though the troubled part is assembled by Northrup, a subcontractor.

Critics of rising defense spending point to the episode as a prime example of
what they say has been a tendency since the beginning of the defense buildup:
Speed is important to the powers in Washington who planned the buildup and
military contractors, with the blessing of the Pentagon, have been rushing
complicated systems into production without adequate testing.

This practice, critics say, increases the likelihood of failure. That happened
when the Army rushed into production with its ill-fated $4.5 billion Sergeant
York anti-aircraft gun project, made by Ford Aerospace. Funding for the flawed
project was withdrawn by Congress in September. Another example is the $19
billion program for the M-1 tank, assembled by General Dynamics and the the
object of much Congressional criticism.

''The products are often irrationally designed, calling for quality and
performance that are hard to achieve,'' says Seymour Melman, professor of
industrial engineering at Columbia University. ''The orders for production are
placed before the product is ready.''

Despite the problems, McDonnell Douglas boasts that its F/A-18 is three times
more reliable than other fighter aircraft. But even at that rate, the mean
flight time between breakdowns of some sort is only 2.5 hours.

The Hornet has been controversial since McDonnell Douglas, a decade ago,
proposed building a single plane to replace both its F-4 fighter and LTV's A-7
attack plane. The Navy brass was skeptical of McDonnell Douglas claims that it
could build a plane suitable for the dual role.

But Congress was intrigued by the idea and research on the project was funded in
January 1976. Five years later, the first Hornets started rolling off the
assembly line. McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second-largest defense
contractor, planned extensively for the Hornet's production, ordering such
hard-to-get components and materials as forgings and graphite well ahead of time
to insure an adequate supply.

It built its own shop to make landing gears because only two outside sources for
such gears existed and it invested $100 million in a state-of-the art plant to
make composites, a lightweight synthetic material that is replacing steel and
aluminum in aircraft. But the testing period, which ran from early 1981 to early
1983, proved too short, even the company now admits.

''You can always test and test yourself into the poor house,'' says Mr.
Capellupo. ''We did what we believe to be extensive tests. But for economy and
other reasons we didn't go further. What we didn't know by our testing was the
severity of the bending, not only bending but twisting. You keep advancing
technology. And no one is perfect. Occasionally you miss something.''

Texas Instruments


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS, the largest purveyor of semiconductors to Uncle Sam, has been
spending heavily in the last five years to transform itself from a subcontractor
into a prime contractor. Its goal is to capture a growing share of the big
defense budget and its effort is paying off: Pentagon sales totaled $1.2 billion
last year, about 20 percent of the company's revenues.

But the Government's largess has been a mixed blessing. Last fall, the Pentagon
announced that the Dallas company had been shipping semiconductor parts that
were improperly tested, endangering the reliability and performance of some of
the nation's most sophisticated weaponry. Semiconductors are the building blocks
of high technology weapons, as important to today's forces as steel and
gunpowder were at the turn of the century.

The Government acted swiftly and severely: It forced the company to halt
semiconductor shipments and froze delivery of weapons containing the parts, a
move that affected about 30 companies making complex weapons systems.

So far, the bottom-line effects have been painful for Texas Instruments. In the
third quarter alone, the debacle reduced profits by $13 million. But its
troubles are not just financial: Although deliveries of some of the 6,300
questionable parts resumed recently, the company is now the object of a Pentagon
investigation that could result is some punitive action.

What went wrong? The company - which ranks 33d among the nation's prime military
contractors - insists that the explosive growth in demand for its military
hardware was to blame. ''This thing has grown pretty rapidly over the last five
years and the system just hasn't kept pace,'' says James Houlditch, manager of
quality assurance for semiconductors. ''We probably didn't have the tools in
place to keep up with demand.''

Other companies find themselves in the same predicament. Last year, National
Semiconductor paid the Government $1.7 million in fines on charges of improper
testing. At Hughes Aircraft, which was overwhelmed last year when missile sales
rose to $900 million from $700 million, the Pentagon is holding up payments
because of faulty work on its missiles.

For its part, the military has tried to protect itself on semiconductors by
demanding that prime contractors test all of them before delivery and by asking
for better warranties from prime contractors, who, in turn, are expected to put
more pressure on parts makers.

At Texas Instruments, a huge clean-up job is underway in semiconductors. Since
September, 200 harried software engineers have been working overtime to
straighten out the problems. They first had to comb through hundreds of pages of
specifications from the weapons manufacturers, checking them against software
programs. They found several of 4,000 steps in each testing program to be out of
line.

Although one spokesman said the errors just ''crept'' in over time, Mr.
Houlditch lays part of the blame on the military for insisting on customized
devices when standardized ones would do.

The company, which makes infrared scanning devices for military aircraft and
high speed anti-radar missile, called HARM, for the Navy, the Marines and the
Air Force in addition to semiconductors for the military, now says the
semiconductor problem is pretty much behind it.

A revised audit system is in place and a computerization of the order entry
system has been increased to reduce errors. The company is now telling all who
will listen that there was never a quality problem - only a testing problem.

But William Mitchell, the president of the Texas Instrument division that makes
military hardware, is not taking any chances. He is testing all the
semiconductor parts, even the ones that are manufacturered by his own company.
''With the current fallout rate of semiconductors, it's cost-effective for me to
do it,'' he says.  General Dynamics


EARLIER this month, as icy

winds swirled about the banks

of Connecticut's Thames River, the Coast Guard Academy band played a medley of
patriotic music and the crew of the U.S.S. Alaska stood rigidly at attention in
the piercing cold.

For the Electric Boat yard in Groton, Conn., it was yet another launch day - and
the ritual was true to form: Anti-nuclear demonstrators were hauled off to jail
while Catherine Stevens, the wife of Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, doused the
submarine with Champagne. Later, guests moved to a nearby waterfront mansion for
a quiet Saturday afternoon feast of filet mignon and Champagne.

But in the midst of all the activity, a company official was telling everyone
within earshot of the company's achievements: The Alaska, he said, was just the
latest in a string of 10 submarines that the General Dynamics subsidiary had
delivered to the Navy ''on time and on budget.''

That may have been technically correct. But some Congressional investigators may
argue with the creative accounting techniques that allowed General Dynamics, the
nation's largest military contractor, to make that claim on the Alaska, part of
the $52.9 billion Trident II program, the country's most costly weapon.

Shipbuilding costs at General Dynamics have been under fire - and official
investigations - for more than a decade. And the charges and countercharges are
likely to accelerate in coming weeks as new Congressional hearings open.

The Alaska, a 560-foot nuclear-powered submersible that functions as a launch
pad for the nuclear-tipped Trident missile, was constructed over a five-year
period at a cost expected to be about $1 billion. But if terms of the original
contract had held, it would have been delivered at a cost of $379.5 million.

Because General Dynamics is a master at stretching the so-called ''rubber base
line,'' it can often boast about delivering its military hardware on budget.
Under this flexible system, which military procurement officer say is widely
used and abused by contractors, the cost and delivery- date terms of the
contract can be renegotiated periodically so that a contractor remains in
compliance. With a companion strategy called the ''buy-in'' contractors often
win awards by submitting unrealistically low bids to obtain a contract and later
submitting additional claims.

Congress and the Pentagon are becoming increasingly fed up with such practices
and five Congressional committees are looking closely into nuclear shipbuilding.
Some of the inquiries cover similar practices at Tenneco's Newport News
Shipbuilding subsidiary. But the spotlight shines brightest on General Dynamics.
In addition to Congress, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Justice
Department and the Navy are all separately investigating the company's
shipbuilding operations.

In fact, troubles are raining on the St. Louis-based conglomerate. It recently
weathered a violent 17-day strike by the International Association of Machinists
at its Fort Worth plant, where it assembles the F-16 for the Air Force. And the
M-1 tank, which it assembles for the Army, continues to be severely plagued by
malfunctioning of its power and firing systems, an intractible problem since
earlier this decade.

But these problems could pale next to allegations that are likely to be aired
when Congressional hearings get under way in coming weeks. P. Takis Veliotis,
who formerly ran Electric Boat for General Dynamics, is now a fugitive in Greece
from criminal charges of accepting kickbacks from contractors. He has been
interviewed there by Congressional investigators who are expected to divulge his
statements.

Congressmen will have questions for General Dynamics officials on a rumored
sweetheart deal between the company and the Navy. Published allegations accuse
the Navy of having increased the company's profits on some ships under
construction in return for the company's decison not to file insurance claims of
$100 million against the Navy.

Congressional investigators say there will also be questions about stock
manipulation and about the chairman, David S. Lewis, allegedly charging personal
trips on the corporate jet to Government contracts. The investigators charge,
too, that since the late 1970's, company officials used blank vouchers totaling
$1.3 million to cover the illegal wining and dining of military officers.

Then there's the matter of Admiral Hyman G. Rickover. Congressional
investigators say the company extended more than $75,000 in gifts to the
''father of the nuclear Navy,'' but he has denied any impropriety.

Nevertheless, Representative John D. Dingell of Michigan is pressing for harsh
measures: the cancellation of the company's submarine contracts and the
Government takeover of Electric Boat under provisions of Federal law that
prescribe such remedies for contract bribery.

But other contractors think such a remedy is a long shot. General Dynamics,
though it once threatened to shut down or sell Electric Boat in the heat of a
previous dispute with the Navy, says it has done nothing to warrant a government
takeover.

The company has spent $270 million modernizing its shipbuilding facilities in
the last decade. And despite all the investigations, the company and the Navy
seem to be on good terms again. Aides say Navy Secretary John Lehman is cool to
Mr. Dingle's threat.

''There's much more cooperation between the Navy and General Dynamics,'' than
there was a few years ago says Ken Brown, the yard's director of operations,
''I'm amazed at the cordial relationship. There used to be nothing but
animosity.''

For its part, the Navy says it will not comment while the investigation is under
way.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of the leading defense contractors ; photos of military weapons

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


Stage Is SetFor New DebateOn Foreign Policy

Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim


Debate on America's world role, as old as the republic, will resume this week
with the start of hearings by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Few
Americans today would argue for the kind of isolationism that kept the United
States out of the League of Nations just after World War I. But there is little
agreement on the extent of American commitments abroad and on the use of force
to back them up.

Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the new Republican chairman of the
committee, last week called for an effort to forge a new consensus on America's
vital interests and their defense. Mr. Lugar said that consensus on foreign
policy had broken down with the Vietnam war, leaving the United States
''uncertain about the use of force.'' Secretary of State George P. Shultz and
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and dozens of former and present
officials and experts will testify.

Senator Mr. Lugar contended that Americans wanted a policy of containment
without cost and of extensive commitments without measures to carry them out.
His comments recalled those of a well-remembered predecessor, Senator J. William
Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat, who argued in the late 1960's that the United
States had overextended itself without taking into account the costs of the
commitments it made to other countries. From America's allies and friends have
come only ambiguous responses to such questions. Resentment over Washington's
attempt to play the policeman has been accompanied by a desire for American
protection and a concern it might not be forthcoming.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUNGLING THE MILITARY BUILDUP

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3737 words


RARELY has any industry enjoyed a better operating environment than the nation's
military contractors do today.  Not since the Vietnam War has there been such
heavy demand for weapons.  The Reagan Administration has been progressively
increasing budgets for military hardware since it arrived in Washington four
years ago, and the pentagon, for its part, has been working overtime to help
contractors overcome their reputation for gross industrial backwardness and
woefully inefficient production.

Yet, after four years of Pentagon nurturing and Reagan administration budgetary
largess, a dizzying procession of highly publicized cost and quality fiascos has
left the industry's image more tarnished than ever.  Why, critics ask, can't the
industry find a way to remedy its mistakes and stop wasting billions of taxpayer
dollars?

There is a litany of woes.  The exlosion earlier this month of a Pershing 2
missile in West Germany, which killed three American soldiers when its motor
caught fire, shocked Europe.  Eight governmental units are investigating the
Navy's nucler submarine building program, looking into alegtions of
multi-million dollar abuse. Other inquiries are focusing on possible illegal
overcharges at Ford Aerospace and kickbacks at Hughes Aircraft.  The armed
services are rejecting shoddy products from military contractors at an
unprecededented rate, including fighter jets from McDonnell Douglas, missiles
from Hughes Aircraft and semiconductors from Texas Istruments. And cost
increases and cost overruns persist, with inflation in the defense sector
running 2 percentage points above the overall inflation rate.

''The problem is a Federal system that rewards high costs,'' says Senator Chuck
Grassley, and Iowa Republican.  ''The bureaucrat gets promoted by raising a
larger budget from Congress.  And the government contractor, whose profit is a
percentage of costs, has a incentive to raise his costs.''

SEVERAL critics have concluded that hefty defense budgets, which were once
touted as a cure for an industry allegedly starved by fiscal neglect, are now
hurting it instead.  At Texas Instruments, growing orders from the Pentagon have
overwhelmed quality control systems.  The crush of expedited production
schedules has produced costly and dangerous design failures, such as the tail
crack in McDonnell Douglas' F/A-18.  And with money flowing contract chincanery
can become a problem, as evidenced by charges against General Dynamics.

''There's no incentive for change,'' said A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a civilian
employee of the Air Force who investigates charges of waste and abuse,.
''There's too much money in the system.''

Proponents of reform insist that measures taken by the Pentagon to increase
efficiency, including the appointment two years ago of an Inspector General to
weed out fraud and abuse, and insuffieient.  The critics, an unlikely alliance
of small business men who want more contracts, Democratic politicians and
goverment bureaucrats, say real progress can come only by scrapping such costly
systems as the MX missile and Army's division air defense (Davad) system, the
Army's beleagured Bradley Fight Vehicle and the Air Force's Maverick, a heat
seeking air-to-surface missile.  Only then, they say, can the military
establishment focus on reducing costs and flaws in its other systems.

The Department of Defense ''has a major problem in allocating money'' among its
many programs, says Nathan Higginnbottom, manager of corporate programs for
McDonnell Douglas.  ''Their budgets are bigger but they have a lot more programs
to fit into that budget.  They have to make some decision about allocating it
more effieiently?''

He says McDonnell Douglas could achieve significant savings per aircraft if the
Government ordered planes in greater volume.  As it stands, the company has
costly excess plane building capacity - and the Pentagon, because it misjudged
requirements, pays for it.

Still, military contractors have more money and more complicated weapons systems
than ever before.  Spending for military hardware and research has almost
doubled in the lst five years, growing to $123.5 billion in fiscal year 1984
from $9.6 billion in fiscal 1980 (constant 1985 dollars.)

Much of that spending will take place later in the decade.  About $198 billion
is in the pipeline now, guaranteeing the industry a steady stream of revenues
and profits for years to come.  And defense budgets are set to continue growing,
with spending set to total $1.6 trillion between fiscal years 1985 and 1989.

Though the largess - too much money and too many projects - may be the root of
the industry's ills, military experts cite several ausiliary causes.  Mainly,
they say, the industry sorely needs the discipline of more competition.  The
Pentagon encourages vigorous competition for research contracts but when those
contracts reach the production stage, ony 6 percent are let competitively,
largely because there are so few prime contractors, according to the General
Accounting Office.  Only two companies, for example (Tenneco and General
Dynamics), have the capability to build nuclear subs.

''We need creeping capitalism'' in the defense industries, says Paul Hoven, a
researcher for the Project on Military Procurement, a Washington based public
interest group.  The 100 biggest military contractors (out of thousands of
companies)get about 70 percent of the procurement dollars.

Those companies, like the military branches they serve, tend to be
tradition-bound and resistant to change.  Many are desperately in need of
modernization.  In the aerospace segment of the industry, computer sided design
is used in only 30 percent of design work and computer aided manufacturing is
used only only 10 percnet on the output, according to the Air Force.  That's
better than manufacturing in general, but far behind the electronics and auto
industries.

And Pentagon executives who oversee acquisitions have usually been very close to
the industry.  Critics say such close ties have taken their toll in the form of
high costs and poor quality.

In recent years, the quality problems have been compounded by a sense of urgency
in moving quickly from the development to the production stage.  National
security and arm control negotiations have generally been cited by contractors
as reasons for the haste.

The Pentagon is gradually acknowledging the problems of managing the production
and funding of so many of costly and complicted systems at the same time.  A
memo last summer from Thomas Christie, the deputy director of the Pentagon's
office of program analysis and evaluation, asked Pentagon's officers to nominate
weapon systems as candidates for termination.

''The trick is to guard the front door so that no more get in and to kick some
out of the back door,'' says G., Wayne Glass, a defense department procurement
analyst.

At the same time, the Pentagon is honing its cost control and quality control
initiatives.  Thirty multi year contracts to build entire systems have been
awarded since 1982.  that's expected to produce savings of $4.5 billion through
1991 compared with the old year-to-year contracting method, spokesmen say.

In addition, contractors are under though new requirements to supply warranties
for their products.  And some of the country's most revered industrial giants
have come under agonizing scrutiny from the Inspector General's office and other
watchdogs.  Payments were cut back to General Electric for engine work in
progress because of faulty workmanship.  Similar action was taken against Hughes
Aircraft for its misfiring missiles.  The government is suing Westinghouse,
trying to get posession of management documents as it searches for evidence of
''mismanagement'' and ''mischarging'' at its military electronics center in
Baltimore.

Carrots are being offered as well as sticks.  A new handbook, ''Building in
Quality,'' rolled off the Pentagon presses last month.  In cookbook fashion it
tells contractors how to move from the development phase into production, how to
plan the acquisition of tools and preduction equipment and how better to analyze
labor requirements.

The concern for quality and reliability is growing as United States military
forces continue to increase their dependence on finicky, high technology weapons
systems white downgrading the importance of such conventional - and less costly
- arms as rifles and tanks.

''This is the military equivalent of the quality versus quality argument,' says
the Pentagon's Mr. Glass, ''The risk that we incur is this reliability problem.
We're putting all our money on quality.  And if quality doesn't work we're up a
creek.''

MCDONNELL DOUGLAS

DOZENS of Hornets, the nickname for the Navy's F/A-18 aircraft, are parked on
runways and sitting idly in McDonnell Douglas hangars at the company's
manufacturing compound in ST., Louis.  They are a graphic reminder of the risk
involved when the Pentagon demands fast production of complex, high performance
systems.

The Hornets, the initial products of a nine-year-old Pentagon plan to spend
$39.9 billion on the combination fighter attack aircraft, are awaiting their
turn to roll into the cavernous, St. Louis assembly plant.  Machinists and
riveters will reinforce each of the plane's two tailfins with three turquoise
L-shaped cleats, thereby correcting one of the most notorious cracks in the
history of Pentagon buying.

Last summer, McDonnell Douglas and the Navy noticed that cracks were suddenly
appearing at the spot where the tail is joined to the fuselage.  The Navy was
furious.

''They were all over us like a chicken on a June bug,'' says John Capellupo, the
company's program manager for the F/A-18, which officially entered operational
service two years ago.  The Navy stopped accepting delivery of Hornets in August
and ordered the company to fix the 148 it had shipped already.

The Navy says the problem has dealt it a ''small setback'' in modernizing its
fleet.  And McDonnell Douglas, which designed the plane, has accepted full
responsibility and will absorb the $25 million cost of the retrofitts, even
though the troubled part is assembled by Northrup, a subcontractor.

Critics of rising defense spending point to the episode as a prime example of
what they say has been a tendency since the beginning of the defense buildup:
Speed is important to the powers in Washington who planned the buildup and
military contractors, with the blessing of the Pentaon, have been rushing
complicated systems into production without adequate testing.

This practice, critics say, increases the likelihood of failure.  The happened
when the Army rushed into production with its ill fated $4.5 billion Sergeant
York anti-aircrft gun project, made by Ford Aerospce.  Funding for the failed
project was withdrawn by Congress in September.  Another example is the $19
billion program for the M-1 tank, assembled by General Dynamics and the object
of the Congressional critism.

''The products are often irrationally designed calling for quality and
performance that are hard to achieve,'' says Seymour Melman, professor of
industrial engineering at Columbia University.  ''The orders for production are
placed before the product is ready.''

Despite the problems, McDonnell Douglas boasts that its F/A-18 is three times
more reliable than other fighter aircraft.  But even at that rate, the mean
flight time between break downs of some sort is only 2.5 hours.

The Hornet has been controversial since McDonnell Douglas, a decade ago,
proposed building a single plane to replce both its F-4 fighter and LTV's A-7
attack plane.  The Navy brass was skeptical of McDonnell Douglas claims that it
could build a plane suitable for the dual role.

But Congress was intrigued by the idea and research on the project was funded in
January 1976.  Five years later, the first Hornets started rolling off the
assembly line.  McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second larget defense
contractor, planned extensively for the Hornet's production, ordering such hard
to get components and materials as forgings and grahite well ahead of time in
sure an adequate supply.

It built its own shop to make landing gears because only two outside sources for
such gears existed and it invested $100 million in a state of the art plant to
make composites, a light weight synthetic material that is replcing steel and
aluminum in aircraft.  But the testing period, which ran from early 1981 to
early 1983, proved too short, even the company now admits.

''You can always test and test yourself into the poor house,'' says Mr.
Capellupo.  ''We did what we believe to be extensive tests.  But for economy and
other reasons we didn't go further.  What we didn't know by our testing was the
severity of the bending, not only bending buy twisting.  You keep advancing
technology.  And no one is perfect.  Occasionally you miss something.''

GENERAL DYNAMICS

EARLIER this month, as icy winds swirled about the banks of Connecticut's Thames
River the Coast Guard Academy band played a medley of patriotic music and the
crew of the U.S. Alaska stood rigidly at attention in the piercing cold.

For the Elecric Boat yard in Groton, Conn., it was yet another launch day - and
the ritual was true to form: Anti-nuclear demonstrators were hauled off to jail
while Catherine Stevens, the wife of Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, doused the
submarine with Champagine. Later, guests moved to a nearby waterfront mansion
for a quiet Saturday afternoon feast of filet mignon and Champagne.

But in the midst of all the activity, a company official was telling everyone
within earshot of the company's achievements: The Alaska, he said, was just the
latest in a string of 10- submarines that the General Dynamics subsidiary had
delivered to the Navy ''on time and on budget.''

That may have been technically correct, But some Congressional investigators may
argue with the creative acounting techniques that allowed General Dynamics, the
nation's largest military contractor, to make that claim on the Alaska, part of
the $52.9 billion Trident II program, the country's most costly weapon.

Shipbuilding costs at General Dynamics have been under fire and official
investigtions - for more than a decade.  And the charges and countercharges are
likely to acelerte in coming weeks as new Congressinal hearings open.

The Alaska, a 560-foot nuclear powered submersible that functions as a
constructed over a five year period at a cost expected to be about $1 billion.
But if terms of the original contract had held, it would have been delivered at
a cost of $379.5 million.

Because General Dynamis is a master at stretching the so called rubber base
line,'' it can often boast about delivering its military hardware on budget.
Under this flexible system, which military procurement officer say is widely
used and abused by contractors, the cost and delivery date terms of the contract
can be renogotiated periodically so that a contractor remains in compliance .
With a compansion strategy called the ''buy-in'' contractors often win awards by
submitting unrealistically low bids to obtain a contract and later submitting
additional claims.

Congress and the Pentagon are becoming increasingly fed up with such practices
and five Congressional committees are looking closely into nuclear shipbuilding.
Some of the inquires cover similar practices at Tenneco's Newport New
Shipbuilding susidiary.  But the spotlight shines brightest on General Dynamics.
In addition to Congress, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Justice
Department and the Navy are all separately investigating the compny's
shipbuilding operations.

In fact, troubes are aiming on the St. Louis based conglomerate.  It recently
weathered a violent 17 day strike by the Internaional Allociation of Machinists
at its Fort Worth Plant, where it assembles the F-16 for the Air Force, and the
M-1 tank, which it assembles for the Army continues to be severely plagued by
malfunctioning of its power and firing systems, an intractible problem since
earlier this decade.

But these problems could pale next to allegations that are likely to be aired
when Congressional herings get under way in coming weeks.  P.  Takis Veliotis,
who formerly ran Electric Boat for General Dynamics is now a fugitive in Greece
from criminal charges of accepting kickbacks from contractors.  He has been
interviewed there by Congressional investigators who are expected to divulge his
statements.

Congressmen will have questions for General Dynamics officials on a rumored
sweetheart deal between the company and the Navy.  Published alegations accuse
the Navy of having increased the company's profits on some ships under
construction in return for the company's decision not to file insurance claims
of $100 million against the Navy.

Congressional investigators say there will also be questions about stock
manipulation and about the chairman, David S. Lewis, allegedly charging personal
trips on the corporate jet to Government contracts.  The investigators charge,
too, that since the late 1970's, company officials used blank vouchers totaling
$1.3 million to cover the illegal winning and dinning of military officers.

Then there's the matter of Admiral Hyman G. Ricover.  congressional
investigators say the company extended more than $75,000 in gifts to the
''father of the nuclear Navy,'' but he has denied any impropriety.

Nevertheless, Representative John D. Dingell of Michigan is pressing for harsh
measures: the cancellationa of the company's submarine contacts and the
Government takeover of Elecric Boat under provisions of Federal law that
prescribe such remedies for contract bribery.

But other contractors think such a remedy is a long shot.  General Dynamics,
though it once threatened to shut down or sell Electric Boat in the heat of the
Previous dispute with the Navy, says it has done nothing to warrant a government
takeover.

The company has spent $270 million modernizing its shipbuilding facilities in
the last decade.  And despite all the Navy seem to be on good terms again Aides
say Navy Secretary John Lehman is cool to Mr.  Dingle's threat.

''There's much more cooperation between the Navy and General Dynamics,.'' than
there was a few years ago says Ken Brown, the yard's director of operations,
''I'm amazed at the cordial relationship.  There used to be nothing but
animosity.''

For its part, the Navy says it will not comment while the investigation is
underway.

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS

TEXAS INSTRUMENTS, the largest surveyor of semiconductors to Uncle Sam, has bee
spending heavily in the last five yers to transform itself from a subcontractor
into a prime contractor.  Its goal is to capture a growing share of the big
defense budget and its efforts is paying off: Pentagon sales totaled $1.2
billion last year, about 20 percent of the company's revenues.

But the Government's largess has been a mixed blessing.  Last fall, the Pentagon
announced that the Dallas company had been shipping semiconductor parts that
were improperly tested, endangering the reliability and performance of some of
the nation's most sophisticated weaponry.  Semiconductors are the building
blocks of high technology weapons, as important to today's forces as steel and
gunpowerder were at the turn of the century.

The Government acted swiftly and severely: It forced the company to halt
semiconductor shipments and froze delivery of weapons containing the parts, a
move that affected about 30 companies making complex weapons systems.

So far, the bottom line effects have been painful for Texas Instruments.  In the
Third quarter alone, the debacle reduced profts by $13 million.  But its
troubles are not just financial: Although deliveries of some of the 6,300
questionable parts resumed recently, the company is now the object of a Pentagon
investigtion that could result is some punitive action.

What went wrong?  The company which ranks 33d among the nation's prime military
contractors - insists that the explosive growth in demand for its military
hardware was to blame.  ''The thing has grown pretty rapidly over the last five
years and the system just hasn't kept pace,'' says James Houlditch, manager of
quaity assurance for semiconductors,.  ''We probably didn't have the tools
inplace to keep up with demand.''

Other companies find themselvess in the same predicament.  Last year, National
Semiconductor paid the Government $1.7 million in fines of charges of improper
testing.  At Hughes Aircraft, which was overwhelmed last year when missile sales
rose to $900 million from $700 million, the Pentagon is holding up payments
because of faulty work on its missiles.

For its part, the military has tried to protect itself on semiconductors by
demanding that prime contractors test all of them before delivery and by asking
for better warranties from prime contractors, who, in turn, are expected to put
more pressure on parts makers.

At Texas Instruments, a huge clean up job is underway in semiconductors.  Since
September, 200 harried software engineers have been working overtime to
straighten out the problems.  They first had to comb through hundreds of pages
of specifications from the weaons manufacturers, checking them against software
programs.  They found several of 4,00 steps in each testing program to be out of
line.

Although on spokesman said the errors just'' crept '' in overtime, Mr. Houlditch
lays part of the blame on the military for insisting on customized devices when
standardized ones would do.

The company, which makes infrared scanning devices for military aircraft and
highspeed antiradqar missile, called HARM, for the Navy, the Marines and the Air
Force in Addition to semiconductors for the military, now says the semiconductor
problem is pretty much behind it.

A revised audit system is in place and a computerization of the order entry
system has been increased to reduce errors.  The compamy is now telling all who
will listen that there was never a quality problem - only a testing problem.

But William Mitchell, the President of the Texas Instrment division that makes
military hardware, is not taking any chances.  He is testing all the
semiconductor parts, even the ones that are manufctured by his own company.
''With the current fallout rate of semiconductors, it's cost effective for me to
do it,'' he says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of problem-plagued weapons systems and equipment. ; Table
outlines contract earnings of major defense contractors and their principal
products.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHOLE FEMINIST CATALOGUE

BYLINE: By Andrew Hacker

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1757 words


Andrew Hacker teaches political science at Queens College. His most recent book
is ''U/S: A Statistical Portrait of the American People.'' SISTERHOOD IS GLOBAL

The International Women's Movement Anthology.  Edited and introduced by Robin
Morgan.  815 pp. New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday. $24.95.

The typical Soviet woman has at least a dozen abortions during her childbearing
years, while in Canada one woman in five will be sexually assaulted. Precisely
13.36 percent of all Nepalese girls between 10 and 14 are already married. One
city in India recorded 394 ''cases of brides burned to death'' in 1980-81,
mainly by husbands coveting a second dowry. These are just some of the facts and
figures in ''Sisterhood Is Global,'' a sometimes grim but always fascinating
compendium on the worldwide condition of women. The contributions cover some 70
countries, from Afghanistan to Zambia. For each nation, we are given a
''statistical preface,'' followed by an original essay by one of the country's
leading feminists. While the gathering of facts presented here is impressive,
the reader should be warned: the book abounds with emotions and opinions, and
has little of the style of a standard reference work. And despite its stress on
statistics, accuracy is not its strongest suit.

In fairness, one should concede the essays make no claim to objectivity. Most
take the form of letters, offering impressions on how women are faring on the
writer's home ground. The editor, Robin Morgan, chose the contributors and then
gave them a free rein. In one sense this is a limitation; what we hear about
each of the countries reflects a single point of view. However, when added
together, the book presents an array - and disarray - of views on where women
stand and what steps they should be taking to improve their lot. For the Dutch
contributor, the major issue is ''Do we still make love with our oppressor?''
The problems are rather different in Haiti, where teen-age girls stitch
baseballs for 14 cents an hour. Elsewhere, the titles tell much of the story:
''Women in a Warrior Society'' (Australia); ''Fighting for the Right to Fight''
(Colombia); ''Elegance Amid the Phallocracy'' (Senegal). From Copenhagen, the
writer wonders if, given all the options she has, she can honestly contend
''that something is really rotten in the state of Denmark.'' A colleague in
Cairo apologizes for the delay in completing her contribution, caused by an
80-day sentence for ''stirring up sectarian strife.''

Not all are critical. From Saudi Arabia and Poland we hear surprisingly positive
prognoses by authors with important academic posts. On the other hand, almost a
dozen of the essays are by exiles, or residents who find it prudent to remain
anonymous.

Some devote their space to poetry (West Germany) or parables (Morocco). Margaret
Papandreou, the wife of Greece's Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, provides a
delightful vignette of ''Village Sisterhood'' in Greece. Only a handful are
really dull (''New Zealand women are without liberty; we are the chattels, the
property of men''). This is true, unfortunately, of the piece on the United
States, which consists largely of slogans (''If men got pregnant, abortion would
become a sacrament''). The entry from Ireland is hilarious. Nell McCafferty
relates the saga of the Pill Train, the only ''gesture of a united women's
movement in Ireland.'' Belfast may be under colonial rule, but at least
contraceptives are available in the North. Hence a publicized train ride, to
obtain packets of pills to brandish back in Dublin. Pharmacists in the North
were friendly but said prescriptions were required. They offered condoms
instead, not quite the same thing.

One of the most rewarding, if unintended, features of ''Sisterhood Is Global''
is the ideological debate implicit in its pages. By temperament, the editor and
almost all the contributors veer toward the left. Yet, as Simone de Beauvoir
points out in her essay on France, if that side of the spectrum has been the
''chosen friend'' of militant women, it has also been their ''worst enemy.'' An
ally because the left calls for rebuilding society, which would presumably end
barriers based on gender. But an enemy because virtually every left-leaning
regime has put women's issues on the back burner or ignored them altogether.
This tension becomes vivid with the articles on the Marxist orbit.

Thus the essay on the Soviet Union, by a samizdat editor now exiled in Paris,
tells of alcoholic husbands, abortions without anesthetics and K.G.B.
harrassment of women who protest brutal conditions. A bitter report on Cuba,
also by an emigre, says that women who backed the revolution feel betrayed.
''The real transformation never took place. And it will not take place so long
as bearded men cling to power.'' However, the Chinese contributor, a professor
writing under a pseudonym, does not seem overly perturbed that her country
''does not allow an independent women's movement to exist.'' She applauds the
one-child-per-family policy, since it will enable women to vie for more
responsible positions.

Communiques from other Marxist capitals are even more sanguine. From Managua, we
hear that ''the massive participation of Nicaraguan women, their sacrifice and
heroism, made possible our national liberation.'' Similarly, the report from
Hanoi tells us that ''the women of Vietnam have energetically devoted themselves
to the establishment and defense of the revolutionary power.'' Needless to say,
both writers hold official positions.

While Robin Morgan tells us that the women in ''Sisterhood Is Global'' share a
''feminist vision of transforming the world,'' her book reveals their
ambiguities. Simone de Beauvoir is frank to say that the rift between
''socialist feminists'' and ''radical feminists'' cannot be papered over. In
politics as elsewhere, those who see betrayal by men as the inevitable outcome
counsel going it alone. Others stick with movements led by men because that is
where the real power resides.

But there remains the issue of accuracy. With the essays, the question is less
apt to arise: we expect emphasis and exaggeration in personal communications.
However, when it comes to figures, more rigorous standards apply. The
statistical prefaces were prepared by researchers and interns connected with the
project and the editor assures us that every item ''was put through a crucible
of care.'' After checking the longest section - the one on the United States - I
feel obliged to aver that care is not enough.

The problem is not that figures were miscopied from documentary sources. In some
cases, it is clear that the researchers did not know how to read the tables.
Hence the errors in computing womens's earnings relative to men's, and in
classifying the types of day-care arrangements made by working mothers.
Elsewhere, suspicious-sounding numbers were not checked against more substantial
sources. This apparently accounts for inflated infant mortality rates, the
undercount of men on welfare rolls and errors in findings on postdivorce income.
The simple failure to distinguish ''families'' from ''households'' yields a huge
overcount of unmarried couples.


ANOTHER tendency is to report the findings of various studies without asking how
the figures were obtained. Thus we are told that as many as nine women out of 10
have suffered ''sexual harassment'' on the job, while seven wives in 10
''experience battery'' while married. Perhaps. But tell us what definitions were
used. And what are we to make of the claim that in the United States, ''a woman
is raped every three seconds,'' which counts out to some 10 million rapes
annually, a thousand times the official count? Similarly, if 1.2 million
children aged 15 or under are ''involved in prostitution or pornography every
year,'' it means one child in 50 undergoes these serious abuses. Such
statistical assertions must be made more persuasive, especially when specific
sources are not given. Nor will it do to cite a single survey when a variety are
available. The results of studies of contraceptive methods, for example, vary by
as much as 50 percent depending on sampling and reporting of responses.

I agree with the editors that most statistics currently in use have an
androcentric bias. They are based on categories created by men, with little
recognition of the lives women lead. Still, working with numbers requires
knowing the nuances, and not all the ground rules are readily self-taught. As it
happens, some of our top statisticians are women. I am sure, had they been
asked, Janet Norwood at the Bureau of Labor Statistics or Arlene Saluter of the
Census would have been pleased to go over one or more of the sections.

That they weren't suggests that the compilers of ''Sisterhood Is Global'' view
women who succeed in a men's world as themselves suspect. While the book lists
the nations where women have served as head of state, these women are not cited
as role models. Too professional a tone may signify one has succumbed to the
''patriarchical mentality,'' wherein, as Robin Morgan puts it, ''the standard
for being human is being male.'' Insofar as this is so, the women's movement
wants more than fairer access to opportunities and power. It is asking that we
reconsider our most basic presumptions about how we analyze the world.B



APARTHEID AN PRIORITIES When I was growing up, I got a lot of encouragement from
women. Women are so resourceful, all over the world. They are the ones who keep
the family together, who augment salaries, who absorb and tolerate pain and
suffering and humiliation. I'm not saying absorbing pain is the answer, the
ideal. But it is an inspiration. Women have always resisted injustice. Even in
our own ancestral heritage, women played very prominent roles. To this day,
outside Pretoria in an area called Hammamskraal, there is an African woman,
Esther Kekana, who is a chieftain in her own right over men and women. (Almost
all of our chiefs - male and female - got their position by heredity because
they were of royal blood, but the South African government appointed chieftains
themselves.) . . . The impact of apartheid on all our lives creates pressures to
relegate ''women's issues'' to a remote priority. But I strongly believe that
feminist issues must be dealt with concurrently, as a major area of injustice,
because after the ''political'' struggles are over, the women tend to be
forgotten. - From ''Sisterhood Is Global.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A DRAFT CANNOT CURB MILITARY RECKLESSNESS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


To the Editor:


Albert Tucher recommends a return to the draft as a check on U.S. military
adventurism (letter, Jan. 15). In spite of the astute observations he makes, his
proposal is tantamount to recommending gasoline as a firefighting agent.

Where, in the draft-fed slaughters of the 20th century, does Mr. Tucher detect a
policy constraint imposed by conscription? Politicians and military
professionals undertake wars with the full expectation of resorting to a draft
to sustain or enlarge the fighting if quick victory eludes them. Without a
draft, the Vietnam War would have been won or abandoned sooner than it was, for
economics played a bigger role than morality in ending it. Making wars expensive
by using purely professional soldiers is a better constraint on military
rashness than the draft.

Part of the problem is who is drafted. Young men have been the victims of
conscription for so long that their hostage value to political fortune is
negligible. But women, who as voters, taxpayers, teachers and consumers help
provide the means and motives for sending men to war, shun the risks of war
while demanding the benefits secured by war. By making the coercion of men
easier, the draft exemption of women plays into the hands of military
adventurists.  As the strong nuclear disarmament movement shows, opposition to
war increases with the number of people who feel threatened by it. Coupling a
male-only draft to a protected female political bloc is a deplorable expedient
for circumventing opposition to conventional warfare. It makes a shambles of
equal rights as well.

The traditional draft is a proven failure as a check on military recklessness.
Why resurrect a failure?

MCGILL VALENTINE Stamford, Conn., Jan. 18, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IS CALLED DESPARATE FOR AID

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 27


''Vietnam has lived without you for a thousand years, and we can live without
you for a thousand more,'' a Foreign Ministry official told a group of visiting
Americans recently.

But diplomats and development experts from both Western and Eastern bloc
nations, interviewed here on the eve of the arrival Monday of Secretary General
Javier Perez de Cuellar, tell a different story. Vietnam, they say, is
desperately in need of Western assistance and wants to improve its relations
with the United States.

The major stumbling block is Hanoi's occupation of Cambodia, which has led to
the curtailment of most Western aid and stood in the way of the establishment of
diplomatic ties with Washington. The visit of Mr. Perez de Cuellar, his first to
Hanoi as Secretary General, is therefore being watched closely by diplomats for
signs of new initiatives on Cambodia from Hanoi.

In assessing the impasse, the Vietnamese leadership appears to be torn between
staying in Cambodia for reasons of national security and finding a way to leave
in the hope of attracting more development aid.

Major Health Problems

Vietnam, the diplomats and aid officials say, is a country where malnutrition
and intestinal infections that have disappeared from many parts of Asia are
still the major health problems. It is a country where the standards of many
goods and services are falling rather than rising, where one of the most
sought-after skills is the repair and rehabilitation of obsolete machinery.

''Every time I pass through Bangkok on my way here,'' an American scholar said,
''I see the gap between Thailand and Vietnam getting wider.''

According to its own official figures, Vietnam failed to meet most of its major
economic targets last year. Nearly a decade after the fall of Saigon, Vietnam
(with a per-capita income lower than India's) ranks with its allies Laos and
Cambodia as the poorest nation in Southeast Asia.

The evidence can be seen in the streets of Hanoi, a beautiful city almost
unchanged architecturally since it was abandoned by the French 30 years ago.
Shabbily dressed people crowd into rundown homes and ride ancient trams brought
here decades ago from Strasbourg. Drinking water is no longer chlorinated, the
electricity supply is erratic. A worker's basic wage hovers around one dollar a
month at the black market exchange rate, about $25 at the inflated official
rate. A bicycle, most people's only form of transportation, can cost as much as
$100.

Guerrilla Camps Emptied

Vietnam's critics say Hanoi may have already decided not to give ground on the
Cambodia issue, particularly now that its troops have successfully emptied the
guerrilla camps of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the larger of
two non-Communist opposition groups loosely allied with the Communist Khmer
Rouge against the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh.

Hanoi, diplomats say, may be hoping instead to persuade the United Nations,
which has called for Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia and does not recognize
the Phnom Penh regime, to accept the status quo.

If this is true, diplomats say, the reasons are manifold and complex, more often
conjecture than known, because Hanoi remains one of the toughest, most
distrustful and most secretive of capitals in which to work.

This atmosphere, according to foreign residents, grows out of an overriding
obsession with national security, born of 40 years of war and possibly
encouraged by the presence of large numbers of Soviet advisers.

''It is impossible to exaggerate the paranoia of Vietnam,'' a diplomat said.

Internal Discord Suggested

These fears of vulnerability, coupled with a historical tendency to see Greater
Indochina as its sphere of influence, make Hanoi reluctant to abandon the
Cambodian buffer, diplomats say. Some diplomats sympathetic to Vietnam say Hanoi
may have rightly calculated that the loss of control over Cambodia may be too
high a price to pay for what might turn out to be a disappointing amount of
Western aid.

Internal disagreements may also be playing a part in the reluctance to
compromise on Cambodia, diplomats suggest. Hanoi's apparent change of heart on
the release of ''re-education'' camp inmates - now called ''criminals'' here -
may reflect pressure on foreign- policy makers from national and provincial
security officials, some diplomats say.

Fears of foreign-supported subversion has kept high the level of accusatory
polemics directed at China, Thailand and the United States. What is not certain,
according to diplomats, is whether this hard line is unanimous. They say there
seem to be those in the leadership who want better Chinese ties and who might
prefer working with Peking than Moscow despite centuries of China-Vietnam
rivalry.

Preoccupation with security has led, aid experts say, to an inattention to
development needs. There has been little long-range planning and little
construction of necessary energy plants, roads and buildings. Without this,
economic experts say, gaps between Vietnam and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (and China under its new economic policies) will grow
geometrically.

Heavy Spending on Army

Vietnam, already heavily in debt to the Soviet bloc, is now thought to spend
more than half its gross national product on the military and maintains the
world's fourth-largest armed forces.

There are known to be younger men in the ranks of future political leaders who
want to outgrow the ''perpetual struggle'' mentality of the past and concentrate
more on economic development, taking a more pragmatic approach and drawing on
Western technological and management skills. Efforts to loosen controls on both
agriculture and small industry have already paid off in some areas, but the
experiment remains controversial.

Disagreements over budget and planning policies may be holding up the calling of
the next party congress, some diplomats suggest.

Soviet aid, thought to be worth more than a billion dollars a year, has had
little effect on daily life, residents of Hanoi say. East bloc equipment is
sometimes technically inferior and inappropriate for Vietnam's needs, aid
experts add.

''I have seen a new machine come off the boat from Eastern Europe that was 30
years out of date the day it was made,'' an aid official said, ''These people
deserve better.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of food vendor in Saigon

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: CBS JURY CAUTIONED ON SHARON PARALLELS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words


Last Thursday, when word spread of a final verdict in the libel trial of Ariel
Sharon's $50 million suit against Time magazine, there was an exodus of
reporters and spectators from room 318 in the United States Courthouse on Foley
Square.

They scrambled for room 110, where, after two months, the Sharon trial was
ending. But, in room 318, the longer and more complex of the two trials that
have made ''libel'' a buzzword in and beyond the courthouse continued apace.
There, Judge Pierre N. Leval is presiding over Gen. William C. Westmoreland's
$120 million suit against CBS and three individual defendants.

At the end of the day, Judge Leval took note of the action two floors below. He
cautioned the jury - which has been allowed to follow news accounts of even its
own case - that the Westmoreland trial ''is not any other case, and you are not
to let yourselves be influenced by the results of any other case.''

It was the second time the judge had expressed such concern. When the Sharon
jury began its deliberations, he said that ''all of you may well be aware that
there is another case in this courthouse as to which parallels or comparisons
have been drawn from time to time in the press with this one.''

But the Sharon case, he said, ''is absolutely and totally different from this
one. If you take two automobile accidents, they have nothing to do with each
other. One is one, the other is the other,'' he said, and they involve ''two
completely different sets of facts.''

The Sharon case pivoted on statements in one paragraph of a Time cover story
about the Israeli investigation of the 1982 massacre by the Phalangists, a
Christian faction in Lebanon. The case before Judge Leval turns on the entirety
of a 90- minute 1982 CBS Reports documentary that accused General Westmoreland's
command in Vietnam in 1967 of deliberately understating enemy strength, to show
progress in the war.

But the Westmoreland case, which has generated what Judge Leval once estimated
to be ''millions of pieces of paper,'' is drawing to a close, too. The judge
gave the lawyers for each side in the case 150 hours to present their evidence
and cross-examine and, as of Thursday afternoon, when court recessed for the
weekend, General Westmoreland's side had used nearly 130 hours and CBS's, 107.
The lawyers are now predicting that summations may start as early as Feb. 21,
with the case going to the jury that weekend.

What the jurors have made of the conflicting, highly statistical evidence so far
- if they have made anything of it at all - cannot be gleaned from their faces
or body gestures. The lawyers are looking for signs but, if they are there, they
are usually too cryptic or too fleeting to mean much.

While one female juror has a ready smile for almost any joke offered up by David
Boies, the principal lawyer for CBS, even Mr. Boies doesn't know whether she
just likes to laugh. Many found reason to laugh the other day when Mr. Boies,
having objected to some maneuver by the plaintiff's lawyer, conceded that he was
''in a little difficult position, because basically I don't believe there's
anything wrong with it.'' They laughed, too, when Judge Leval ordered a witness
to answer a question with ''yes or no or anything in between.''

Yet some jurors have shown virtually no emotion since testimony began on Oct.
15, and some have turned their chairs away from witnesses from time to time. But
whether this should be interpreted as momentary indifference or boredom, or as
nothing more than a human need to shift one's weight or re-focus one's eyes, is
not something that the lawyers in room 318 have figured out yet.

Certainly the jurors have had to bear repetitive testimony, and it can be
wearying. One afternoon last month a female juror complained of not feeling
well. Judge Leval, who maintains an air of civility in his courtroom even as the
parties fight over whether a wartime commander sought to deceive his President,
was solicitous of the juror's health. The woman explained, during a conference
in his robing room, that she didn't feel badly except in the courtroom.

''Just I sit in there, I start to feel dizzy,'' she said. ''And then I feel
throw up.'' But, in the end, the juror went back for more. And, for the record,
her discomfort was laid to a bowl of chicken soup she had downed at lunch.

The defense, which began its presentation of evidence three weeks ago, has only
four major witnesses left. Two - Col. Gains Hawkins and Maj. Gen. Joseph A.
McChristian - were senior intelligence officers in Saigon in 1967. Two - Roger
Colloff, a former vice president of CBS News, and Mike Wallace, who narrated the
documentary - were involved in the making of the broadcast 14 years later. Mr.
Wallace is one of the defendants in the case, as are George Crile, the producer
of the program, and Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency
analyst who was a paid consultant for the broadcast.

But, even as these men testify, the lawyers will be wrangling on another front.
Last week, each side in the case gave Judge Leval a lengthy set of proposed
instructions for the jury. Immediately, each side objected to much of the
language of his opponent.

For example, Mr. Boies would have the judge tell the jury that its verdicts
regarding each defendant - each of the four, including CBS, stands separately
before the jury - must be unanimous. But Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's
lawyer, suggested that, while the judge instruct the jury that ''they should
strive'' for unanimity, ''less than unanimous'' verdicts would be
''acceptable.''

Both sides would have to agree to go along with verdicts that were other than
unanimous but, at this stage, that seems unlikely. Mr. Burt said in an interview
that verdicts of, say, 11 to 1 or 10 to 2, would reduce the possibility of a
''hung jury.'' But Mr. Boies said that, unless and until the jury indicated that
it was deadlocked, he saw no reason to depart from the normal practice of
unanimity.

Unlike most Federal civil cases, which are heard by juries of 6 members, there
are 12 jurors in what is officially known as ''82 Civ 7913.'' Before the trial,
Judge Leval said he thought a panel of 12 was ''more appropriate'' to this case,
given the ''monumental issues.''

The Westmoreland case has also involved an unusually high number of lawyers;
indeed, there may be a lawyer for every juror. Two of the lawyers in room 318
represent, not the plaintiff or the defendants, but the C.I.A. and the National
Security Agency. They are there, they say, to see that no classified information
pops out of a witness's mouth. Still another lawyer represents companies with
whom CBS has libel insurance and, occasionally, he volunteers ideas on strategy.

While Mr. Boies and Mr. Burt have conducted most of the examination of the
witnesses, a half-dozen lawyers associated with each of them have performed
every task from writing briefs to taking depositions to hauling across the
courtroom the six-foot- high blow-ups of cables and memorandums that have
figured in the case.

In recent days, the cross-examination of two key CBS witnesses has been handled
by David M. Dorsen, a litigator from the Washington law firm of Sachs,
Greenebaum & Taylor who, when he's not busy at this kind of bar, reviews
restaurants in the Capital. The interrogations by Mr. Dorsen, a former Federal
prosecutor who is widely regarded as more at ease in the courtroom than Mr.
Burt, fueled rumors of a split within the plaintiff team. On the other hand, Mr.
Dorsen, who has long worked with Mr. Burt on the case, had deposed both of the
witnesses, Mr. Adams and George W. Allen, former deputy chief of Vietnamese
affairs for the C.I.A.

On the CBS side, Mr. Boies let the limelight fall last week on William F. Duker,
a 1981 graduate of Yale Law School. Mr. Duker took over the questioning of the
current witness, Douglas Parry, a former C.I.A. analyst. But no lawyer has
worked harder on the case for CBS than Robert H. Baron, a 1981 graduate of
Harvard Law School who, like Mr. Duker, is an associate at the firm of Cravath,
Swaine & Moore.

When Mr. Boies is standing at a lectern posing questions, Mr. Baron is often in
Mr. Boies's green leather armchair - passing him, in manila folders, notes and
advice and documents. An unresolved issue is whether Mr. Baron ever sleeps.
Once, before trial, he flew from New York to San Francisco, back to New York, on
to Frankfurt, West Germany, and back again to New York, interviewing prospective
witnesses at each stop. It was all done in 48 hours.

Some say Mr. Baron then took a nap. Mr. Boies says Mr. Baron took another
deposition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES CAMERON, A JOURNALIST AND COMMENTATOR IN BRITAIN

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 27


James Cameron, a leading figure in post-World War II British journalism and
television, died Saturday night at his London home after a long illness. He was
73.

Mr. Cameron wrote for numerous newspapers, but was most associated with Lord
Beaverbrook's Daily Express, where he began his Fleet Street career shortly
before World War II, and with the Cadbury family's News Chronicle, which closed
in 1960. He published several books, including a widely read 1967 autobiography,
''Point of Departure,'' and in his later years became a noted television
commentator and newspaper columnist.

''When I started, he was my idol and more than 30 years later, it remains the
same,'' said David A. Chipp, editor in chief of Press Association, a British
news agency.

He was born Mark James Walter Cameron on June 17, 1911, the son of a Scottish
barrister who turned to fiction writing. Mr. Cameron began his newspaper career
as a 15-year-old office boy in Manchester. He arrived on Fleet Street from
Dundee, Scotland, in 1939 after the death of his first wife, the former Eleanor
Murray, during the birth of their daughter. His subsequent marriage to Elizabeth
O' Conor resulted in the birth of a son.  The marriage ended in divorce. He
married Moneesha Sarkar, who survives him, in 1971.

He became noted for his wide travels through postwar Europe, the Far East, and
Africa, as an elegant writer and observer of detail, and as a committed
Socialist.

Articles he wrote from mainland China in the 1950's were printed in The New York
Times Magazine. In 1965, he became the first Western correspondent to tour North
Vietnam after the American bombing there began. He reported, in a series of
articles from Hanoi that was published simultaneously by The Evening Standard of
London and The New York Times, that the bombing had ''welded the nation
together'' and that its effect was limited because ''in Vietnam there is always
another way'' .

In 1946, Mr. Cameron covered the testing of an atomic bomb at the Pacific atoll
of Bikini and returned home to become a founding member of the Campaign for
Nuclear Disarmament. He was named a Commander of the British Empire in 1979.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Cameron is survived by a son, a daughter and three
stepchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Goldwater Backs Rise In Budget for Military

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 207 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Senator Barry Goldwater, the new chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said
today he supported a continued buildup in the military budget, suggesting an
increase only slightly less than what the Reagan Administration is proposing.

He said he and the military forces could accept an increase in military
spending, on top of inflation, of 5.5 to 5.8 percent in the next fiscal year.

The Administration is to submit a Federal budget to Congress next week in which
it is expected to call for real growth in the military budget of 5.7 to 6.4
percent, depending on the inflation estimate used.

Mr. Goldwater made his remarks in an appearance on the NBC News program ''Meet
The Press.''

In a somewhat enigmatic remark, Mr. Goldwater also said today that he believed
the United States had employed a nuclear weapon in the Vietnam War, saying, ''I
think we've used one of them in Vietnam where it theoretically just cleared a
big circle out of everything.''

Very large conventional bombs were used in Vietnam to clear terrain, but
Government officials and Vietnam historians say that no nuclear weapons were
ever used there. An above-gound nuclear detonation would have been relatively
easy for the Soviet Union or China to detect.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EUPHORIA AT 'TODAY' AFTER TYING ABC FOR 1ST

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words


It was dark all around Rockefeller Center last Friday at 6 A.M., and tired men
and women were trudging in to work, but in NBC's Control Room 3K there was
raucously giddy laughter: For the first time in almost three years, ''Today''
had finished first in the ratings, tying ABC's ''Good Morning America.''

''The CBS Morning News'' with its new format and new co-anchor, Phyllis George,
came in third.

In the morning news program business, even a tie for first after years in the
wilderness is triumph - it's a baseball pennant or a successful NASA liftoff -
and, accordingly, the afternoon before, when the Nielsen numbers came through,
Lawrence K. Grossman, the president of NBC News, sent up a bottle of champagne.

''It's nice,'' Mr. Grossman said from a conference in Florida, ''but it's only a
tie and it's only the first week.'' His safety-first language belied the general
euphoria around the network. The ''Today'' show's revival carried wider
significance to NBC than just a program's success: A two-hour five-days-a-week
program serves as an important flagship for all NBC News programs.

''Good morning,'' said Bryant Gumbel, the ''Today'' anchor, testing his
microphone at 6:45. ''Good morning, in Israel, the reaction to the Sharon libel
trial is . . . Good morning. In Israel, the reaction to the Sharon libel trial
is . . .'' A teleprompter with Mr. Gumbel's script rolled the words across one
of the video monitors.

''It's going to be a long haul,'' said Steve Friedman, the executive producer of
the program, who sat in shirtsleeves having an early morning cup of diet soda.



Gumbel Goes to Moscow

This year, the ''Today'' surge came in conjunction with NBC's ratings rise and a
determination by the NBC chairman, Grant Tinker, and Mr. Grossman to jostle
viewers into remembering the program. ''Today'' was promoted all over the
evening airwaves, and an effort was made to raise Mr. Gumbel's profile as a
serious newsman: He hosted ''Today'' from Moscow for a week in October, and
handled the assignment aggressively and sure-footedly. NBC news executives were
literally exultant. Earlier this month, he went to Geneva. ''Good Morning
America'' producers disclosed last week that they would be sending their anchor,
David Hartman, to Vietnam this spring.

There was, as well, a coalescing of ''chemistry'' on the program among its
principals: Mr. Gumbel, Jane Pauley - who some on the program say showed both
new ease and determination when she returned last February from a three-month
pregnancy leave - the ebullient, spheroid- shaped weatherman, Willard Scott, and
the program's literate, wild- haired, -browed, -moustachioed cultural
correspondent, Gene Shalit.

Many say that the center of the program, however, is Mr. Friedman who sees the
competition to book guests as war.

''They've been real sharp in their bookings,'' said Phyllis McGrady, the
executive producer of ABC's ''Good Morning America.'' To call ''Good Morning
America,'' the rival of the ''Today'' show is to underestimate the competition
between the two programs. Mr. Friedman tells, and Miss McGrady denies, a story
in which ''Good Morning America'' sent staff members in a limousine to pick up
the mother of the captured flier Robert Goodman on a morning when she was to do
an NBC interview, ringing her doorbell and identifying themselves as being from
''Today.''



'There's Competition'

Few minutes go by in the control rooms of either of the programs when either
producer doesn't check out what the other has put on the air. ''It does exist,''
said Miss McGrady. ''There's competition. It's healthy. I think they've changed
in tone: Jane and Bryant seem more at ease, and they are enjoying it.''

The ''Today'' show personnel all agree that when Mr. Gumbel came onto the
program as the main anchor three years ago, it caused some tension on the air.
''As everyone around here knows I went to the management and made as persuasive
a case as I could for equality,'' said Miss Pauley. ''They listened and went the
other direction.''

Miss Pauley said the argument that Mr. Friedman made was that one of the
program's difficulties had been that the audience couldn't find an authoritative
center to the program, while David Hartman was commanding viewer attention and
affection on ''Good Morning America.''

''It was hard for me to cry sexism when there had been women on television for
30 years, but no one black had ever hosted or anchored any network news
program,'' she said, referring to Mr. Gumbel, who is black.

Miss Pauley has, however, held on to at least an equal news presence on the
program to Mr. Gumbel's.

''A big point in our favor,'' said Mr. Gumbel, ''is that Jane's back. She seems
to have returned with a brighter outlook, and a better realization this is all
not life and death.''



A Self-Confident 'Quarterback'

Mr. Gumbel, who called himself ''the quarterback'' on the program, has a nearly
complete sang-froid about his role: ''I have always been arrogant enough to
believe I'm doing a pretty good job,'' he said. ''I've got the self-confidence
needed, even when the results wouldn't necessarily justify it.'' He said he has
never thought of television as ''that big a deal.'' ''This has never been church
to me,'' he said. ''I don't get scared by a lot, and certainly not by things on
television.''

''He has gotten more confident and he has gotten better,'' said Mr. Friedman of
Mr. Gumbel. ''In the beginning he was interested in showing people what he knew.
Now he asks questions for the answers.''

When, that week in 1983, ''Today'' found itself in the ignominious position of
sharing third place with the perennially third-placed ''CBS Morning News,'' it
was, said Miss Pauley, ''the low point.''

On Friday, though, Mr. Friedman looked around at the 40 television monitors
surrounding the room with the unbroken focus of a surveyor, addressed his crew
with the severity of a submarine captain. ''Watch it,'' he said to the engineers
filing in, ''every shot could be the deciding factor.''

In his studio, Mr. Gumbel was interviewing Ray Cave, the managing editor of
''Time.'' ''We're the only one who have Cave,'' Mr. Friedman said happily.

Ariel Sharon was reportedly on his way to be interviewed by Miss Pauley. Mr.
Friedman looked up at the monitors and saw that the ''CBS Morning News'' had a
videotape of Mr. Sharon. ''If you're going to put it on tape,'' he chortled,
''call it 'yesterday,' not 'Today.' '' Then he looked on another monitor across
the darkened control room, a sound-insulated hull from which shots are chosen
and the show is kept on schedule, and saw Mr. Sharon being interviewed on ''Good
Morning America'' by Barbara Walters. All three networks' morning programs had
the same story on the air at the same time.

''I don't know,'' said Mr. Friedman, ''maybe it's overkill.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gene Shalit, Jane Pauley, Bryant Gumbel and Willard Scott
during the'' Today Show''; Photo of Steve Friedman working in the control room

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. CHIEF VISITS VIETNAM FOR TALKS ON CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 28


Javier Perez de Cuellar arrived here today on his first official visit as United
Nations Secretary General and went directly to a series of meetings with
Vietnam's Foreign Minister.

The Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told reporters before Mr. Perez de
Cuellar arrived that he expected their private talks tonight and on Tuesday to
cover Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and the wider issues of ''peace and
stability in Southeast Asia.'' He said they would also discuss ''bilateral
relations between Vietnam and the United Nations.''

The Vietnamese prepared a low-key reception for Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who
arrived late this afternoon from Vientiane, Loas. He had also visited Bangkok
for talks with Thai leaders and had visited the Thai-Cambodian border for the
first time.

He is to meet Tuesday with Prime Minister Pham Van Dong. On Wednesday he will
tour several United Nations projects in Vietnam. Hanoi has relied heavily on the
United Nations for technical assistance in the absence of Western aid. Many
Western nations, as well as Japan and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
have withheld development assistance from Vietnam because of its military
occupation of Cambodia.

The United Nations Security Council and General Assembly have condemned the
occupation.

Mr. Thach said he would tell the Secretary General that the United Nations
should stop allowing anti-Cambodian guerrillas to use civilian border camps as
havens. The organization aids the displaced Cambodian civilians in those camps.
Rebels from the camps have been attacking Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

''The hands of the United Nations are bloodied,'' Mr. Thach said. ''If the
United Nations cares about humanity, they must forbid the use of the camps for
military purposes.''

The Foreign Minister said Vietnamese troops might have been responsible for the
deaths of about 30 civilians last Thursday at Dangrek, a Cambodian camp where
Vietnamese refugees who have escaped across Cambodia are also staying while
attempting to find homes in the West.

He said it was inhumane to use civilian camps as a facade for guerrilla forces.



Thai Border Areas Attacked

ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Jan. 28 (AP) - Vietnamese artillery bombarded Khmer
Rouge positions along a rugged sector of the Thai-Cambodian border south of here
today, apparently in an attempt to blunt guerrilla counterattacks.

Military analysts in Thailand predicted the forces of the Communist Khmer Rouge
would be the next target of the Vietnamese offensive against guerrillas along
the border.

Thai officers said the first report showed five Vietnamese were killed and six
Khmer Rouge soldiers were wounded in the fighting about 30 miles south of
Aranyaprathet.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnam Veterans' Rate Of Death Found Higher

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 28


Researchers studying death certificates have reported that a sampling of
Massachusetts veterans of the Vietnam War died at a higher rate than nonveterans
and veterans who did not serve in Vietnam.

''The findings in this study support the hypothesis that white male Vietnam
veterans are at greater risk of death due to self-inflicted or stress-related
conditions'' than other men in Massachusetts, the researchers said.

The study, sponsored by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and the
Office of Veterans Services was made public Sunday.

The researchers said they found 28 deaths from stroke among the Vietnam
veterans, in contrast to 20.2 deaths that would have been expected, based on
statistics from the other groups; 169 motor vehicle accident deaths, in contrast
to 133.2 that would have been expected, and 102 suicides in contrast to 86.1
that would have been expected.

The study also reported a sharply higher incidence of deaths among the Vietnam
veterans from cancer involving connective and soft tissues.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-REP. PAUL McCloskey BACKS CBS ON STRENGTH OF ENEMY TROOPS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words


A former United States Representative and two former Central Intelligence Agency
analysts testified yesterday that Gen. William C. Westmoreland should not have
removed the Vietcong's self-defense forces in 1967 from the official listing of
enemy strength known as the order of battle.

The decision to delete those forces - which also resulted in their not being
counted at current levels in a special intelligence estimate for President
Lyndon B. Johnson in November 1967 - is a key issue in the 16-week-old trial of
General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS.

The suit stems from a 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' that accused the general's command in Saigon of engaging in a
''conspiracy'' to show progress in the Vietnam War by understating the size and
nature of the enemy. That thesis was based largely on 15 years of research by a
former C.I.A. analyst, Samuel A. Adams, who was a paid consultant for the
broadcast and is now a defendant in the lawsuit.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from January 1964
to June 1968, contends that the broadcast defamed him by saying he had lied
about enemy troop strength to President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Former Representative a Witness

The witnesses for CBS in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday were Paul
N. McCloskey Jr., a Representative from California between 1967 and 1982 who ran
for the Republican nomination for President in 1971 on an antiwar platform, and
Douglas J. Parry and John I. Dickerson, who were C.I.A. analysts in 1967.

Mr. Parry, who had worked at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., said C.I.A.
officials had been ''cowards'' for ''conforming'' in 1967 to the newly adopted
position of General Westmoreland's command: that the part-time, hamlet-based
self-defense forces were inconsequential militarily and could not be estimated
accurately.

Mr. Parry also testified that, after the Tet offensive of January 1968 the
C.I.A. estimated that North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam during
the fall of 1967 was 20,000 to 30,000 a month, quadruple the rate stated at the
time by General Westmoreland's command. The documentary used a monthly figure of
20,000, too, and charged that the command had blocked reports about the higher
infiltration.

But Judge Pierre N. Leval twice reminded the jury that the ''truth'' issue in
the case was not whether the command's estimates ''were right or even close to
right.'' The issue, he said, is whether they were made ''honestly.''

Mr. Dickerson, who worked in 1967 at the C.I.A.'s station in Saigon, said he
came to believe the military was involved in a ''conscious effort, a deliberate
conspiracy to keep the numbers in the order of battle below a certain pre-
defined, arbitrary level.''

Like other witnesses for CBS, both Mr. Dickerson and Mr. Parry were called to
the stand to demonstrate that Mr. Adams had a reasonable basis for his views
about the enemy strength dispute and was not alone in those views. Both said
they conveyed their sentiments to Mr. Adams in 1967.

Package of Secret Documents

Mr. McCloskey recalled meeting Mr. Adams in the spring of 1973, when they both
testified at the Pentagon Papers trial of Daniel Ellsberg. Shortly thereafter,
Mr. McCloskey said, Mr. Adams went to his office on Capitol Hill with a package
of documents two or three inches thick, that he wanted Mr. McCloskey to keep in
his safe.

''He was afraid that something would happen to him or the documents,'' Mr.
McCloskey said.

Two years later, according to Mr. McCloskey, Mr. Adams returned for the package
and showed him some of its contents. Among the documents, Mr. McCloskey said,
were cables that had been sent in August 1967 from General Westmoreland's
command to the Pentagon and the C.I.A.

Under questioning by Michael R. Doyen, a lawyer for CBS, Mr. McCloskey
identified one of the documents as an Aug. 19, 1967, cable from Gen. Creighton
W. Abrams, General Westmoreland's deputy, to Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

'Gloomy Conclusion'

In the cable, which General Westmoreland supported in a brief message to General
Wheeler the next day, General Abrams minimized the capabilities of the
self-defense forces, opposed their continued inclusion in the order of battle
and warned that the press would draw 'an erroneous and gloomy conclusion'' from
new intelligence estimates that would increase the number for those forces from
70,000 to 120,000.

Mr. McCloskey said he was ''shocked'' when he read the documents ''and I told
Adams, I may even have been the one who used the word, that I thought it was a
conspiracy'' by Generals Abrams and Westmoreland and by Robert W. Komer, who was
head of the pacification program in South Vietnam.

''I told Mr. Adams that 'it was almost a criminal thing' to say that the
self-defense forces 'weren't effective.' '' It was one thing, he remembered
saying, to ''deceive the press and even Congress.'' But to have downgraded the
self-defense forces in the special estimate for the President and other policy
makers in the executive branch ''was a criminal thing,'' he said.

Counterinsurgency Specialist

Mr. McCloskey, a retired colonel in the Marine Corps Reserve who specialized in
''counterinsurgency'' training, recalled referring to some of the cables in a
speech on the House floor on April 23, 1975. Those documents, he told the jury,
''explained the difference'' between the official briefings he received on a
trip to Vietnam in December 1967 ''and what I saw in the field.''

The self-defense forces, said Mr. McCloskey, who served on active duty in Korea
but not in Vietnam, ''probably caused as many casualties as North Vietnamese or
VC regular forces. In my opinion they had to have been included in the order of
battle.''

On cross-examination, David Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, asked Mr.
McCloskey about Mr. Adams's first visit to him in 1973.

Q. Did Mr. Adams tell you he wanted you to have the documents because he was
afraid of being executed?

A. I remember he was concerned that something might happen to him or to the
documents.

Mr. Dorsen then showed Mr. McCloskey a copy of remarks he made in the House on
June 17, 1982, regarding the CBS documentary. Mr. McCloskey had said Mr. Adams,
when he brought the documents, ''was afraid of being executed if his views were
known.''

'Files Would Be Safe'

Mr. McCloskey, who is now a lawyer in California, told Mr. Dorsen that Mr. Adams
''felt his superiors were opposed to his views. He wanted to be sure that, if
anything happened to him, and he feared it might, the files would be safe. I
don't think he used the word 'executed.' ''

Mr. Adams has denied using that word.

Mr. Parry, a 43-year-old Utah lawyer who was a C.I.A. analyst from 1966 to 1968,
said that after the Tet offensive, he had hoped the military would agree with
Mr. Adams and others in the C.I.A. that enemy strength was much higher than had
been indicated.

He recalled saying to Mr. Adams that the military's relatively low figures
''gave us Tet'' and that ''now the intelligence community would listen to us.''

But when military representatives adhered to their own estimates at a conference
on enemy strength in April 1968, Mr. Parry said, he concluded that General
Westmoreland's command was ''not interested in the truth.'' He decided to leave
the C.I.A.

''I had really lost the enthusiasm I had had for the agency. I couldn't be part
of it anymore,'' he recalled saying to Mr. Adams. ''The truth had become
political, and it didn't really matter what truth was, but how it was
packaged.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY IS TOLD PROFESSOR WAS SLAIN BY ACCIDENT IN A MOCK STRUGGLE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 416 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., Jan. 28


In opening arguments today at the trial of a Vietnamese immigrant accused of
murdering a university professor sympathetic to the Communist Government of
Vietnam, the defense portrayed the accused as a frightened victim of
circumstance.

The 21-year-old defendant, Minh Van Lam, is charged with first-degree murder in
the death by shooting of Edward Lee Cooperman, a 48-year-old physics professor
at the California State University's Fullerton Campus. Dr. Cooperman, who
maintained close scientific and political ties to Vietnam, was found dead of a
gunshot wound to the neck in his campus office last Oct. 30. Mr. Lam was
arrested shortly after he telephoned the campus police to alert them to the
killing.

Dressed in black trousers and a white shirt, Mr. Lam listened silently as an
interpreter related the proceedings in the Orange County Superior Court.

Mel Jensen, Deputy District Attorney of Orange County, told the court that
evidence to be presented would not support the defendant's argument that the
death was accidental, and cited inconsistencies in Mr. Lam's account of the
shooting as evidence of his guilt.

Shooting Called an Accident

As the seven-woman, five-man jury looked on, Alan May, Mr. Lam's attorney, said
that Dr. Cooperman and his former student were good friends. He said the
professor and Mr. Lam were playfully enacting an assassination attempt when a
.25-caliber revolver went off accidentally.

Mr. May asserted that Dr. Cooperman had been in fear of his life and had
acquired guns for protection, including the weapon that killed him. He said it
was the professor's idea to engage in the mock struggle.

Mr. Jensen, however, noted that Mr. Lam had originally said he was not present
at the time of the shooting. Upon further questioning the defendant admitted
that he was present when the gun went off.

Mr. May said the defendant had originally given a false account because he was
afraid he would go to jail, but that told the truth after the police told him
not to worry.

After the shooting, which occurred before noon, Mr. Lam said he left the scene
and went to the movies with a woman. He said he returned to the office after 3
P.M. and then called the authorities.

In pretrial arguments, the defense had also asserted that Dr. Cooperman had
regularly befriended young Asian men and bought them black leather jackets.
Witnesses testified that Dr. Cooperman had been seen wrestling with other
students on the floor of his office.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.N. Secretary Confers With Vietnam Leaders

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 29


Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar held another round of talks with
Vietnam's Foreign Minister today that were believed to have centered on Cambodia
and other problems in Southeast Asia.

United Nations officials described the conversations between Mr. Perez de
Cuellar and Foreign Minister Nguyen Cao Thach as ''frank and useful,'' and there
were indications that the two men had had some blunt exchanges concerning the
Cambodian situation.

This afternoon, Mr. Perez de Cuellar also met with Prime Minister Pham Van Dong
at Vietnam's Presidential Palace. The Secretary General told him that the
encounter was a ''very important opportunity for an evaluation of so many
problems.''

Mr. Perez de Cuellar, aides suggested, has been delivering messages to the
Vietnamese from the Thai Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
One Killer Reprieved; Another Faces Death

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., Jan. 29


The Supreme Court refused today to halt the execution of James David Raulerson
early Wednesday, but a second condemned killer got an indefinite reprieve from
Florida's electric chair.

The Court denied Mr. Raulerson a stay by a 6-to-2 vote, clearing the way for his
execution at the Florida State Prison near Starke for killing a Jacksonville
policeman in a 1975 robbery.

Larry Joe Johnson got an indefinite stay of execution from the United States
Circuit Court of Appeals for the 11th District in Atlanta. Mr. Johnson's
attorneys argued that he was suffering a psychological disorder related to his
service in Vietnam when he committed a robbery and murder in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS WITNESS SAYS GENERAL USED 'POLITICAL POWER'

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


Ronald L. Smith, a former Vietnamese affairs analyst for the Central
Intelligence Agency, testified yesterday that he believed Gen. William C.
Westmoreland used his ''political power'' in 1967 to impose a ''grossly
misleading'' estimate of enemy strength on the C.I.A.

The estimate - half the 500,000 to 600,000 advocated by the C.I.A. - was
incorporated into the official military listing of enemy strength known as the
order of battle and was reported to President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff in a special, 25-page assessment in November 1967.

Mr. Smith said he believed the estimate for enemy strength successfully advanced
by representatives of General Westmoreland's command were ''improper, incorrect
and inadequate.'' Mr. Smith added that the C.I.A.'s ''capitulation'' to the
military's position on the question was ''morally unacceptable.''

With regard to General Westmoreland, he said, ''It was wrong both from a
procedural point of view of not allowing the professional intelligence people to
do their work unmencumbered and, seocondly, it was wrong to use the political
power he had at the time to force the thing down our throats.''

Sixth Witness for CBS

Mr. Smith appeared in Federal District Court in Manhattan as the sixth witness
for CBS in the trial of General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit.

The suit stems from a 1982 CBS documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' that accused the general's command in Saigon of engaging in a
''conspiracy'' to show progress in the war by understating the size and nature
of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in South Vietnam in the year before the
Tet offensive of January 1968.

The thesis of the 90-minute program was based largely on 15 years of research by
Samuel A. Adams, a 51-year old former C.I.A. analyst who took part in the
dispute over enemy strength in 1967. Mr. Adams was a paid consultant for the
broadcast and is now a defendant in this trial.

Mr. Smith, who retired from the C.I.A. last month after 26 years of service,
was, in 1967 and 1968, head of the South Vietnam branch of the agency's Office
of Economic Research in Langley, Va. Mr. Adams joined Mr. Smith's branch in
January, 1968, after resigning in protest from another C.I.A. unit that he felt
had been ''compromised'' in its estimates of enemy strength by ''pressures''
from the military.

The head of that unit, George A. Carver Jr., testified for General Westmoreland
last November that Mr. Adams was ''very prone to jump to conclusions and very
intolerant of people who did not share the conclusions to which he jumped.''

Praise for C.I.A. Analyst

But, yesterday, Mr. Smith described Mr. Adams as ''one of the finest analysts
that I ever worked with.''

David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, then recalled that Mr. Adams had been portrayed
as ''a mental case'' in a CBS interview in 1981 with Lieut. Gen. Daniel O.
Graham, a retired director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, an arm of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Q. Did you see any evidence of that?

Mr. Smith smiled.

A. No, I did not see any evidence of it and it would be hard for me to speculate
as to why anyone would say that.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam between January
1964 and June 1968, contends the CBS documentary defamed him by saying he had
lied to President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs.

Dispute on Self-Defense Forces

The program said that, as part of a ''conscious effort'' to minimize estimates
of enemy strength, General Westmoreland had ordered the removal of the
Vietcong's self-defense forces from the order of battle and refused to permit
their inclusion in the special assessment for the President. Those forces were
newly estimated in 1967 at 120,000 - an increase on paper, if not in the field,
of about 50,000.

General Westmoreland testified he dropped the self-defense forces from the order
of battle because he decided they were insignificant militarily and could not be
counted precisely and because their inclusion at a higher number would only be
confusing.

But Mr. Smith said yesterday he was not aware of any intelligence that
''justified that position.'' He said the size of the Tet offensive ''strongly
confirmed that the base of enemy strength was larger than that depicted'' in the
assessment for the President.

Although that assessment did not contain a 1967 figure for the self-defense
forces, it noted that in early 1966 their number was ''on the order of
150,000.''

Like some other witnesses for CBS, Mr. Smith said that, after the Tet offensive,
the C.I.A. estimated that North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam in
the five months before the attack had been 20,000 to 30,000 a month - quadruple
the rate reported by General Westmoreland's command.

Infiltration Rate Left to Military

Before the Tet offensive, Mr. Smith testified, the C.I.A. had left the
determination of infiltration to the military. And ''most certainly,'' he said,
the command in Saigon had been in a position to know of the higher rate.

The documentary, on which Mr. Smith did not appear, asserted that, in the fall
of 1967, the command had ''systematically blocked'' reports by its own officers
of a high infiltration - leaving the President and American forces ''totally
unprepared'' for the size of the Tet offensive.

As on Monday, Judge Pierre N. Leval reminded the jury the ''truth'' issue in the
case was not whether the command's figures on infiltration or other aspects of
enemy strength were ''accurate or inaccurate,'' but whether they were made
''honestly.''

Mr. Smith, who is recovering from a medical ailment, was excused before lunch
yesterday, and will return to the stand this morning.

Brief Cross-Examination

In a brief cross-examination, David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General
Westmoreland, pressed Mr. Smith on whether he ''personally knew'' that senior
aides to President Johnson considered the estimates on enemy strength in 1967 to
be ''misleading.''

Mr. Dorsen singled out four aides who have testified for General Westmoreland -
Robert S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense; Paul H. Nitze, Deputy Secretary of
Defense; Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President for National
Security Affairs, and William P. Bundy, the Assistant Secretary of State for Far
Eastern Affairs.

Mr. Smith said he had not discussed the figures with any of those officials.

During the afternoon Mr. Boies read into the record portions of pretrial
depositions from John Moore, a former C.I.A. analyst in Saigon, and Col. William
Cover, a former military intelligence officer in Vietnam.

Mr. Moore said he believed there had been a ''conspiracy'' by the military to
''suppress'' the true strength of the enemy. Colonel Cover said that, after he
returned to the United States from Saigon, he found it ''hard to believe'' the
optimistic reports he read regarding the course of the war.

''Following the Tet offensive,'' he said, ''I concluded that the rosy glow
coming across the Pacific had been a false dawn.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

7 CHEFS COOK UP AN ADVENTURE IN INDIA

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Jan. 25


With the exception of Vietnam and, more recently, Japan, French chefs have not
looked to the East for culinary inspiration. They have never turned to India.
Yet a few days ago, seven European chefs from some of the top restaurants in
France, Belgium and West Germany - including Michel Rostang, Pierre Troisgros,
Alain Dutournier and Eckart Witzigmann - came to this city to begin a culinary
passage through India.

They had come to learn about dishes ranging from properly prepared curry to the
tantalizing confections eaten as desserts. They had come to watch the gathering
of food from the countryside, the hauling-in of fresh fish and the activity of
the marketplaces in New Delhi, Bombay, Jaipur and Goa.

In return, they would cook a dinner using native ingredients and their own
ingenuity, aided by Prem Kumar, a chef at the Taj Hotel in New Delhi, and served
Wednesday night to 80 distinguished guests, including Government officials,
French Embassy staff members and selected connoisseurs of fine food. The results
were spectacular - a classic French dinner inspired by India's culinary riches.

The meal, as it came about, was a daring display. None of the chefs had ever set
foot on Indian soil. They had never seen an Indian market or the inside of an
Indian kitchen. No two of them had worked together before - and they had never
worked under such pressing circumstances. Because of flight delays and fog, the
loss of an essential piece of luggage and a misunderstanding concerning visas,
the chefs arrived with only four hours to shop for unfamiliar ingredients of
uncertain quality for a still-to-be- planned menu to be served that night.

The project was said to have begun several months ago when the chefs shared an
Indian meal in London. They found it novel and appealing, and expressed delight
with a national cuisine about which they knew little. News that these European
chefs wanted to view their counterparts in India came to attention of the Taj
Group of Hotels, headquartered in Bombay, which extended an invitation to tour
the country and study its distinctive cuisines.

There is, for example, the northern- style food of New Delhi, combining Arab,
Mogul and Hindu cuisines to produce meat and rice dishes, cooked with a limited
range of aromatic spices, and fresh vegetables, simply prepared. There is the
cuisine of Jaipur, a desert city known for its spicy skewered meat kebabs and
for the use of twigs, leaves and buds found in the desert, and of ground peas.
By contrast, Goa's emphasis on seafood cookery reflects its location on India's
west coast, while the use of olive oil, red pepper and eggs in Goa's cuisine
reflects centuries of Portuguese trading. In the metropolis of Bombay, a host of
culinary influences seem to converge.

For the European chefs, the journey started with an exhausting series of delays
that left little time for organizing the feast. But whatever misgivings the
chefs had when they landed evaporated when they arrived at 7 A.M. Wednesday at
one of the principal markets in New Delhi, which caters to both the home and the
restaurant trade. The market was jammed with produce and with people making
their daily rounds of the market stalls for their home kitchens.

The displays were dizzying: piles of eggplant, carrots and cauliflower, and
exotic fruits and vegetables that none of the chefs could identify.

Pierre Troisgros marveled at the ''astonishing quality and freshness of the
foods.'' There were meats of all kinds, live fish, shiny lobsters and shrimp in
the shells, and one fish, in particular, that captured the group's collective
fancy. It was a flat, sole- shaped fish, a household staple, it seemed. There
was a great deal of merriment when the chefs learned that the name of the fish
is pomfret, since in French, pommes frites are french fries.

By noon, the visitors were outlining the evening menu.

The appetizer was miniature puff pastry shells filled with imported caviar. Then
came the tail meat of shelled shrimp cooked in an aromatic bouillon of lobster
and other shellfish; then fillets of pomfret, delicate and tender, served on a
bed of green noodles and bathed in a deliciously rich saffron-cream sauce.

Boneless chicken breasts were filled with an eggplant caviar (so called because
the grains of the eggplant, when cooked and mashed, resemble the fish roe),
while the chicken legs were drenched in a red wine sauce with whole pieces of
fresh leeks. A first-rate Indian cheese called paneer, firm in texture and
masked with an excellent herb vinaigrette, followed. For dessert, oeufs a la
neige, or snow eggs, appeared, the gossamer meringues floating on a base of
English custard and topped with crisp, freshly made caramel tracery.

The puff pastry, which is difficult to make and is virtually unknown in Indian
cooking, was made by hand by Jean Lameloise, chef-owner of the three-star
Lameloise restaurant in Chagny, France. The other chefs included Jean-Andre
Charial, chef and grandson of the celebrated Raymond Thuilier, chef-owner of the
three-star Oustau de Baumani ere at Les Baux- de-Provence, France; Mr.
Dutournier, chef-owner of Au Trou Gascon, a two-star restaurant in Paris; Mr.
Rostang, chef-owner of the two-star restaurant in Paris that bears his name, and
Mr. Troisgros, chef-owner of the three-star restaurant Les Fr eres Troisgros in
Roanne, France.

From Belgium came Pierre Romeyer, chef-owner of the Romeyer restaurant in
Hoeilaart, near Brussels, and from Munich came Mr. Witzigmann, the Austrian-born
chef- owner of the three-star restaurant L'Aubergine.

The appetizer was accompanied by well-chilled Champagnes - Laurent- Perrier and
G. H. Mumm Cordon Rouge. For the meal itself there was a white Meursault 1982
and a red Ch,ateau Vignelaure 1980 from Provence.

The meal was greeted with praise; the chefs got a standing ovation. One can
always tell when French chefs are pleased with their performance; they dance the
cancan. The dinner in New Delhi was no exception.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of chef Pierre Troisgros

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Is Called Open To U.S. Role in Region

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 31


Vietnam's Foreign Minister said today that Hanoi would welcome a more active
American role in solving the problems of Southeast Asia.

Speaking at a news conference in Hanoi marking the end of a three-day visit to
Vietnam by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co
Thach said of the Americans:

''If they can can make a war here, they can easily make a peace.''

For his part, Mr. Perez de Cuellar said he was ''very agreeably surprised'' at
the positive responses he got from the Vietnamese on ''three or four'' issues
the United States had asked him to raise in Hanoi.

One of these issues involves the nearly 2,500 Americans still missing from the
Vietnam War. Vietnamese Foreign Ministry officials say they plan to meet with
Americans next month to further explore the technicalities of searching for
remains.

Speaking to reporters on his flight back to Bangkok this afternoon, Mr. Perez de
Cuellar said he was buoyed by his reception in Hanoi. ''Mr. Thach said the time
is right for finding a solution to the problem of Cambodia - and that's enough
for me.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FLORIDA EXECUTES KILLER OF OFFICER

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 433 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., Jan. 30


James David Raulerson was executed today in Florida's electric chair, protesting
to the end that a stray police bullet killed a rookie Jacksonville police
officer in a 1975 gunfight.

Mr. Raulerson was pronounced dead at 7:11 A.M. from a 2,000-volt, 90-second
surge of electricity in the electric chair at Florida State Prison.

Mr. Raulerson was the 37th person executed in the United States and the 11th in
Florida since the Supreme Court reinstated capital punishment in 1976.

Mr. Raulerson was convicted of killing the police officer, Mike Stewart, after a
restaurant robbery in which a waitress was raped.

Statement by Raulerson

Calmly reading from a sheet of paper while strapped in the chair, Mr. Raulerson,
33 years old, said Officer Stewart's death was the fault of the policeman's
partner, James English.

''James English killed Michael Stewart and used Stewart's gun to murder my
cousin,'' said Mr. Raulerson.

Mr. Raulerson's cousin, Jerry Tant, was also killed in the exchange of gunfire
with the police.

Ralph Greene, the former Assistant State Attorney who prosecuted Mr. Raulerson,
denied Mr. Raulerson's assertion, saying that Officer English's gun was not
fired in the incident.

''The bullet that killed Officer Stewart came from the .38 revolver belonging to
Raulerson,'' Mr. Greene said.

Mr. English was in a crowd of more than 60 Jacksonville police officers who kept
a vigil in a pasture outside the prison. Another group of 30 people was present
to protest the execution.

Police Officers Cheered

Jack Stewart, the victim's father, witnessed the execution and later said, ''I
was here because I promised my son the day he was buried that I would be at the
execution.''

The police officers outside the prison, some wearing T-shirts with a drawing of
the electric chair and the words ''Crank up Old Sparky,'' cheered when the
execution was complete.

Mr. Raulerson's mother, Virginia Hamlin, of East Point, Ga., made her final
visit to her son late Tuesday.

The United States Supreme Court denied Mr. Raulerson's final appeal for a stay
by a 6-to-2 vote late Tuesday.

Larry Joe Johnson, who murdered a gas station attendant in 1979, had been
scheduled to die with Mr. Raulerson, but his lawyers won an indefinite stay of
execution late Tuesday from the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th
Circuit, in Atlanta.

Mr. Johnson's attorneys had argued that the Vietnam veteran suffered severe
psychological problems as a result of combat and that his condition was not
taken into consideration by the trial court.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of officers

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. WITNESS FOR CBS SUPPORTS ADAMS TESTIMONY

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


Richard D. Kovar, a former Vietnam specialist for the Central Intelligence
Agency, testified yesterday that the only trouble with Samuel A. Adams was that
he did not ''salute and shut up'' in 1967 when he concluded that the military
had lied about the size of the enemy in South Vietnam.

Mr. Kovar - appearing in Federal District Court in Manhattan as the seventh
witness for CBS in the trial of Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120 million
libel suit - said that Mr. Adams, a defendant in the case, had been a
''rigorous, diligent, inspired analyst'' for the C.I.A. in the mid-1960's. And
Mr. Adams had been right about the need to include the Vietcong's self-defense
forces in a special intelligence estimate for President Johnson in November
1967, Mr. Kovar said.

But when Mr. Adams ''pushed his outrage'' at both the military's refusal to
include those forces and the C.I.A.'s ''acquiescence,'' Mr. Kovar said, it
''frightened a lot of people and made people mad.''

''You can turn off a true blue civil servant with that kind of behavior - with
not closing ranks and going beyond the level that a subordinate is supposed to
go,'' Mr. Kovar told the jury. ''To this day, some of my associates in the
agency don't regard Sam as a true blue civil servant.''



Credibility Issue

Mr. Kovar, who retired from the C.I.A. in 1980 after 29 years of service,
continues to work there under contract. Until a few weeks ago, he helped prepare
President Reagan's daily intelligence brief.

Mr. Adams, who resigned from the C.I.A. in 1973, was a paid consultant for the
1982 CBS Reports documentary that is the subject of General Westmoreland's suit.
Because Mr. Adams's thesis of deception by the military was critical to the
broadcast, his credibility and knowledge of the issues covered by the program
have been a major issue at the trial.

The documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' accused General
Westmoreland's command in Saigon of engaging in a ''conspiracy'' to show
progress in the war by minimizing the size and nature of North Vietnamese and
Vietcong forces in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

According to the broadcast, General Westmoreland imposed an ''arbitrary
ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of Communist strength, mainly by removing the
self-defense units from the official listing of enemy forces known as the order
of battle and by refusing to allow a current figure for them in the estimate for
President Johnson.

The program also said the command had ''systematically blocked'' reports from
its officers of an infiltration rate of 20,000 to 25,000 a month in the fall of
1967 - quadruple the rate made known by the military.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from January 1964
to June 1968, has denied the charges. He testified that he deleted the
self-defense forces from the order of battle because he decided they were
inconsequential militarily and could not be estimated accurately and because
their inclusion at a high figure would only mislead Washington and the press.
Those forces were newly estimated in 1967 at 120,000, an increase of 50,000.

Before Mr. Kovar took the stand yesterday, David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General
Westmoreland, cross-examined Ronald L. Smith, a former Vietnamese affairs
analyst for the C.I.A.

Used 'Political Power'

Mr. Smith, who was head of the South Vietnam branch of the agency's Office of
Economic Research, had testified on Tuesday that General Westmoreland used his
''political power'' in 1967 to impose a ''grossly misleading'' estimate of total
enemy strength on the C.I.A. While Mr. Adams, Mr. Smith and some others in the
C.I.A. had favored an estimate of approximately 500,000, the military argued
successfully for a range of 223,000 to 248,000, plus a political cadre of
85,000.

Yesterday, Mr. Smith said this ''massive intent to distort these numbers to
Washington policy makers would have been impossible without the leadership of
General Westmoreland.'' He described the military's figures as ''rampantly
dishonest.''

Mr. Smith, like Mr. Kovar, said he had never met or spoken to General
Westmoreland.

Mr. Smith conceded that at an April 1968 conference - after the Tet offensive -
the military and the C.I.A. were not far apart on the number of the enemy's
regular, or ''main and local,'' forces. A May 1968 C.I.A. report on the
conference said the C.I.A. estimated those forces at 125,000 to 145,000, and
General Westmoreland's command, 120,000 to 140,000.

''But of course,'' Mr. Smith told Mr. Dorsen, ''we never saw those numbers in
the order of battle.'' The military, he said, ''agreed to those numbers at the
conference and then never used them.''

On Tuesday, Mr. Smith had testified that the military failed to report
approximately 100,000 North Vietnamese troops who, he said, had infiltrated into
South Vietnam in the five months before the Tet offensive. But yesterday, Mr.
Dorsen noted that the May 1968 conference report made no reference to figures of
that kind.

Mr. Smith - who repeatedly accused Mr. Dorsen of being ''totally mixed up'' -
said the lawyer was ''way out of line.''

Q. Isn't it the case, Mr. Smith, that the evidence of what you called 100,000
infiltrators was so tenuous and so weak that you were not prepared to present it
to the military at the April order-of-battle conference and you were not even
prepared to present it to the Director of Central Intelligence?

A. I'll try to give you a good answer. The documentary evidence for the
infiltration analysis was at least as good and better than it was for the main
and local forces. There was an enormous flow of paper. That's the most
ridiculous statement I have ever heard about infiltration.

Mr. Smith said that infiltration was not a key issue at the April 1968
conference. Moreover, he said, if there had not been that large infiltration,
the enemy - ''with its incredible losses'' in February 1968, could not have
pursued the Tet offensive.

Mr. Kovar, in 1967 and 1968, was on the executive staff of R. Jack Smith, then
the C.I.A.'s deputy director for intelligence. Mr. Kovar said his duties
included serving as Mr. Smith's special assistant for Vietnamese affairs. He
said he last visited Vietnam in 1958.

At one stage, Mr. Kovar volunteered that his ''competence'' in this area was
''at least as good'' as that of George A. Carver Jr., the agency's former chief
of Vietnamese affairs, who had testified for General Westmoreland. Mr. Kovar's
observation stood out because he had not been asked about Mr. Carver.

Mr. Kovar said that the self-defense forces should ''certainly'' have been
listed at their current strength in the special estimate for President Johnson
and that, contrary to a statement in the 25-page estimate, both the military and
the C.I.A. had sufficient evidence to count them ''with confidence.''

Many people in the C.I.A. ''have papered over their consciences on this
subject,'' he said. ''I felt there was a direct guilt trail between that
estimate and the debacle in January 1968.''

On cross-examination, Mr. Dorsen pointed out that, even if the estimate did not
give a 1967 figure for the self-defense forces, it contained a 1966 figure of
150,000 and a number of passages describing the role of those forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LIBEL SUITS SHOW DIFFERING NEWS APPROACHES OF PAPERS, TV AND MAGAZINES

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2024 words


Although libel has been the stated issue in the trials brought by Ariel Sharon
against Time magazine and by Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS, the
unstated issue in both trials has been the way two major news organizations
gather and report the news.

Exhaustive testimony in both trials has offered unusually intimate glimpses of
the aims and techniques of news magazines and broadcasters. And in doing so, it
has underscored the sometimes striking differences in the way major newspapers,
news magazines and television networks report the news.

''Broadcasters are storytellers, newspapers are fact gatherers and organizers of
information, and news magazines are kind of a hybrid of both,'' said Everette E.
Dennis, executive director of the Gannett Center for Media Studies at Columbia
University.

More Than Packaging News

The differences can be most surprising to those who think the branches of the
press are all alike, but merely package the news in varying ways. Many
journalists feel that the different systems produce different kinds of
journalism, and the trials have prompted renewed debate among journalists
regarding the strengths and weaknesses of each.

Though both television and newspapers concentrate on events of the past 24
hours, nightly television news shows are ''a headline service plus a little
more,'' according Robert J. Murphy, a vice president at ABC News, who estimates
the words spoken during an average 30-minute broadcast would fill two-thirds of
a newspaper's front page. While newspapers can offer detail and depth and cover
many topics, television's strength is moving pictures and on-the-spot immediacy.

Traditionally newspaper executives have prized detail and objectivity in
reporting, with the burden of interpretation and analysis left to editorial
pages or to articles that are usually labeled as analysis. In television news,
broadcasters say, objectivity is also sought, with analysis and commentary
labeled as such.

News-magazine journalism is set apart because here the articles include
interpretation and analysis interwoven with fact and are written with what Ray
Cave, Time's managing editor, has called ''a point of view.''

Tidy vs. Messy Stories

''The technique is to make a story neater, to point a moral and come to a neat
ending when life isn't like that,'' said Tony Day, editorial page editor of The
Los Angeles Times. ''Newspapers are truer to the facts at hand, even if it is
messy and inconclusive.''

Editors at news magazine say that their magazines are intended to be more than
summaries of a week's news and that their readers welcome the analysis in the
articles.

Perhaps the most bitterly argued difference in newspapers and news magazines is
the magazines' practice of dividing reporter and writer functions, which
newspapers generally leave to one person.

Newspaper editors generally describe their ideal news article as one that is
researched and written by one person and appears precisely as written with no
editing changes.

'Triangulating' the Facts

At news magazines, information is gathered by one or more reporters and a
reseacher and merged into a single article by a writer. The technique, the
magazine editors say, permits the inclusion of germane information from many
perspectives.

''It allows you to triangulate the facts better than an individual reporter,''
said Osborn Elliott, who was an editor at Newsweek for nearly 20 years and is
now dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University.

But some journalists contend that important nuances may be lost when articles
are written secondhand, despite efforts by news magazines to have reporters
review articles before publication.

Accountabliity for the article or segment, a subject of great importance and
debate among journalists, lies with the individual reporter at newspapers, while
at news magazines accountability is fragmented.

Accountability in television is also widely spread, because news segments are
usually the product of one or more off-camera producers and an on-camera
correspondent working as a team that also includes film editors and technicians.


Debate Over Approaches

In television documentaries, the accountability may be blurred even more,
because on-air correspondents in some documentaries ask questions or read a
script that the producers have largely prepared.

''I put a premium on responsibility,'' said Hodding Carter 3d, a journalist with
experience in both print and broadcasting and a former spokesman for the State
Department in the Administration of President Jimmy Carter. ''Too much of the TV
thing consists of the unseen hand with the up-front mouth, and the news
magazine's separating the reporter and writer scares me. When you are clearly
accountable, it breeds more rigorous reporting.''

News-magazine editors and television executives respond that accountability is
no better at newspapers, only different because of the number of people
involved.

Such issues - questions of aims, objectivity and accountability - have figured
prominently in both trials.

Jury Has Last Word

Last week a jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan found that Time had not
libeled Mr.Sharon in a disputed article regarding his role in the massacre of
Palestinian civilians in Beirut in 1982, when he was Israel's Defense Minister.
The jury said that while a key paragraph in the article was false and defamed
Mr. Sharon, the article had not libeled him because it had not been published
with a reckless disregard for the truth. Mr. Sharon had sought $50 million in
damages.

In his $120 million libel suit against CBS and three other defendants, General
Westmoreland has challenged a CBS documentary entitled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception.'' The general has charged that CBS defamed him in the
broadcast by saying he had deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff about the true size and nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong
forces in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

CBS has maintained that the documentary is accurate and has also defended the
journalistic process that led to it. The trial, which began in October in
Federal court in Manhattan, is expected to continue for several more weeks.

Different Mechanics Involved

As has been shown during these trials and libel trials involving newspapers, the
day-to-day mechanics of how different news organizations operate are starkly
unalike in some respects.

At most daily newspapers, articles written by the newspaper's staff for
publication in the next issue are assigned by an editor. The idea for the
article can be a reporter's or an editor's, and its length and display in the
newspaper are decided as deadlines for publication near, based on the top
editors' judgment of the article's importance and the available space.

Staff-written articles are reviewed by an editor for gaps in information, and an
editor may question such things as the article's tone and organization.

Because editors know that readers may read only the first few paragraphs of an
article, newspaper prose is typically spare, with the most important and
freshest information densely packed at the beginning of an article, which then
expands into more detail. In most cases, reporters make any revisions after
conferring with editors.

The Method at Time

In Time's basic system, which is similar to that employed by other news
magazines, editors assign an article to a writer who then sends a query, usually
by wire, to reporters in the field indicating the information that is expected
to be needed. The writer works with a researcher who gathers information from
such sources as the magazine's library.

Reporters gather information and send it to Time's headquarters in New York in
long memorandums called ''files.'' These are then crafted into articles by
writers in the Time style, which favors action verbs and clever, offbeat
introductions.

Time articles sometimes also include a paragraph that tells the reader what to
think about the news developments that have just been described, a judgment
usually made by the magazine's top editors, according to staffmembers.

In describing the magazine's point of view in a pretrial deposition in the
Sharon case, Mr. Cave, the managing editor, said it was ''evolutionary'' and not
the point of view of an individual. He said it was not codified, but was a
product of the judgments of all of the editors and was rooted in the magazine's
traditions.

Writers and reporters at Time are not allowed to communicate directly when
working on an article, but may do so in memos, according to testimony at the
Sharon trial. Time editors and some of the magazine's writers say the practice
avoids confusion and errors and helps establish accountability, but some
journalists have criticized the prohibition as an unnecessary obstruction. Staff
members at other news magazines say their policy is more relaxed.

New Approaches Sought

Because they are offering articles about news events that may already have been
reported in newspapers, news magazines strive to find new approaches.

During Time's trial, Mr. Sharon's lawyers argued that the magazine's eagerness
to have something new prompted it to include information that could not be
thoroughly verified and that later proved to be false.

Because they are essentially news summaries, articles in news magazines are
tightly condensed, and color photographs and graphics are given substantial
space. One senior writer describes his job each week as ''pouring the Atlantic
Ocean into a teacup.''

Nightly television news is also largely a summary because time constraints are
severe.

In a typical broadcast of the ''CBS Evening News with Dan Rather,'' about 6 of
the 30 minutes of air time go for commercials, and Mr. Rather takes about 6
minutes for quick reports on some stories and for introducing news segments from
the field, according to Ann Morfogen, director of communications for CBS News.
Usually from six to eight news subjects are covered during the remaining 18
minutes, and a four minutes on any topic is considered quite long, according to
Miss Morfogen.

Coordinated Efforts Employed

When an assigment for a news segment is made, a correspondent and a field
producer gather information and shoot videotape that will accompany the audio
script.

The principal role of a correspondent is to report and write the script that
will be used for his appearance on-camera, and a producer's job is to organize
and execute the coverage and supervise the correspondent and camera crew,
according to Mr. Murphy at ABC News. But depending on the circumstances and
individuals, producers may be deeply involved in reporting and crafting the
script.

The tape-recorded script is usually reviewed by a senior producer of the news
show before the segment is made ready for broadcast.

Competition among correspondents for appearances on the main evening news show
can be fierce, because there are far more correspondents than available slots.
For instance, Mr. Murphy estimates that ABC has about 80 correspondents and uses
from 8 to 11 news segments during ''World News Tonight.''

More Time for Documentaries

While almost everything on the nightly news program is prepared in 24 hours or
less, television documentaries may take from six months to a year or more.

Ideas for documentaries are usually originated by producers, who must persuade
top news executives to make a sizable investment of time and money. Typically a
producer will do preliminary research for a documentary and submit a proposal,
called a blue sheet.

If approved, the producer either assembles or is assigned a team consisting of
associate producers, a correspondent and others to make videotaped interviews
and conduct more research. In some cases, correspondents do their own reporting.
Senior news executives usually review the initial interviews and other material
before giving full approval to completing the story.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Osborn Elliott

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TWP SENATE HEARINGS COMPETE FOR CABLE TIME

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


Two overlapping Senate hearings will compete for television time on two cable
stations today: Senator Richard G. Lugar's Foreign Relations Committee hearings
- in which the new chairman, an Indiana Republican, and some eminent witnesses
will explore current aspects of American foreign policy - and the continuing
confirmation hearings of Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to President Reagan since
1981, for his nomination by the President as Attorney General.

''I don't know what we're going to do,'' said Henry Schuster, the producer in
charge of broadcasts of both hearings for the Cable News Network. ''It's a very
interesting situation.'' CNN plans to cut between the two hearings over the next
two days, breaking away for news reports on each half-hour.

Meanwhile, C-Span, the cable public-affairs network, will be broadcasting both
hearings gavel-to-gavel, though on a delayed basis due to the network's primary
commitment of carrying the business of the House of Representatives.

''This has been just a terrific week,'' Brian Lamb, the president of C-Span,
said of the confluence of hearings.



Memorable Images

Some of the most memorable images in television history have come during the
daytime: Joseph Welch, holding his spectacles at the Army-McCarthy hearings, the
hands of Frank Costello at Estes Kefauver's Senate hearings into organized
crime, Senator Sam Ervin indignantly shaking his jowls at the Watergate
hearings.

And at least one hearing is well- remembered in part for the fact that it was
not telecast: Fred W. Friendly, the former CBS News president, resigned in 1966,
pushed, he said, by his network's refusal to pre-empt an ''I Love Lucy'' rerun
for the Fulbright Senate Foreign Relations Committee's hearings on the Vietnam
War.

Today's Lugar and Meese hearings, however, are under no such contest at the
networks, none of which are considering pre-empting their lucrative daytime
programming for Senate hearings which were designed for educational reasons and
may be informative, even fascinating, but may or may not turn out to be
newsworthy.

''If I was still at CBS News, I would not fight for these hearings to be covered
live,'' said Richard Salant, a former president of CBS News, whose decision it
was in 1973 to broadcast the Watergate hearings. ''These things stretch out into
valleys, but as far as I can tell they will have have no peaks. I think I would
fight for hourlong summaries and highlights at night, though. In these cases the
evening news is not enough.''



'An Educational Forum'

With the advent of cable and the public affairs network C-Span, television has
in the last few years broadcast more of Government-at-work than it had in some
time: C-Span, on the cable outlets on which it is available, will present as
much of the hearings as possible.

And yet the hearings led by Senator Lugar, which were designed in part for a
television audience's viewing of discussion and debate on the Administration's
foreign policy goals, will receive moderate exposure outside of cable.

''When Senator Lugar became chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, he felt
that the committee could be used for an educational forum,'' said Mark Helmke,
his spokesman, who said the committee called both Secretary of State George P.
Schultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, as well as former
Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger, former Secretary of State Alexander
M. Haig and former National Security Adviser Richard V. Allen.

''The Alexander Haig confirmation hearings had some drama,'' said Ed Turner, the
executive vice president of news at the Turner Broadcasting System. ''It doesn't
cost a great deal, other than what you lose in commercials: once you get into
these things you have to stay with them. Invariably you find the moment you
leave, the fistfight starts.''

''The President's inaugural address was like a campaign address,'' said Mr.
Schuster, who said that two cameras had been assigned to each committee room.
''The Lugar hearings are the first time we can have their plans for second term
foreign policy spelled out for the Senate and get a sense of foreign policy
goals. It may be the first time the word has ever been applied to Edwin Meese
and George Schultz, but going between their hearings will be a kind of
rock-and-roll.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM, NORTH AND SOUTH: STILL TWO WORLDS



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 30


The old man sits on the post office steps, a bathroom scale on the sidewalk
beside him. The little scale, a vintage model, is his livelihood, and he has
covered all but its dial with a piece of used plastic to protect this most
valuable possession from the mud of a drizzly day.

For less than a penny the old man weighs people, bending down slowly and with
great effort to focus his weak eyes on the numbers. Reading out a customer's
weight is part of the service. He accepts payment without expression and returns
wearily to his step.

With severe shortages of most consumer goods and minimal public services,
Hanoi's residents continue to draw on their resourcefulness. The old man with
his scale is but one of hundreds, if not thousands, of small entrepreneurial
efforts on city sidewalks.



A Gradual Improvement

Frequent visitors to Hanoi say that over the last five or six years, the quality
of life has improved in this capital city, a fine example of French colonial
architecture that was damaged surprisingly little by American bombing in 1972.
There are more goods in the stores, more television sets in homes and brighter
colors on people and buildings.

But Hanoi and the overpopulated, impoverished north, its soil depleted and its
forests fast disappearing, are still a world away from southern Vietnam.



Making Do in the North

In the south, consumer goods apparently are abundant. The Deputy Mayor of Ho Chi
Minh City, the former Saigon, boasts that food rations have tripled in a decade
and that most businesses with fewer than 20 employees are in private hands. So
is two-thirds of the city's housing, he adds.

''One country, two systems,'' people here say sardonically, echoing the formula
the Chinese have used to describe how Peking hopes to coexist with Hong Kong
when it reverts to Chinese rule.

Hanoi's residents have come to assume that most things unavailable here must be
found in the south. Requests for a commodity or service - a certain book, a
restaurant, a map, a telex, an international telephone line or a taxi - are met
with the stock, almost reflexive, reply: ''We don't have it in Hanoi, but in
Saigon. . . . '' So in Hanoi, people make do. Entrepreneurs fix bicycles, refill
the refills of ballpoint pens or sell things: dumplings, bowls of soup,
vegetables from their gardens, individual envelopes or cigarettes, handmade
objects of bamboo and straw. Moneychangers, paying more than 20 times the
official exchange rate for foreign currency, thrive.  Recyling is an art: The
pull-tab from an imported aluminum can is bought for a fraction of a cent and
used to make curtain rings. The can itself fetches anywhere from a dime to more
than a dollar and has many uses. Old movie film is fashioned into celluloid
picture frames.

At night a visitor passes an old woman selling used bottles of all sizes in the
front room of her home. A few people beg, and others sleep huddled in doorways.

Although such scenes of everyday life might not suggest it, this is a year of
celebrations for Vietnam. In October Hanoi celebrated 30 years of liberation
from the French. In April Ho Chi Minh City, which its own tourist bureau still
calls Saigon, will mark the 10th anniversary of the Communist victory over South
Vietnam's American-supported Government.

In between, the army marked its 40th birthday in December, a reminder that after
40 years Vietnam is still at war - now in Cambodia and on the border with China
- and another generation is being called on to make sacrifices.

The Peach Blossoms of Tet

This is not to say that all is sacrifice and no amusement in Hanoi. The city's
young people seek their pleasures in movies, in window-shopping at Government
stores or in walks by the city's lakes or in its parks, now sprinkled with the
pink peach blossoms that are the flower of Tet, the Vietnamese New Year, in the
north. The young also read.

At the Hanoi-Hue-Saigon bookstore, the city's largest, a clerk in the section
marked Literature reported that her biggest sellers were romantic novels and
detective stories.

She said a favorite among the books, which were priced inexpensively from a few
cents to about half a dollar at street exchange rates, was ''Romeo, Juliet and
Darkness,'' a love story by an author named Jan Otsenasech set against the evil
of Nazi Germany. ''A lot of books come from the Russians,'' an English- speaking
browser volunteered.

The store, which had one copy of a Vietnamese translation of Graham Greene's
''The Quiet American,'' also sold collections of contemporary Vietnamese short
stories, published locally in pamphlet form on coarse brown paper.

Themes of endless war and remembered heroics mixed with grief mark these
stories, which are often short morality lessons. They jolt the foreign reader
into an awareness of how ''the American war'' has already slipped back into
history, taking its place behind the newest threat from the Chinese. It is
overshadowed by universal preoccupations, like the concern of one character that
his spoiled, long-haired son will come to no good.

In the collection called ''The Years After,'' the American war becomes a stage
set. A story by Nguyen Minh Chau about a militant woman who has to learn love
and compassion opens with the line: ''The battalion was installed on an old
American base.''

''The Vietnamese are ambivalent about Americans,'' a Western diplomat said.
''Despite the war, they respond more to American culture than to Russian, and
want more contacts with American people.''

Scarce Housing

Housing, which is controlled by the Government, is scarce in Hanoi. Requests by
at least one international agency for permission to build apartments at its own
expense have met countless bureaucratic obstacles.

The West German Ambassador and his family live in a few rooms of the Thong Nhat
Hotel, the rundown ghost of the once-grand Metropole. A Canadian forester on
duty with the United Nations has been living there for two years with his wife
and three sons. They can be seen trooping into the dining room at lunch and
dinner bearing their own mustard and peanut butter to augment the spartan fare.

All diplomatic eyes are on a mysterious green villa, which, by common
understanding, seems to be reserved for the American Embassy if and when
diplomatic links are forged and the Yankees return.

''We know it must be for the Americans,'' one diplomat said, ''because the
Soviet Embassy is also painted green and we figure that's the superpower
color.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of shoppers in Hanoi (Page A6); photo of riders on back of train
in Hanoi

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN NICARAGUA, THE AMERICAN EMBASSY FEELS THE EFFECTS OF A WIDENING RIFT

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua


Under the iron barbs of the United States Embassy's 10-foot-high security fence,
a crowd of protesters chanted ''Yankee murderers!'' and ''More Yankees will die
here than in Vietnam!''

United States Embassy security guards in civilian clothes carefully surveyed the
crowd. Atop the building, a Marine guard in olive fatigues peered over a
concrete wall as the chants echoed through the shady parking lot.

The protests are common here, up to three times a week in recent months, and are
a sign of the United States Government's unpopularity with the Nicaraguan
Government and the ruling Sandinista National Liberation Front.

The peaceful demonstrations are little more than a nuisance to embassy
personnel, who often are dismissed early when a demonstration is expected and
are denied entry or exit while it is under way. But the protests also are a
symbol of the growing split between the two nations.

A Widening Rift

The rift widened on Jan. 18, when the Reagan Administration, citing a lack of
progress, announced it had suspended direct negotiations with Nicaragua. The
same day, the United States also said it would not take part in further
proceedings before the International Court of Justice about the mining of
Nicaragua's harbors.

Meanwhile, the Sandinistas' attempts to convince the Nicaraguan people of the
damage caused by American policies seem to be having an effect.

''They are all spies inside. They are the enemies of Nicaragua,'' said Jose
Santos Gonzalez, a worker who walked by the embassy on his way home.

For Ana Ciesa, the answer was also clear. Her son was kidnapped by the
''contras,'' as the rebels supported by the United States are known here.

''The people inside are the same as the rebels fighting up in the mountains,''
she said, pointing at the embassy. ''They are in agreement with the rebels.''

Accusations in 1983

A Sandinista party official who deals with the United States asserted that
intelligence gathering went on at the embassy because of the unrestricted
freedom embassy officials have. But, he added, ''they'd be crazy'' to run covert
operations from the embassy.

The only major diplomatic incident occurred in June 1983 when the Sandinistas
expelled three United States diplomats for purportedly plotting to kill Foreign
Minister Miguel D'Escoto Brockman. The United States denied the charges and
retaliated by closing six Nicaraguan consulates in the United States and
expelling 21 consular officers.

The Sandinista official said that most of the embassy personnel here were simply
professionals doing their job. He said, however, that Ambassador Harry E.
Berghold had isolated himself from the Nicaraguan Government and that there
seemed to be more hostility toward Nicaragua on the part of the embassy's middle
level officials.

Less Contact

''We haven't changed our attitudes. Ambassador Quainton used to see the
'comandantes,' so it is the embassy that has changed,'' the official said,
referring to former Ambassador Anthony Quainton, who was ambassador here earlier
in the Reagan Administration, and to the nine-member national directorate that
leads the Sandinistas.

The embassy does appear to be having less contact with high-ranking Government
officials, including the recently-elected President, Daniel Ortega Saavedra.

One person familiar with the embassy complained that no Warsaw Pact country
restricted access to Government officials as much as Nicaragua does. The same
person said that Ambassador Berghold did not have direct contact with the nine
commanders of the Sandinista National Directorate, and that no other embassy
officer did either.

A Western diplomat said that there were no other restrictions on the movement of
embassy personnel. The diplomat added that the embassy's telephones ''are
probably tapped'' and that those who the diplomats have contact with are under
surveillance.

Opposition Said to Be Harassed

Another person who follows embassy functions said that there was no evidence
that people who met with United States Embassy officers were being harassed
specifically for their contact with Americans.

''They're being harassed anyway,'' the person close to the embassy said,
pointing out that the embassy has had contact with opposition politicians.

The embassy does not have any restrictions on what is called ''fraternization''
with the local population, a common regulation in United States embassies in
Eastern Europe. But there is a growing sentiment in the embassy that such a
policy may be needed if Nicaragua's Government continues to become like those of
Eastern Europe.

''There have been several cases of social penetration,'' one Western diplomat
said, referring to attempts to get information from United States Embassy
personnel. ''But it's not as bad as it could be.''

The Western diplomat added, ''The down side of a 'no-frat' policy is it closes
off a lot of contacts, but you come to a point where your intelligence
vulnerability is so high, you have no choice.''

Anti-U.S. Feeling Reported Low

Another person close to the embassy insisted that anti-American sentiment among
the Nicaraguan people was very low.

''It relieves some of the psychological pressure'' on the Americans to know that
''the reaction to embassy personnel is very warm,'' said the person familiar
with the embassy. ''The devil image just doesn't take hold.''

At the end of 1984, the United States Embassy here had a staff of only about 45
officers. Large United States Agency for International Development programs were
phased out early in the Reagan Administration, and the embassy staff now is
smaller than it was during the rule of Anastasio Somoza Debayle, who was ousted
when the Sandinistas came to power after an insurrection in 1979.

Embassy personnel receive a 20 percent bonus with their salary as hardship
payment, and they are only required to serve two years, instead of the normal
three to four years.

Paid Rest Trips

Those serving in the post also get one paid rest-and-recreation trip. The
Bahamas is the designated location for such trips, but most people take the
equivalent air fare and visit the United States.

The embassy is a rundown, emergency housing unit that was built after the
earthquake that struck Managua in 1972, and it was only meant to serve for 10
years.

One person who knows the state of the building said that it ''passed its
projected useful life two years ago and it shows. You could kick your way right
through from one side to the other.''

There are no speed bumps or barricades in front of the embassy, only the iron
gate with the barbs and two or three Sandinista policemen in a kiosk out front.

''However, we probably are safer here than other places,'' said another Western
diplomat. ''After all, here nothing is going to happen without the Government's
consent.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesters

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JURORS IN CBS CASE GET PREVIEW OF SUMMATIONS

BYLINE: By M.A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words


The jury in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel trial against CBS in Federal
District Court in Manhattan was given an unexpected preview yesterday of
summations likely to be delivered by both sides in a month.

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, told the jury that the controversy
over enemy strength in South Vietnam in 1967 - the focus of the CBS documentary
over which the general sued - had ''all the earmarks of a very bitter dispute
but not evidence of any conspiracy to deceive.''

All of you, he told the jurors, have had ''violent disagreements with a spouse
or a boss'' over how the same set of facts should be interpreted. ''It doesn't
mean you were dishonest. You can have that kind of disagreement over which
football team is going to win the Super Bowl.''

General Westmoreland's command, Mr. Burt said, had made no effort to hide
figures on the North Vietnamese and Vietcong enemy: ''Everybody had the same raw
data. Now, one of the things that people trying to engage in deception do not do
is give the people they are trying to deceive the evidence that shows a
deception in progress.''

David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, countered: ''This is not an honest
disagreement.'' The actions by the military, he said, were ''properly
characterized'' on the 1982 broadcast ''as a conspiracy. This is not a situation
in which you look at two different pieces of evidence and you come up with
different bets on who's going to win the Super Bowl.

''This is a situation,'' he said, ''in which, instead of bringing intelligence
from the bottom up, instead of intelligence officers doing what they are
supposed to do, to find out what the facts are, you had a command position from
the top down saying, 'No, we don't want to hear that. We don't want to hear
anything that tells the policy-makers that we're not winning this war.' ''

Interim Summations Allowed

The remarks by each lawyer were made as ''interim summations'' permitted by
Judge Pierre N. Leval on a limited basis since the trial began in October. The
last interim summations were delivered Jan. 8, when Mr. Burt rested his case.

Mr. Burt initiated the exchange yesterday, telling the jury that ''you've all
been here a long time and I think it's possibly helpful for us to summarize.''

The CBS documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' accused
General Westmoreland's command of ''conspiring'' to understate enemy strength in
the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968. General Westmoreland led
American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

Acccording to the broadcast, General Westmoreland imposed an ''arbitrary
ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength, mainly by removing the
Vietcong's self-defense troops from the official listing of enemy forces and by
refusing to allow inclusion of a current figure in a special intelligence
estimate for President Lyndon B. Johnson and his aides in November 1967.

The program also said the command ''systematically blocked'' reports from its
officers of an infiltration rate of 20,000 to 25,000 a month in the fall of 1967
- quadruple the rate made known.

General Westmoreland - who contends that the documentary defamed him by saying
he had lied to his superiors - has denied that he acted for other than proper
reasons.

Much Higher Estimates

Yesterday, Joseph C. Stumpf, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst,
testified for CBS that his estimate of the Vietcong's ''administrative
services,'' or support, troops in April 1968 was 75,000 to 100,000 - more than
twice the 35,000 to 40,000 figure successfully advanced by the military command.

Mr. Stumpf recalled visiting Vietnam in the weeks before the Tet offensive and
being told by some military analysts that their own relatively high figures
''were being arbitrarily reduced'' by senior officers. The analysts, according
to Mr. Stumpf, ''were simply told that it was a command decision . . . made up
the line.''

The command's ''contrived numbers, geared to show we were winning the war,'' Mr.
Stumpf said, became ''increasingly dishonest'' and, after the Tet offensive,
''intolerable.''

On cross-examination, Mr. Stumpf conceded that his superiors in the C.I.A. had
reduced his estimate of support troops to 60,000 to 80,000, for methodological
reasons and because some of those troops might have been outside South Vietnam.
Mr. Stumpf also acknowledged that at least one senior military intelligence
officer thought his estimate was ''based on a thin reed.''

In other testimony, Greg Rushford, an investigator for the House Select
Committee on Intelligence in 1975, also said the military's figures for enemy
strength in 1967 were ''dishonest.'' The military, Mr. Rushford said, had
''acted like used car salesmen rolling the mileage back.''

Mr. Rushford said that General Westmoreland was responsible for creating ''the
tone, the atmosphere'' that permitted such distortion.

No Interview with the General

On cross-examination, Mr. Rushford said he had spoken to only four military
officers during his work for the committee on the Tet offensive and had ''not
had the opportunity'' then to interview General Westmoreland. He said he did not
know ''which of the higher- ups'' knew the military command was being
untruthful.

In a deposition read into the record late Wednesday, Bernard A. Gattozzi, a
former military analyst in Saigon, said that the officially reported monthly
infiltration of approximately 5,500 in the fall of 1967 was ''a joke.''

Mr. Gattozzi, an Army lieutenant in 1967, said he had attempted to argue for
''confirmed'' infiltration of 15,000 to 20,000 a month, but had been rebuffed by
senior officers. Mr. Gattozzi said that while he regularly made use of
infiltration estimates, he was not involved in their compilation.

In his interim summation yesterday, Mr. Boies mentioned several CBS witnesses,
including C.I.A. analysts and military officers, who have portrayed the role of
General Westmoreland's command in 1967 as a ''conspiracy.'' Their views, he
said, were the basis for the documentary.

''The words they used,'' Mr. Boies told the jury, ''were not the words of
'honest disagreement.' You heard the words. They were 'dishonesty, suppression,
guilt' - words that talked about putting forward estimates for which there was
no evidence.''

Mr. Boies also reminded the jury that, to prevail in his suit, General
Westmoreland had to prove that the broadcast defamed him personally, not merely
that it related to his command.

Mr. Burt responded that, by his count, the documentary mentioned General
Westmoreland more than 40 times, ''and it sure didn't wander in there by
accident.''

Mr. Burt noted that, even though the estimate for President Johnson did not
include a 1967 figure for the self-defense forces, it contained a 1966 estimate
and described the forces.

The issue in the suit, Mr. Burt stressed, was whether General Westmoreland had
sought to deceive his superiors. And CBS, he said, had had ''plenty of time to
check and determine'' that question.

''It's just like you take a gun,'' Mr. Burt said, ''and you put bullets in the
chamber of that gun and you level it at a person.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1985 International

A space-based defense plan has won increasing support among Americans, according
to Secretary of State George P. Shultz. Testifying at the start of several weeks
of hearings on foreign policy, Mr. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, who appeared later, said the long-range plan was crucial to the
stability of the strategic relationship with Moscow and held open the
possibility of reducing the threat of nuclear war. (Page A1, Column 1.)

Ships delivering arms to Ethiopia have apparently been given priority over ships
bringing food to famine victims, according to aid officials and Western
diplomats in the capital, Addis Ababa. (A10:3-4.)

Impoverished northern Vietnam is a world away from southern Vietnam, where
consumer goods appear to be in abundance. The contrast prompts people to say,
''One country, two systems.'' Nearly 10 years after the fall of South Vietnam's
Government, ''the American war'' has slipped into history, overshadowed by the
latest threat from China. (A1:3-5.)

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick expressed conviction that her views had been
''misunderstood'' and distorted by key Reagan Administration officials. But Dr.
Kirkpatrick, who will leave her United Nations post in March, said she was
buoyed by her diplomatic and personal achievements over the last four years.
(A1:6.)

Many remains of a ''lost city'' that archeologists believe may rival the
spectacular ruins of the Incas have been examined and photographed high in the
Andes of Peru. The pre-Columbian ruins of massive walls and terraces, buildings,
tombs and statuary were presumably a major center of an early, resourceful and
mysterious people whose civilization flourished long before the golden age of
the Incas. (A1:1-2.) National

The lowest rate of spending growth in two decades will be reflected in the
budget that President Reagan sends Congress on Monday, according to
Administration officials and budget documents. The total is $973.7 billion, or
1.5 percent more than the Government expects to spend this year. Mr. Reagan
proposes cuts in spending at eight departments, including Agriculture,
Education, Energy and Housing and Urban Development. (A1:6.)

The high value of the dollar is exacting a heavy toll from the nation's farmers,
from merchants and bankers in many rural towns and from the industries that
produce the farmers' supplies. Nationally, the experts say, this cost now
amounts to tens of billions of dollars a year. (A1:5.)

Two Brink's workers were arrested on Federal charges of plotting to rob Brink's
main vault in San Francisco to help finance the activities of an extremist,
anti-Semitic group seeking to take over the Federal Government. One of the men,
Charles E. Ostrout, was also charged with aiding in the $3.6 million armed
robbery of a Brink's armored truck last July near Ukiah, Calif. (A12:3-5.)

A series of eight airline accidents within two months, five of them fatal, has
prompted the Federal Aviation Administration to begin an in-depth analysis of
its air safety inspection system. (A12:1-2.)

The Des Moines Register and Tribune Company's board approved the sale of its
flagship newspaper and other newspaper properties to the Gannett Company for
$200 million. The action ended a heated competition among some of the nation's
largest newspapers to acquire what is considered one of the best papers.
(B7:1-3.) Metropolitan

A police officer who fired two shotgun blasts that killed a 66-year-old woman
during an eviction dispute in the Bronx last October was indicted for
manslaughter. The officer, 43-year- old Stephen Sullivan, pleaded not guilty in
the slaying of the woman, Eleanor Bumpurs. (A1:2.)

Five inquiries on Dr. Elliot M. Gross, the New York City Medical Examiner, will
be undertaken. United States Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would study
''possible obstruction of justice of certain Federal civil-rights
investigations.'' Meanwhile, the State Attorney General, Robert Abrams, said he
had asked a special state prosecutor, Thomas A. Duffy Jr., to study assertions
of misleading and inaccurate autopsy reports. (A1:3-4.)

The environmental inspection agency

 in New York State is so short of funds and manpower that many laws are not
enforced and the well-being of residents is jeopardized, according to leaders of
the Assembly. They made the comments as a panel made public a report on a
six-month study of the agency that cited inadequate inspections of air and water
and hundreds of municipal landfills operating without state permits. (B2:3-5.)

The dean of the Seton Hall University Law Center, Elizabeth F. Defeis, was
nominated by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for a Federal judgeship in the Eastern
District of New York. If approved by President Reagan and the Senate, Miss
Defeis would be the first woman to serve as a judge in the district, which
covers Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island. (B3:6.)

The new top administrator of New York State's gigantic court system is Joseph W.
Bellacosa, a professor at the Albany Law School and a former chief clerk of the
New York Court of Appeals. (B2:1.)


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 1, 1985, Friday, The Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By John Gross

LENGTH: 973 words


SWEET JUSTICE. By Jerry Oster. 12 pages. Harper & Row. $13.95.

SOUND EVIDENCE. By June Thomson. 179 pages. Doubleday. $11.95.

WALKING SHADOWS. By Fred Taylor. 407 pages. St. Martin's Press. $15.95.

AT the outset of Jerry Oster's ''Sweet Justice,'' three young hoodlums armed
with knives board a local train on the IRT and start molesting a woman
passenger. The other passengers sit tight, with one exception - a lean man in a
corduroy jacket and jeans who has the look of a student or ''a precocious
professor.'' When he tells the leader of the trio to leave the woman alone and
the youth defies him, he draws a pistol and shoots him dead. Then he slips off
the train and disappears.

While the police search for him, the news media turn him into a popular hero.
One paper dubs him ''The Samaritan Killer''; another compares him to the
character played by Charles Bronson in ''Death Wish'' who embarks on a
single-handed vigilante campaign. There is speculation about his motives - had
he been embittered by some previous experience of big city lawlessness? - And
editorials proclaim that the only way to win the war on subway crime is for
citizens to protect themselves as best they can.

Nature, it will be seen, has once again been catching up with art. The opening
pages of ''Sweet Justice'' contain some uncanny premonitions of recent events on
the real New York subway; they are also tense enough to arouse reasonably high
expectations.

If the excitement soon dissipates, it is not through any shortage of action.
Indeed, part of the trouble is that Mr. Oster tries to pack in too much. A
gaggle of murderees go to their doom in rapid succession; Vietnam casts a long
shadow; the air is thick with anonymous letters and psychopathic tremors. But it
is hard to work up much of a lather about characters who seem to mean so little
to the author himself.

You are left wondering, even so, what would have happened if Mr. Oster (who has
written three previous novels) had decided to concentrate on one or two
incidents instead of resolutely overegging the omelette. In this respect,
''Sound Evidence'' provides an instructive contrast, all the more so because the
two novels, worlds apart though they are in atmosphere, share a common
underlying pattern. (To say more would be to risk giving the game away.)

June Thomson is a low-keyed writer; if she were less skillful, she would seem
positively drab. But she takes trouble over her characters, even the humblest of
them, and she has a sure sense of pace. There is nothing perfunctory in her
writing, and nothing hectic; the suspense is allowed to build up naturally,
without forcing, and every incident is given its full value.

In ''Sound Evidence'' Hugo Bannister, an official in the British Foreign Office,
is trying to throw off his infatuation with a young workman called Ray who hangs
around on the fringe of the underworld. He knows that Ray has been involved in a
robbery, but it is not until Ray himself has been killed (''by a person or
persons unknown,'' as the British legal phrase has it) that he learns that it
was a robbery that culminated in murder. The discovery also means that he is now
exposed to a more dangerous form of blackmail than any he has known so far.

Hugo's fluctuating feelings about Ray are rendered wholly credible; so is the
dry professional efficiency with which he tries to cope with his double life; so
is Ray's general uselessness. Mrs. Thomson carries you along with her - through
police procedures, down the odd byways of her characters' lives - and plays
steadily on your curiosity.

It must be said that by the standards she has set in some of her earlier work,
''Sound Evidence'' is only a middling performance. The detection is rather
humdrum, and I think most readers will have less trouble identifying the murder
weapon - an important clue - than she assumes. But what the book lacks in
ingenuity it makes up for in solid realism.

Fred Taylor's ''Walking Shadows'' is a spy novel, and one of the best I have
read for a long time. The year is 1942; a group of German officers decide that
it is now imperative to get rid of Hitler, but they are worried that if they
eliminate him themselves they will be regarded as traitors by the majority of
their countrymen and prevented from replacing the Nazis with a government of
their own.

They hit on an alternative scheme, however, and present the British with a
tantalizing proposal. A good opportunity for assassinating Hitler will soon be
at hand - he is planning to visit the island of Rhodes for a secret meeting with
Mussolini. Why not dispatch a British hit squad to carry out the job, which will
prevent any blame falling on the German conspirators? In return, they promise to
help track down ''Turquoise,'' the double agent who is known to be operating
from within the heart of British Intelligence.

The story works its way toward a sizzling denouement through a cat's cradle of
double cross and triple cross, but it remains mercifully intelligible; at no
point does it try to rival the more labyrinthine elaborations of the later John
le Carre. It also manages to bring a number of historical characters into the
story, Churchill and the German intelligence chief Admiral Canaris among them,
with none of the suggestion of animated waxworks that you get from the average
venture into ''faction.''

Mr. Taylor has previously edited and translated a volume of Goebbels's wartime
diaries, and he brings an intimate knowledge of the period to bear on his
material. You feel he has a thorough understanding of the way people would have
spoken in the circumstances he describes, or - scarcely less important - how
they would not have spoken. But he is also a natural storyteller, and he has
produced a gripping and distinctly superior entertainment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fred Taylor

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS PLAY DOWN HANOI'S PROPOSALS TO U.N. CHIEF

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 1


The Thai Government today dismissed as ''nothing new'' Vietnam's proposals to
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar on ways to negotiate an end to the war
in Cambodia.

At a news conference today, the United Nations Secretary General appeared
irritated when a reporter echoed the negative Thai response, made this morning
at a Foreign Ministry briefing.

The Thai rejection appeared to have been publicly stated before being conveyed
to Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who has been trying to keep his negotiations
confidential until the end of his Southeast Asian tour.

The Secretary General said he had passed Vietnamese ''clarifications'' on to
Thai officials ''only yesterday.''

''I have not yet had any direct response,'' he said.

Exactly what the Vietnamese proposed is not publicly known.

Annoyed at Sihanouk's Comment

Mr. Perez de Cuellar, who left this afternoon to continue his trip in Malaysia,
Indonesia and Singapore, also expressed annoyance at comments made Thursday by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk. The Prince made his comments while talking with
reporters about his meeting with the Secretary General earlier in the day.

Prince Sihanouk, a former Cambodian head of state, is now president of a
coalition of three rebel groups trying to overthrow the Vietnamese-installed
regime in Phnom Penh.

The Prince, who described the Vietnamese as ''very tricky,'' said the Secretary
General had reported coming away away from Hanoi ''optimistic.''

''Either the Prince or I have to refresh our French,'' Mr. Perez de Cuellar said
today. ''Optimistic and pessimistic are not words in my vocabulary.''

He added that he had met with Prince Sihanouk ''at his request'' because the
Prince is head of the coalition that the United Nations recognizes as the
Government of Cambodia.

''It was my duty - and pleasure, even if I have some doubts because I was so
much misquoted - to see the Prince,'' Mr. Perez de Cuellar said. ''It would be
naive of me to think that a solution to so complex a problem would be easy, or
even possible, in the near future.''

Relays U.S.-Vietnam Messages

The Secretary General seemed to have had more success in presenting messages
from the United States to the Vietnamese Government, according to statements he
made Wednesday on his way back from Hanoi to Bangkok.

Today, he met with the United States Ambassador to Thailand, John Gunther Dean,
to relay the Vietnamese replies. The Secretary General would not discuss the
messages relayed, except to say he was ''gratified at the Vietnamese acceptance
of my demarche.''

At their meeting, Ambassador Dean told Mr. Perez de Cuellar that the United
States would give the United Nations an additional $2 million to aid refugees
along the Thai-Cambodian border who have been dislocated by Vietnamese attacks
on rebel settlements.

The Secretary General said Japan had pledged the same amount, and he voiced
hoped that this would serve as an example to other nations.

On the prospects for a United Nations-inspired settlement of the six-year-old
war in Cambodia, the Secretary General seemed less enthusiastic about extended
shuttle diplomacy than he was at the end of three days of talks in Hanoi. He
said that he would have to conclude his tour before making any assessment but
that he now saw ''no basis for a new visit to Hanoi or renewed talks in
Thailand.''

Some Skeptical of Mission

Diplomats and regional officials have been skeptical of the Secretary General's
mission, saying there is evidence that none of the parties to the conflict or
their supporters have compelling reasons to end the war.

The Vietnamese, according to Western diplomats and officials of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, are unlikely to permit any solution that
does not leave a government of their choosing in Phnom Penh. China and at least
some Asean nations, on the other hand, are not adverse to seeing the Vietnamese
bogged down in Cambodia, diplomats say.

Asked today to define the major obstacles to a Cambodian settlement, Mr. Perez
de Cuellar said the Asean nations and China wanted a withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops from Cambodia.

The Vietnamese will agree to that if only the Khmer Rouge leadership is removed
from the opposition. Khmer Rouge forces, however, are the strongest element in
the rebel coalition and the opposition's only military hope of forcing the
Vietnamese to the bargaining table.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WHY NOT INTERVENE IN CAMBODIA?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


To the Editor:


It is amazing that the United States can spend millions of dollars to fight
covert wars in Afghanistan and Nicaragua, yet refuse military aid to the rebels
in Cambodia (''U.S. Official Rules Out Arms for Cambodia Rebels,'' news story,
Jan. 19).

Since we pulled out of Vietnam and Cambodia in 1975, we have tried to deny the
consequences of our actions there. Now, in an effort to avoid further
embarrassment and ridicule, we have said to Cambodia that ''military support
should not be an American role'' when, in fact, many of that country's current
problems are a result of military and political intrusion by the United States.

We are probably responsible for creating the confused political climate that
sought solution in the brutal Khmer Rouge Government. At the very least, our
involvement aggravated Cambodia's historically precarious position and laid the
country open to its war with Vietnam.

While I do not support any of the Reagan Administration's covert operations, I
find it hypocritical that the U.S. would choose Cambodia, of all places, to take
a stand of nonintervention.

SUSAN T. DREYER New York, Jan. 19, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS, SEEKING NEW IMAGE, LOOK TO OLD NAME



BYLINE:
By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 2


Nearly half a century ago, long before there was a Burkina Faso, a Brunei
Darussalam, a Zimbabwe or a Zaire, the ancient Kingdom of Siam changed its name
to Thailand.

A determined lobby wants the old name back.

''This word 'land' is English and totally inappropriate; we don't need that
farang stuff here,'' Serm Phenjati said, using the Thai epithet for all things
Western.

Mr. Serm, 26 years old, whose father is Thai and mother American, recently
injected new life into the Siam lobby with a letter to The Bangkok Post, an
English-language newspaper. The letter, which opened a round of correspondence
on the subject, was provoked, Mr. Serm said, by his experiences as a student in
the United States.

'A Negative Image'

''Most Americans,'' he said, ''don't know the difference between Taiwan and
Thailand.'' Those who do, he added, ''have a negative image of Thailand from the
60's - the Vietnam War and refugees - and don't want to think about those
times.''

Mr. Serm, who works in a Bangkok advertising agency, says the name Siam had a
much higher recognition factor, ''especially among the older Americans who
remember 'The King and I.' ''

The name-change lobby is not alone in worrying about the country's image. The
Thai Foreign Ministry has just devised an image-improvement campaign to be waged
by embassies abroad. Too many foreigners, the ministry says, link the country
with piracy, child labor, exported prostitution and a domestic sex industry that
leaves nothing to the imagination.

''We want people to see we are an old country with a long history,'' said
Sawanit Kongsiri, the Foreign Ministry spokesman.

'Act of Nationalism'

Seven-hundred-year-old Siam became Thailand - temporarily in 1939 and
permanently in 1949 - not to rid itself of a colonial past. This was the only
Southeast Asian country not to fall under European domination.

Prathet Thai, the Thai name for Thailand, translates variously as ''land of the
free'' or ''land of the Thai'' and just seemed more up-to- date and fashionably
Western to the military Government of the time.

''This was a tribal act, an act of nationalism,'' said Sumet Jumsai, an
architect and writer who has been campaigning for years to rid the country of
its present label. ''The explanation that Thailand means 'land of the free' is
bogus.''

The name Siam, say its proponents, is a geographical designation that takes in
not only Thais but also the ethnic minorities the realm ingested over the
centuries. Thailand, they say, has no meaning for citizens of Burmese, Khmer,
Malay or hill tribe ancestry.

Thailand is a name as out of date as the military dictatorships that thought it
up when absolute monarchy was abolished half a century ago, Dr. Sumet said.

''If the people realized that the name originated from a fascist government in
the 30's, if they realized that it had a republican connotation, an
anti-monarchist connotation,'' he said, ''then I am sure they would want to
change the name back.''

King Still Rules Over Siam

The present constitutional monarch, King Phumiphol Aduldet, ''is still
Sayamindrathiraj, the King of Siam,'' Dr. Sumet said. ''Siam is the name still
used in royal proclamations. So we have this problem: The King reigns over a
Siam that doesn't exist any more.''

Further, he added, Bangkok (which Thais call Krung Thep) is living in an
''astrological discrepancy'' because its founding horoscope was related to that
of a country called Siam.

And that, Dr. Sumet says, goes a long way to explain the city's problems.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Serm Phenjati

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Guns Pound Rebels in Cambodia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 2


Vietnamese gunners pounded Cambodian Communist rebels today in a continuing
offensive.

Rebel and Thai military reports said Vietnamese heavy artillery and mortars
attacked Khmer Rouge guerrillas Friday night and today in mountains south of
here. The barrage was seen as a prelude to a full-scale attack.

In the last week, 41 Khmer Rouge guerrillas have been killed and 80 to 100
others wounded in heavy fighting in the area, the Thais said. They said small
Khmer Rouge units had inflicted heavy losses and had destroyed two Soviet- build
T-54 tanks.

The Communist rebels are allied with two non-Communist groups against the
Vietnamese-backed regime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


Members of Congress did not get their first look at Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger's budget until today, but over the last two months they have seen a
great deal of Mr. Weinberger himself.

In a grinding marathon of television appearances, newspaper interviews,
Congressional testimony and about 70 private meetings with individual members of
Congress, the Defense Secretary has laid out the case for his spending plans
with a tireless intensity extraordinary for this early stage in the
budget-making process.

He has deployed an arsenal of arguments, ranging from national security and arms
control to budget economics and pragmatic politics, in trying to explain why the
$313.7 billion military budget is critical.

Credibility Seen Impaired

But, according to members of Congress and aides interviewed earlier this week,
Mr. Weinberger has not softened their resolve to reduce the military budget as
part of the overall effort to control the Federal deficit. On the contrary, some
of them said, the Secretary's tenacious lobbying may have hardened Congressional
attitudes and impaired his credibility.

''There is a feeling of exaggeration,'' said Senator Mark O. Hatfield, an Oregon
Republican who is chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. ''A lot of
his presentation is crying down the forces of doom. Well, we haven't met all
their requests in the past, and it hasn't meant doom. How often do you cry
wolf?''

Other members of Congress said the Secretary's tendency to get carried away in
making his case was evident, in a small but telling way, on Thursday, when Mr.
Weinberger, apparently trying to impress the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
with the need to develop a defense against incoming missiles, twice asserted
that the Soviet Union had shot down one of its errant cruise missiles that had
strayed over Finland recently.

Clarification From Pentagon

Pentagon officials and intelligence sources later said the Secretary was
mistaken and that the Soviet Union was working on a cruise missile defense
system but had not yet mastered it. A Pentagon spokesman said the missile ''was
not shot down,'' and ''either flew into the ground or ran out of fuel.''

''Those kinds of things tend to detract from a man's credibility,'' said
Representative Bill Nichols, an Alabama Democrat who is a member of the House
Armed Services Committee and an admirer of Mr. Weinberger. ''Generally, I feel
the Secretary is pretty credible.''

But Senator John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, a Republican who is a former
Secretary of the Navy, said many senators believed Mr. Weinberger had used bogus
numbers in contending that he had squeezed from the military budget as much as
he prudently could.

'It Does Get Tedious'

''He's a million rubber bands in his resilience,'' Senator Alan K. Simpson of
Wyoming, the Senate Republican whip, said of Mr. Weinberger. ''You can't come
away without the richest regard for the tenacity of the man. But every time we
take a nickel out, we're told one less airplane will fly or one less soldier
will have an M-16 rifle. It does get tedious when you're told that.

''Anytime you have a budget of 286 to 300 billion bucks, you know there are
rotating funds in there,'' Mr. Simpson added. ''We've seen it before, when we'll
terminate a program and then all of a sudden they'll come up with the money
somewhere.''

Mr. Weinberger has made some headway with such conservatives as Senator Barry
Goldwater of Arizona, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, who
talked earlier about a freeze on military spending but later said he supported
continuing the military buildup at about the same level President Reagan was
requesting. ''I wish we had more people like Weinberger,'' Mr. Goldwater said
this week.

Cycle of Feast and Famine

But, according to one senior Administration official, Mr. Weinberger's standoff
with Congress on the budget has caused concern in the Defense Department about a
popular backlash against military spending that could plunge the Pentagon into a
cycle of feast and famine. A more conciliatory approach, this official said,
might have led to a consensus in Congress that would have assured a long future
of slower but steady growth.

Even Mr. Weinberger's critics generally agree that the Secretary is sincere, an
able debater and impressively tenacious. But people on Capitol Hill say he has
failed to appreciate the political problems facing members of Congress this year
as they try to halve a budget deficit projected at more than $200 billion.

''We strongly believe we will not be able to sell to our Democratic compatriots,
to the House or to the country a budget that makes the reductions that must be
made if those reductions come solely from nondefense areas,'' Senator Chafee
said. He described Mr. Weinberger as ''a genuinely nice person, thoughtful and
sincere,'' but ''stubborn.''

The Defense Secretary's allies say he is well aware of this reaction, but he
pushes ahead for two reasons: He and the President genuinely believe the money
is needed, and Mr. Weinberger is convinced that if he gives a little, Congress
will just take more.

''Where they get upset is that he doesn't back off early enough,'' said Russell
A. Rourke, Assistant Secretary of Defense for legislative affairs, who often
accompanies Mr. Weinberger on his lobbying forays. ''He doesn't view that as his
role. It would be easy for him to make a lot of friends on the Hill by rolling
over on the defense budget.''

Why the Equipment Is Needed

Congress, Mr. Rourke added, is like a group of rebellious taxpayers. ''They want
the police protection,'' he said. ''They want the fire protection. But when
their property taxes go up, they start going to taxpayer meetings.''

Nonetheless, Representative John McCain, an Arizona Republican who is a retired
Navy captain, a former pilot and prisoner of war in Vietnam and later a top
Congressional liaison officer for the Navy, said Mr. Weinberger should be
faulted for seeking bigger military budgets without making a case for the
nation's far-flung military commitments.

''The Pentagon has the ability to dazzle you with the 'gee-whiz' value of a
piece of equipment, but they have lots of trouble explaining why they need that
equipment,'' Mr. McCain said. ''Do we need 250,000 troops in Europe forever?''

In addition, several members of Congress said Mr. Weinberger had been
unsuccessful in changing the widespread belief that the military budget was
riddled with wasteful programs.

Lately, the Pentagon has taken several highly visible steps to prove that it is
cracking down on contractors.

They include the appointment of a new Assistant Secretary of Defense to watch
over weapons-buying, the naming of new Army and Air Force ''competition
advocates'' to force tougher bidding on contracts, and a flow of critical audits
and penalties from the office of Inspector General Joseph H. Sherick.

''I think Weinberger's been convinced by people in the Pentagon that they've got
the problem under control,'' Mr. McCain said. ''Perhaps they do. But that
message has not gotten out to the American people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article in The Week in Review on Feb. 3 about Congressional supervision of
intelligence operations omitted the attribution of a description of Angelo M.
Codevilla, who was until recently on the staff of the Senate Intelligence
Committee. The characterization of Mr. Codevilla as an outspoken staff member
with close ties to conservative activists was made by Senator Patrick J.  Leahy
of Vermont and Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger leaving briefing room

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
REVIVING A MUSICAL AND AN AGE OF OPTIMISM

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1684 words


Attending the Broadway revival of ''The King and I'' recently, I was reminded of
the time when Rodgers and Hammerstein were viewed as pop deities in somewhat the
same way that the Beatles and Bob Dylan came to be idolized by the rock
counterculture a decade and a half later. When ''The King and I'' opened in
1951, World War II was only six years gone. Still flushed with victory, America
was settling into the nesting, fortress mentality of the postwar baby boom.
Official optimism was the cultural order of the day.

''The King and I'' was Rodgers and Hammerstein's fifth musical collaboration,
and at the time it opened, their fourth, ''South Pacific,'' was still running on
Broadway. ''South Pacific'' went on to play 1,925 performances, and with the
success of ''The King and I,'' which ran for 1,246 performances, Rodgers and
Hammerstein assumed the stature of unbeatable winners wearing a moral halo -
they personified American self-confidence. The team's refinement of the
integrated book musical, in which the interweaving of story, songs and
choreography all worked toward a single purpose, fortuitously coincided with the
coalescing of a vast, spirtually homogeneous American suburbia.

Emerging as the most powerful nation on earth, with our land unscathed, we were
not so much in the mood to question national values as to celebrate them. And in
popular music, no one gave the booming suburban middle class a grander a sense
of its destiny than Rodgers & Hammerstein. Though their musicals were often set
in the past in exotic locales, and featured characters who were not Americans,
they nevertheless reflected a radiant vision of American pluck, virtue and
enlightenment overcoming the unknown.


In their craft, Rodgers and Hammerstein's songs consistently transcended the
banalities of Tin Pan Alley to evoke a sophisticated yet wholesome worldliness
that everyone could attain. Mr. Rodgers's grander, later melodies, like ''Some
Enchanted Evening'' and ''Hello, Young Lovers'' took on portentous flourishes
that aspired to the opera house without risking any uncomfortable dissonance.
Mr. Hammerstein's lyrics, with their cultivated, elocutionary tone, increasingly
suggested theatrical monologues intended not only to reveal character but to
delineate official cultural values. Where the lyrics of Cole Porter limned the
ethos of an often jaded, snobbish urban elite, Rodgers and Hammerstein's songs
invoked a more generalized urbanity and a ''responsible'' upward mobility in
which the whole of American society worked toward shared ideals of romantic
fulfillment and social justice.

In ''The King and I'' Rodgers and Hammerstein's ''official'' voice found its
most convincing expression. The show's lyrics state explicitly that the power of
positive thinking, along with strict observance of a code of Anglicized good
manners, can solve most problems. Its opening song, ''I Whistle a Happy Tune,''
preaches a stiff-upper- lip philosophy underscored by marching, grammar- school
diction: ''Whenever I feel afraid, I hold my head erect, and whistle a happy
tune, so no one will suspect I'm afraid.'' And as the characters in the show
follow these instructions, their anxieties magically dissolve. ''Getting to Know
You'' is another extended lesson - in friendliness and open-mindedness to
strangers. Adopting a tone of indomitable cheer, the English schoolteacher Anna
Leonowens tells her Oriental charges that the better she knows them the more she
likes them. The underlying assumption is that people are basically good.


Rodgers and Hammerstein extended the notion of mannerly civility as a social
panacea beyond the realm of social discourse and into the sexual arena itself.
The closest Anna and the King of Siam come to surrendering to an ambivalent
attraction of which neither is fully aware, is in ''Shall We Dance.'' This song
is yet another lesson in manners, in proper courtship, as a ''civilized'' woman
leads a ''barbaric'' slaveholding polygamist in a sweeping ballroom polka. If
the song works wonderfully in its dramatic context, it also exemplifies a deeper
vision of sexual polarization that runs through much of the whole Rodgers and
Hammerstein canon. In this vision, men are noble, egocentric beasts in need of
taming by indulgent, subservient women who understand them better than they
understand themselves. ''He has a thousand dreams that won't come true/ You know
that he believes in them/ And that's enough for you,'' sings Lady Thiang, the
wisest of the King's wives in ''Something Wonderful.'' These sentiments are
offered as the kind of universal knowledge that all women secretly share,


Such was Rodgers and Hammerstein's sway over American pop that for the next 25
years everything that followed represented some kind of reaction. Nothing could
be more opposite from Oscar Hammerstein's inspirational politeness than Little
Richard's non-verbal syllabic shouts. Building American roots music into a new
pop mainstream founded on records rather than the theater, rock-and-roll made
bad manners, bad grammar and sexually direct rhythms into a music as powerful in
its own way as the genteel songs of Rodgers and Hammerstein. Rock's electric
rhythms chopped up pop music's flowing narrative line and shifted the ideal of
the lyric from an artfully phrased short story into a more realistic exclamatory
street slang. And the traditional sexual double standard crumbled.

But rock - the music that toppled Rodgers and Hammerstein - also produced some
notable Rodgers and Hammerstein acolytes. The most popular and important has
been Carole King, who individually, and with various collaborators, translated
their romantic humanism into a colloquial pop-rock language expressing a ''whole
earth'' version of their philosophy. The archetypal Carole King song, ''You've
Got a Friend,'' expresses a serene trust in better days, happy endings and ties
that bind. The pop- soul tradition of Motown has also adapted Rodgers and
Hammerstein's positive-thinking philosophy into an informal, streetwise argot
typified by the flowery ballads of Stevie Wonder and Lionel Richie. Mr. Richie's
worshipful love songs like ''Lady,'' 'Truly,'' and ''Endless Love,'' with their
late romantic classical trimmings, are the studio-pop descendants of ''Some
Enchanted Evening,'' ''Hello, Young Lovers,'' and ''Climb Ev'ry Mountain.''


The lyric vocabulary of Broadway in the 80's has branched into a dozen different
streams, from Motown (''Dreamgirls'') to country-folk (''Pump Boys and
Dinettes'') to highbrow art song (Stephen Sondheim). Mr. Sondheim - Oscar
Hammerstein's greatest pupil - has refined and developed his teacher's ideas and
techniques into a highbrow moral and esthetic dialectic that is at once an
homage and a rebuttal. Rodgers and Hammerstein never seriously questioned the
assumption that a happy life was possible for everyone who strove and believed.
This is not the case in the songs of Mr. Sondheim. ''We all deserve to die!''
roars the Demon Barber of Fleet Street in ''Sweeney Todd.'' Though the character
is clearly mad, his lust for vengeance is well enough focused to send a chill
through audiences.

Rodgers and Hammerstein, even at their more portentous, wanted to communicate a
message unambiguously, with a minimum of semantic fuss, to the widest possible
audience. Mr. Sondheim's songs frequently don't court as general a public.
Indeed his shows can be viewed as criticisms of Broadway, and Rodgers and
Hammerstein, in particular, for having catered so willingly to the theater
audience's sentimental expectations. That view of the world may be permissible,
his songs imply, but only after it has been rigorously analyzed. ''Merrily We
Roll Along'' moves backward in time - stylistically as well as narratively -
from the brassy 80's to the gentle 50's. As the show progresses, the score
softens and culminates in a sweet Rodgers and Hammerstein-like chorale, ''The
Hills of Tomorrow'' whose words hold open a future of endless promise. In
''Pacific Overtures,'' Mr. Sondheim's post- Vietnam answer to ''The King and
I,'' the West and the East are portrayed as equally barbaric and the idea of
progress presented as an illusion. The lyrics aren't homilies but riddles, and
the characters who come out ahead in the show not idealistic dreamers but those
who know best how to ''accommodate the times.''


One of the striking qualities of Mr. Sondheim's songs is that for all their
apparent opposition to Rodgers and Hammerstein, their work still represents a
spiritual and esthetic point of departure. While Mr. Sondheim has explored all
manner of non-rock idioms, the model to which he always returns is the same
highly verbal, carefully crafted European operetta and art-song tradition
favored by Rodgers and Hammerstein. And for all their intellectual probing, his
work often ends up reaffirming time-honored moral and esthetic values -
self-motivation, friendship, honesty, and in ''Sunday in the Park With George,''
''Children and Art.'' ''Move On,'' from that show, exhorts a mystical belief
that things will get better if we adopt the right attitude and pull ourselves
out of our psychological ruts. Where Mr. Sondheim stops short of Rodgers and
Hammerstein is in holding out true love as the answer to life's problems.

Today, we are finally far enough away from the era when Rodgers and Hammerstein
ruled the roost of American pop so that the social doctrine their songs promoted
doesn't seem so much oppressive as appealingly quaint. Is it possible to
recapture the generous spirit that the best Rodgers and Hammerstein songs exuded
in such abundance, despite their questionable assumptions about human nature?
The thousands who are flocking to the Broadway Theater each night are lured, I
think, by more than Yul Brynner's monumental farewell performance as the King of
Siam. They are also hoping to be inspired by Rodgers and Hammerstein's serene
faith in a better future - the golden vision of grace, order, elegance and
romance that animates the show's lovely and enduring score.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
THE NETWORKS HAVEN'T QUITE FORSAKEN QUALITY DRAMA

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


Think a moment - on which television outlets did you first see the following
productions: Katharine Hepburn in ''The Glass Menagerie,'' Laurence Olivier in
''The Merchant of Venice,'' Carol Burnett in ''Friendly Fire,'' Colleen Dewhurst
in ''The Women's Room,'' Christopher Plummer in ''Cyrano de Bergerac,'' Julie
Harris in ''The Little Moon of Alban,'' Henry Fonda in ''Gideon's Trumpet'' and
Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne in ''The Magnificent Yankee''?

Public television? Cable, of either the standard or pay variety? No, all of
these distinguished programs could be found during prime time on the commercial
networks, the first four on the series labeled ABC Theater and the rest on the
Hallmark Hall of Fame. This reminder that the networks can lay claim to
not-infrequent bursts of outstanding quality - a fact that is being curiously
downplayed by some advocates for the newer technologies - is prompted by two
developments: the Museum of Broadcasting's current tribute, running through
April 18, to the Hallmark Hall of Fame; and the ABC Theater presentation
tomorrow night at 9 of ''Consenting Adult,'' starring Marlo Thomas and Martin
Sheen as the parents of a college-age athlete son who suddenly announces that he
is a homosexual.


Hallmark's involvement with broadcasting began in the 1930's when Joyce C. Hall,
founder of Hallmark Cards, decided that radio could provide an effective and
classy sales vehicle. The company came to television in 1951 and that year
sponsored the first opera created for television, Gian Carlo Menotti's ''Amahl
and the Night Visitors.'' Under the supervision of Albert McCleery, the Hallmark
programs began to command attention with such unusual fare as Maurice Evans in
''G.I. Hamlet,'' a version of Shakespeare's play designed for servicemen during
World War II. Then, in 1955, George Schaefer, the producer/director, and Mildred
Freed Alberg, the executive producer, entered into a Hallmark collaboration that
would employ an enviable degree of artistic freedom for much of the next 15
years.

At a recent seminar at the Museum of Broadcasting, Mr. Schaefer, still very
active and still fighting the good fight to respect the assorted talents of
writers and actors, recalled the luxury of having complete artistic control in
the days before networks began to interfere with their silly notions of ''high
concept'' and the like. For a 90- minute show, Mr. Schaefer was able to give his
cast 15 days of rehearsal. At the same session, Teresa Wright, the fine actress
who appeared in Hallmark's production of Shaw's ''Devil's Disciple,'' spoke
about the extended rehearsals having allowed her to work toward ''the
playwright's truth.''

The ''Schaefer years'' certainly have their abundance of outstanding credits,
from ''The Green Pastures'' with William Warfield and Earle Hyman to ''The
Lark'' with Julie Harris, Boris Karloff and Basil Rathbone; from ''The Tempest''
with Maurice Evans and Richard Burton to ''The Fantasticks'' with Ricardo
Montalban and Bert Lahr. And the list of highly successful Hallmark
presentations after 1970 includes George C. Scott in ''Beauty and the Beast,''
Alec Guinness and Genevieve Bujold in ''Caesar and Cleopatra,'' and Richard
Thomas in ''All Quiet on the Western Front.'' The record, establishing what the
company calls ''a tradition of excellence,'' speaks for itself. Coming this
Tuesday evening at 9 on CBS is ''The Corsican Brothers,'' a Norman Rosemont
Production that, if nothing else, is bound to be opulent.


On the face of it, ABC Theater has been more of a programming grabbag, filled
with everything from modest efforts by new writers (''The Last Tenant'' and
''Benny's Place'') to full-scale major productions (''Eleanor and Franklin''
and, first among the ''docudramas,'' ''The Missiles of October''). It has
offered ''event TV'' such as ''The Day After,'' ''problem TV'' such as
''Something About Amelia,'' and adaptations of stage plays such as ''Wedding
Band,'' ''The Shadow Box'' and ''The Elephant Man.'' The connecting thread is
that the mere presence of the label ABC Theater connotes something beyond the
ordinary. Brandon Stoddard, now the president of ABC Motion Pictures (a position
also responsible for theatrical releases like ''Silkwood'' and ''The Flamingo
Kid''), has explained: ''ABC Theater seeks to present a handful of television
movies each year purely on the basis of quality and importance, with no
commercial considerations.'' Tomorrow's ''Consenting Adult'' happens to be the
50th presentation in a truly remarkable record that began in December 1972 with
''If You Give a Dance You Gotta Pay the Band.''

''Consenting Adult'' is not the most impressive of ABC Theater presentations,
but, courtesy of a thoughtful production and an exceptional cast, it is a film
that commands attention. Based on the novel of the same name by Laura Z. Hobson
(''Gentleman's Agreement''), John McGreevey's script is just a trifle too pat,
touching on most of the cogent points but leaving no room for surprises. Ken and
Tess Lynn (Mr. Sheen and Miss Thomas) are pleasant, well-meaning people living a
decidedly upscale life. He is just recovering from a heart attack and she is
coping sympathetically when their only son Jeff (Barry Tubb), a star collegiate
swimmer, decides to announce his homosexuality. The situation is carefully
calculated in dramatic terms. In fact, Jeff has never had sexual relations of
any sort, but he believes he is attracted to men because that's what his
fantasies are about. His mother, hoping to change matters, sends him to a
psychiatrist who claims that 25 percent of his ''highly motivated'' patients
have switched from homosexual to heterosexual inclinations. Jeff's father is so
angry about his son's revelation that he refuses to deal with him at all,
reverting to the standard stereotypical comments about ''fags'' and ''queers.''
Only Jeff's sister and her husband offer the unhappy young man unstinting
support.


On a certain level, ''Consenting Adult'' is almost as chaste as ''That Certain
Summer,'' the groundbreaking TV movie about homosexuality that was carried on
ABC in the early 1970's and which also starred Martin Sheen, that time playing
one of the homosexual lovers. Jeff is not flamboyant or ''different'' in any way
that might be considered unsettling in ''polite society.'' But he is an
attractive vehicle for making a broader point. The 84-year- old Miss Hobson has
underlined her purpose: ''I believe that thousands of young people who are still
in agony over their discovery that they are homosexual will see this picture and
realize they must stop being ashamed. This film says to them, 'Don't let society
brainwash you into staying in the closet. Tell your parents now. Sure, there
will be trouble, but you'll live through it, and it's always better to be honest
in the end.'' This is still not likely to be a terribly welcome or popular
message in today's supposedly liberated world, but ABC Theater delivers it with
an admirable combination of emotional clout and dignity. The superb performances
of Miss Thomas, Mr. Sheen and Mr. Tubb make this Starger Company Presentation,
directed by Gilbert Cates and produced by Ray Aghayan and David Lawrence, the
kind of small movie that is likely to have enormous reverberations.

Anybody who works in the ferociously scrambling world of television will concede
that it is almost miraculous that anything of value ever gets produced. But,
against formidable odds, it does. ABC's Mr. Stoddard can still get as excited as
a frisky teen-ager when discussing his various projects. At the moment, he is in
the script-development stage of an ABC Novel for Televison that will cover
America's involvement in a war - in Vietnam and at home - during the 1960's and
70's. The writer is John Sacret Young (''Rumor of War,'' ''Testament''). ''The
Black Rainbow,'' dealing with three generations in a single fictional family, is
expected to run between 10 and 14 hours.

Clearly, in terms of indisputable quality, however scattered and sporadic,
commercial television can still be ambitious and, more significant for the new
programming entities, highly competitive.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ASCAP EXHIBITS 70 YEARS OF COMPOSERS' MEMORABILIA

BYLINE: By WILL CRUTCHFIELD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1351 words


In 1909 a young songwriter named

Irving Berlin invested in his first

piano, an ''Upright Grand'' made

by the Weser firm, with two special features: a ''non-squeaking pedal action''
patented in 1895, and a knob under the keyboard that moved the action, making it
possible to transpose a song from one key to another without knowing how.

On this battered-but-venerable- looking relic Mr. Berlin composed ''Alexander's
Ragtime Band'' and dozens of other hits, possibly including ''God Bless
America.'' You can't test the patented pedal because it's under glass, but you
can see the keys that fingers of genius stroked when the Lincoln Center
Library's new exhibit, ''ASCAP: 7 Decades of America's Music,'' opens to the
public Thursday morning.

ASCAP (the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers) is a
performing-rights organization formed in 1914. Mr. Berlin was an early member,
and is still at 96 an enthusiastic one. ''I talk to him every few days,'' said
the society's president, the lyricist Hal David. ''He just loves the idea; he's
been giving me detailed instructions on what should be printed on the card, and
so forth.''

The exhibit, which will be launched with a preview and dedication ceremony
Wednesday, came about through the efforts of Mr. David, Vartan Gregorian (the
president of the New York Public Library), and Martin Segal, the chairman of
Lincoln Center, who was the principal organizer.

''ASCAP is a client of my old company,'' Mr. Segal explained, ''and their
offices overlook Lincoln Center. It was natural. Hal David initiated it - that
was in the summer of 1983. These manuscripts had been sitting in their offices
and accumulating over the years. He said he'd like to talk to me about 'us and
Lincoln Center,' so we set up a lunch and decided we needed an archive. We're
going to take it in stages: A librarian has been at ASCAP for several months
now, combing through material. It's possible that the library will use some
space in the new building we're planning.''

The exhibit, which represents gleanings from a much larger collection that will
eventually be made available to researchers at the Lincoln Center Library for
the Performing Arts, is arranged in decades. It starts with the century's teens,
when Victor Herbert and a few colleages founded ASCAP to help them reap the
rewards of widespread use of their popular music. The ensuing years are
documented in photographs, scribbled-on menus, business correspondence, sheet
music, contracts and licenses (ASCAP's first was to Rector's, a restaurant at
1600 Broadway, which agreed on Oct. 1 1914 to pay $180 annually, in equal
monthly installments of $15, for the right to have ASCAP music played),
commemorative stamps, prizes, legal documents (Mr. David: ''ASCAP's history is
grounded in the courtroom'') and manuscripts. Mr. David's own lyric to ''Alfie''
is there, along with a preliminary draft of it. There are also materials donated
by Stephen Sondheim, Marvin Hamlisch, Jerry Herman, Burt Bacharach, Aaron
Copland, Ned Rorem, John Denver, Neil Diamond and others; several will be on
hand to make formal presentation of their gifts Wednesday.

Besides Mr. Berlin's piano, the collection houses Stevie Wonder's harmonica and
John Philip Sousa's gold baton. The first Pulitzer ever given to a songwriter
(Ira Gershwin) is there; so is the first Emmy for music, and the Congressional
medal awarded to George M. Cohan for ''Over There'' and ''You're a Grand Old
Flag.''

Some of the composers' letters are fascinating. Most are about money. ASCAP
originally rated its composers subjectively according to a classification system
that ran from AA to 4 in 13 steps (it was complicated); the money collected from
ASCAP licensees was divided among composers according to their classification,
which was assigned and reviewable by a committee of the association's board.
Igor Stravinsky got a C, which meant about $2,000 a year, and he didn't like it.
''It is my opinion,'' he wrote in 1943, ''that I have done much to enrich the
total field of music for many years; and that an obligation rests upon your
committee to take generous care of those of us who have advanced the art of
music and have achieved world recognition in the art.''

He didn't get his reclassification, but in 1950 the society switched to an
objective pay schedule based principally on number of performances.

There are also letters from Bela Bartok's son thanking the association for help
in the composer's last troubled years, from Count Basie asking about his
classification, and from Anna Mahler, asking in 1980 about royalty checks.

From other letters, meanwhile, one learns that Jerome Kern considered Richard
Rodgers ''a gentleman, a sound clear thinker, trustworthy,'' and that George
Gershwin was piqued that Ferde Grofe might be taking credit for part of the
composition of ''Rhapsody in Blue,'' which he orchestrated. Sigmund Romberg
wrote in 1938 to ask help for his friend Franz Waxman, a member of the Austrian
composers' society: since ''all Jewish members are being banned now from Austria
the same as in Germany . . . the question now arises: how can he join ASCAP?''

Composers can now join simply by having a song published or otherwise
commercially performed or reproduced, and composers who have account for 118 out
of 143 Oscars in music, and almost half the Pulitzers. The licenses cost more
than Rector's paid in 1914, and if Stravinsky were a member today he'd make more
than $2,000 a year, but the annual dues are precisely those exacted from
Gershwin, Herbert, Berlin and their colleagues all those years ago: $10 for
individuals, $50 for publishers.

Broadcast Festival


Another celebration of American music comes from WNYC radio, which has devoted a
winter festival to the nation's composers since 1939. From Feb. 10 through 18,
the station, an affiliate of National Public Radio and the Public Broadcasting
Service, will play American music all day long.

In addition turning over everyday programming to American music, WNYC will offer
several specials during the course of the festival. Among them are a Virgil
Thomson Anniversary Concert by the Hartford Symphony, broadcast on the
festival's first evening; a continuing Duke Ellington tribute at noon on each
weekday; four afternoon programs tracing the history of black musicians who
played in U.S. military bands from World War I to Vietnam; a ''Meet the
Composer'' series, hosted by Tim Page, that will begin during the festival and
continue into August; and concerts by the American Composers Orchestra under
Dennis Russell Davies.

On Saturday, Feb. 16, the festival will present a free ''Americathon'' concert
at the New School Auditorium, beginning at 1 P.M. and continuing through the
day. Philip Glass, Morton Gould, Anthony Davis, The Western Wind and others will
make guest appearances, and the concert will be broadcast.  From Japan


Music from Japan, an organization devoted to the presentation of contemporary
Japanese music, will celebrate its 10th anniversary with a concert in Carnegie
Hall on Feb. 14. Four American premieres will be given: a cello and orchestra
piece entitled ''Orion and Pleiades,'' by Toru Takemitsu (whose piano concerto
was recently played here by Peter Serkin with the Los Angeles Symphony);
''Gioh,'' a symphonic poem for Yokobue (Japanese flute) and orchestra, by Mark
Ishii; ''Kyomon'' for children's choir and orchestra, by Akira Miyoshi, and a
''Threnody to Toki'' by Takashi Yoshimatsu. The Toki is a Japanese crested bird
on the international endangered species list, and extinct in Japan since 1971.
All four works were composed last year; the American Symphony Orchestra will
play.

The concert will be followed on Feb. 15 and 16 by a symposium on ''The State of
Contemporary Music in Japan,'' sponsored jointly by Music From Japan and the
Music Critics Association at the Asia Society. On April 14 another concert will
be given at the Kennedy Center in Washington, accompanied by its own symposium,
this time on ''Japanese Music and its Impact on American Culture.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Trouble With the Joint Chiefs

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


Next to the President, the chiefs of the armed forces are the highest ranking
officers. Their power is tightly confined by making them a committee, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, allowed only to advise the President and Secretary of Defense.
But the price of protecting civilian control in that way is a command system
that creaks with inefficiency.

Many students of the problem believe the inefficiencies imperil national
security, and they offer diverse proposals for reform. The latest is a
forthcoming report from the Center for Strategic and International Studies at
Georgetown University. It would make the chairman of the Joint Chiefs a true
deputy to the Secretary of Defense, with the power to resolve interservice
rivalries in matters of command, budget and strategic planning.

To its critics, interservice rivalry is the bane of the present system. Each of
the four Chiefs ''represents'' his own service - Army, Navy, Air Force and
Marines - and may dissent from joint recommendations. Hence the committee is
seldom able to resolve service conflicts or set priorities under a budget
ceiling. The advice the Chiefs tender to the Secretary of Defense, according to
former Secretary Harold Brown, is ''almost without exception either not very
useful or the reverse of being helpful. That is, worse than nothing.''

Service rivalries extend from the Pentagon to the battlefield. In Vietnam, the
United States had five separate air forces; rather than cooperate, each service
sought to carve out a larger mission for itself. When President Carter asked for
a Rapid Deployment Force to defend the Persian Gulf, the Joint Chiefs took years
to develop a multiservice force instead of instantly assigning the job to the
Marines. No single commander directed the ground forces that took Grenada
because the Army and Navy couldn't agree.

Some redundancy and rivalry can be stimulating and even necessary. But taken to
extremes, as in divided command or foot-dragging on interservice missions,
internal rivalries can paralyze. Efforts to integrate the armed forces have been
generally supported by the Army and strenuously resisted by the Navy. The reason
is evident: The Army needs the Navy or the Air Force to get anywhere; the Navy
has its own army - the Marines - and its own air force. Navy Secretary John
Lehman derides such proposals as a recipe for creating a ''Prussian-style
general staff'' that would subvert civilian control and dilute the authority of
operational commanders. He could be right.



Yet whatever the merits of any reorganization, the underlying problem is too
serious to ignore.

Gen. David Jones, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs, traces in our military
history ''a disconcerting pattern: (1) Unpreparedness at the onset of each new
crisis or war; (2) initial failures; (3) reorganizing while fighting; (4)
building our defenses as we crank up our industrial base; (5) prevailing by
wearing the enemy down - by being bigger, not smarter.'' Future wars may not
allow this luxury. The outcome may depend on whatever is at hand.

Much of the blame probably lies with civilian leaders who have defined excessive
or vague objectives, or both. Much lies with Congress, which thwarts long-term
planning with unpredictable budgets and parochial impositions. Much lies with
defense contractors who foist overcostly and overcomplex weapons on the
services. But that still leaves fault with the services for tolerating
bureaucratic rigidities and rivalries that can seriously impair their
performance.

Those who seek to reform the defense establishment may err in their proposals,
but their anxieties deserve attention.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

On Language;
THE BOFFIN SPEAKS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 11, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words


IN A RECENT COLUMN you said you were seeking a replacement for the word pundit
,'' writes Godfrey Sperling Jr. of The Christian Science Monitor. How about
maven?'' Mr. Sperling, whose newsmaking breakfasts are a Washington institution
and whose granddaughter is named Mavyn, adds: ''What is the precise English
translation of this Yiddish word - or is it Yiddish? Does expert do justice to
the word?''

I am a language maven and a political pundit. Those two nouns, one of them
relatively new to English, have quite different meanings.

A maven is a self-proclaimed expert. When someone says ''I am a maven,''
however, a note of self-mockery is added, as if to say ''and if I'm not such an
expert, sue me.'' Just as the Yiddishism kibitzer, or ''participating
onlooker,'' was adopted by the English-speaking in the last generation, maven
has made its way into the dictionaries in this yuppier generation. In the
synonymy of expertise, a slot has been left open: connoisseur connotes a person
of exquisitely discriminating taste; expert or authority has a technocratic or
academic ring, and aficionado or enthusiast carries a meaning of less
discrimination and greater devotion. What of somebody who loudly and happily
asserts that his love for the subject has made him an expert? He may not wear
the ring of authority, and to a connoisseur he's no connoisseur; but to his
peers, only when it comes to his special interest, the maven has The Word. The
phrase closest in meaning, but with bookish overtones, is opinion leader.

As can be seen, maven is a word I like, and Bud Sperling's granddaughter has a
name that augurs a great career; but pundit, as a term for ''political
commentator,'' is getting tired. The Hindi word for ''learned man'' was
popularized in the United States by Henry R. Luce, founder of Time magazine, who
applied it to Walter Lippmann, the columnist and full- time sage. Luce, I always
believed, took that word from the Pundits Club, a group of undergraduates at
Yale, and carried it with him into the newsmagazine dodge.

However, I am informed by Prof. Russell Judkins of New York State University's
College of Arts and Science at Geneseo that an earlier Pundit Club was formed in
Rochester in 1854 by the anthropologist Lewis Henry Morgan, and an article
titled ''Reminiscences of the Pundit Club'' was published by the Rochester
Historical Society in 1923. The notion of a club's using the Hindi word as its
name was evidently widely bruited about early in this century.

Further digging in the Oxford English Dictionary shows pundit to have been used
in this colloquial, mocking sense as far back as 1816: ''For English pundets
condescend/ Th' observatory to ascend'' was in the poem ''The Grand Master'' by
Quiz, a pseudonym probably for William Combe. In 1862, The Saturday Review used
the word as it is used today: ''A point upon which the doctors of etiquette and
the pundits of refinement will differ.'' In 1948, after Henry Luce had made the
word known to a wider audience, John Steinbeck, the novelist, used a word that
cast aspersions on the characteristics of a pundit: ''News has become a matter
of punditry. A man sitting at a desk in Washington or New York reads the cables
and rearranges them to fit his own mental pattern and his by-line.''

Well, yes, that's often how it is done, and it is not hard to bash the damnable
media for being what Albert Julius, a London jeweler, called Kopf- verdreher,
''head-twisters,'' or ''mind-turners.'' But pundit just doesn't seem to have any
zip left. What other choices are there to describe the ''panjandrums of the
opinion Mafia'' (Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s phrase)?

''Savant is too precious by far,'' writes Edward Engberg of Santa Barbara,
Calif., dismissing the term for ''knowing one.'' He prefers a coinage like
wisant. Another -ant coinage suggested was sagant, but that sounds too much like
sergeant; several writers like pedant, but the teaching profession has that
locked up.

Another response to the query for a word between wise man and wise guy that came
in from several readers was polymath, a Greek-based word meaning ''a person of
great learning.'' I have rejected that because it conjures a vision of a parrot
loudly spouting numbers, which limits its use to economic columnists.

Chochem has its legion of supporters. ''If the French savant is in the running
as a replacement for the Sanskrit pundit,'' writes Miriam Gross of New York,
''why not also consider the Yiddish chochem? Depending on how it is used, it can
mean 'wise man, clever fellow' or, sarcastically, 'wise guy.' '' No; with maven
already in the field, the fricative fricassee of chochem is redundant.

Another possibility, from the scientific world, is bonze. ''Like pundit, the
word comes from South Asia, in this case I think, Vietnam,'' writes Dietrick
Thomsen of Science News in Washington. ''It refers to a very senior Buddhist
monk, the sort who is always propounding the most inscrutable koans. In past
decades it was used by German university students (particularly in physics) to
refer to professors whose pronouncements were unassailable. Einstein, Bohr,
Pauli, Heisenberg . . . were all Bonzen.'' This is a pretty good word, and bears
watching; I wonder what the Heisenberg effect on bonze will be.

The most colorful contribution was by Dr. Daniel Hely of Carlisle, Pa., who
found the hair-ball oracle, a title of a chapter in Mark Twain's ''Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn.'' ''Miss Watson's nigger, Jim,'' recounts Huck, ''had a
hair-ball as big as your fist, which had been took out of the fourth stomach of
an ox, and he used to do magic with it. He said there was a spirit inside of it,
and it knowed everything.'' Ah, if only a few oracles had access to a hairball
before Don Regan got the idea to break the gridlock in Mr. Reagan's cabinet!

However, hair-ball oracle is a tad too pretentious. Portmanteau words like
savantaleck, wisdomfont and greminence are off the mark. My favorite is boffin.

''For pundit try boffin,'' suggests David Sider of the department of classical
and Oriental languages at Queens College in New York. ''This is a British term
of recent coinage that is defined (defining clauses begin with that - right?) by
the O.E.D. Supplement as referring primarily to scientists with 'back-room'
knowledge, but I've heard it applied to experts in general.''

The lexicographers at Oxford point out that boffin, etymology unknown, was first
used by young naval officers about their elders, and later by members of the
Royal Air Force about the scientists working on radar. The word has a nice sound
to it, and a folk etymology could quickly be fashioned (''from griffin, mythical
beast with the head of an eagle and the body of a lion, influenced by buffoon
'').

Go With the Flow

IN A PIECE ABOUT THE moving-around and shaking- out that took place at the start
of Mr. Reagan's second term, I recalled the time that Richard M. Nixon demanded
the resignations of everyone in order to avoid having the country run by
''exhausted volcanoes.'' I thought he was quoting Disraeli about Gladstone.

The Gotcha! gang promptly struck in the person of Senator Daniel P. Moynihan,
Democrat of New York, the Nixon aide in 1972 who slipped a biography of Disraeli
into the President's night reading.

''I can't find the remark,'' he writes, ''but I am dead certain it was not about
Gladstone but rather of the Whig (or Tory) front bench. . . .''

The Senator's recollection is only partially accurate: Disraeli's metaphorical
use of volcanoes was directed at Gladstone's ministers, if not the Prime
Minister himself, in a speech at Manchester on April 3, 1872. According to
Britain's Dictionary of National Biography, it was to extinct volcanoes that
Disraeli ''likened the heads of departments in Mr. Gladstone's Government, as he
sat opposite to them in the House of Commons.''

In The Speeches of the Earl of Beaconsfield, Vol. II, this passage from Disraeli
erupts: ''As I sat opposite the Treasury Bench the ministers reminded me of one
of those marine landscapes not very unusual on the coast of South America. You
behold a range of exhausted volcanoes. Not a flame flickers on a single pallid
crest. But the situation is still dangerous.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
THE ALPHABETICAL ISSUES FROM A TO D

BYLINE: By Richard L. Sine

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


At 12:01 A.M. Feb. 17, new postage rates will go into effect. The new rates will
be 22 cents for first class mail single ounce and 14 cents post card rate. With
rather short public notice, the United States Postal Service released last
Friday,

 its fourth non-denominated stamp. It has no number to designate the 22- cent
face value and has the same basic design as its earlier brethren. Like its three
predecessors, the new stamp and the accompanying items of postal stationery
carry a face value to match the postal rate increase.

The new stamp was released in Los Angeles, Calif., with no formal ceremony.
Previous undenominated stamps were issued when the First Class postage rate was
increased from 13 to 15 cents, from 15 to 18 cents, and from 18 to 20 cents. The
new series carries the letter ''D'' in place of the customary numeral showing
the face value. The first three stamps with similar design of a stylized eagle
and the words ''Domestic Mail'' carried the letters ''A'', ''B'' and ''C.''


The legend on these stamps is important to their use. Stamps without a printed
denomination are not valid for international mail, including mail to Canada.
Color of the ''D'' stamps is green. Production of this series was begun in 1981
and kept in storage until a rate change required its use. The ability of the
U.S. Postal Service to get these stamps to post offices across the nation
guarantees that postal patrons will have single stamps for the new first class
mail rate prior to the effective date.

The new stamp is available in three formats: panes of 100 with perforations on
all four sides, coils of 100, 500 and 3,000 with perforations on two sides and
booklets with two panes of 10 stamps with perforations on two or three sides and
considerably smaller than the other two. Also released was an embossed envelope
with the indicia matching the stamps.

Because of the timing of the public announcement and to encourage collectors to
affix their own stamps to cover for first day cancellations, the normal 30-day
deadline for requesting postal markings has been extended to 60 days. Orders
must be postmarked by Aprrl 2 to receive the special cancellation.

Customers affixing their own stamps. The USPS encourages this and promises
preferential service. Each envelope must be addressed or bear a peelable address
label. A filler of postal card thickness should be inserted in each cover to
ensure a clear cancellation. Stamps issued prior to Feb. 1 may be used along
with the ''D'' stamps. These envelopes should be placed in another, addressed to
Customer-Affixed Envelopes, D Stamp, Postmaster, Los Angeles, Calif. 90052-9991.

With reference to the embossed envelope, customers are encouraged to purchase
their own and address them in the same manner as recommended for the ''D''
stamps. Requests are to be sent to Customer Provided Stationery, D Envelope,
Postmaster, Los Angeles, Calif. 90052-9991.

Postal Service affixing the stamps. Collectors must submit addressed envelopes
and 22 cents for each cover desired. Personal checks are acceptable for orders
up to the limit of 50 covers. Postage stamps and cash are not acceptable as
payment. Orders are to be sent to D Stamp, Postmaster, Los Angeles, Calif.
900529992.

For collectors who wish to have the USPS provide the embossed envelope, the
price is 27 cents. Unless the No. 10 size is specified, the No. 6 3/4 size will
be provided. Window envelopes will not be provided. Requests with remittance are
to be sent to D Envelope, Postmaster, Los Angeles, Calif. 90052-9992.

New Postal Card

An undenominated postal card, honoring Patriot Charles Carroll, was issued last
Friday at New Carrollton, Md. As with the undenominated stamps issued the same
day, these postal cards are not valid for international mail. This card is in
the Patriot Series.

Procedures for ordering first day cancellations parallel those for the ''D''
stamps. For collectors providing their own cards, requests should be sent to
Customer Provided Stationery, Charles Carroll, Postmaster, New Carrollton, Md.
20784-9991.

For collectors desiring the USPS to provide the cards, prices are 14 cents for
postal cards and 28 cents for double reply cards. Orders and remittance should
be sent to Charles Carroll Postal Card, Postmaster, New Carrollton, Md.
20784-9992.

Propaganda

Postage stamps have been a well- used tool for propaganda from promoting peace
and arguing for human rights to promoting the sale of a nation's products and
recommending tourist sites. Many stamps issued for these reasons are classified
by collectors as ''semi-postals.'' The stamp displays two denominations, one for
the actual cost of the postage and the other - usually smaller - for funds to be
contributed to the specified cause.

Stamps also have been used in espionage from spies using stamps on mail to tell
of the movement of ships and troops to the concealing of microfilm. During World
War II, there were examples of Allied forces using stamplike items with
caricatures of Hitler as well as counterfeiting German postal issues. Even bogus
mail bags and bag labels were used to send mail to German civilians directly
with their message. One effort was known as ''Project Cornflakes,'' a program to
get mail on the breakfast tables of the German people.

More recently, North Korea counterfeited stamps to mail propaganda into South
Korea during the 1950's. During the American presence in Vietnam, North Vietnam
on several occasions released stamps showing this country committing atrocities
or claiming the shooting down of large numbers of U.S. planes.

Proliferation

Within the first 30 years of Great Britain issuing the world's first postage
stamp in 1840, 140 countries were issuing such items for the prepayment of
postage. Of that number, about half have been incorporated into larger nations.
The second states to issue stamps were the Swiss cantons of Zurich, Geneva and
Basel which after 1850 were under the postal administration of Switzerland. The
German states of Bavaria, Prussia, Hanover, Baden and others now are under the
postal administation of East or West Germany.

Other states which are now part of larger nations are those of Australia and
Italy as well as provinces of Canada. Even with this consolidation, which cut
back on the original number of stamp issuing entities, today there are more than
250. Where only a few hundred stamps were produced annually in the world, the
annual number has increased to more than 6,000!

New York CityWhen the New York Local Post was taken over in 1842 by the Federal
postal system, John Lorimer Graham, the New York postmaster, reported that the
average number of letters delivered in the city each day was 437. That number
increased to 762 per day within three months of the takeover.

Some 130 or so years later, the average number of pieces of mail deposited or in
transit through the New York City post office had grown to nearly 25,000,000
pieces! Average daily mail delivery numbered nearly 10.5 million pieces.

By Donkey?

Mail has been moved by virtually all forms of transportation ranging from
pigeons to streetcars to spacecraft. Collectors have examples of all of these
forms and many more. India has equipped donkeys as mobile post offices, no doubt
much more versatile than the U.S. Highway Post Offices that were rigged out as
post office facilities. Donkeys do not have to restrict themselves to improved
roadways.

India was also a pioneer in experimentation of rocket mail which also was
attempted by other places in the world. In this country Dr. Robert H. Goddard
experimented with rocket mail as far back as 1914. Mail traveled through
pneumatic tubes in major cities of the world including New York, Philadelphia,
Chicago, London, Berlin, Rome, Vienna and Paris. Italy issued stamps expressly
for that type of mail service.

Perhaps the most exotic example of transport of a letter occurred on July 20,
1969, when the first man on the moon arrived equipped with a device to cancel a
letter. Unfortunately, Astronauts Edwin Aldrin and Neil Armstrong were too busy
with their experiments to cancel the letter on the moon's surface.

Actual canceling of the letter bearing a die proof of the 10-cent airmail stamp
of 1969 depicting the first man on the moon occured in the space craft on the
return trip to Earth. Two years later, television viewers witnessed David Scott
canceling a letter on the moon - a letter carrying the pair of 8-cent stamps
depicting a decade of U.S. achievement in space. Immediately after the 8:52 A.M.
lunar event, the stamps went on sale in the United States.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of new stamp

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Chief in Singapore

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 61 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Feb. 3


The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, said today that
Hanoi wants a ''peaceful and negotiated settlement'' to the Cambodian problem
but remains far from the positions of the regions's non-Communist countries. Mr.
Perez de Cuellar conferred last week with officials from Vietnam, Laos and
Thailand about restoring peace in Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI LEADER WANTS BETTER TIES WITH PEKING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 3


Vietnam's Communist Party leader has acknowledged in a speech marking the
party's 55th anniversary that there are ''shortcomings and mistakes'' in
Vietnam's economic and ideological affairs, according to reports from the
Vietnam News Agency.

The official Hanoi agency, monitored in Bangkok, said the party chief, Le Duan,
also told party and Government officials Saturday that the country should
improve its relations with China and with the non-Communist nations of Southeast
Asia, while continuing to build ties to Moscow.

The speech came at a time when diplomats in Hanoi suggest that a faction of
Vietnam's leadership has become wary of the growing dependence on the Soviet
Union and would like to keep a line open to Peking.

Relations between the Chinese and Vietnamese - traditional enemies until this
century's wars against the French and Americans - have deteriorated again over
the last six years, as Peking has given substantial material support to rebels
in Cambodia who are trying to overthrow the Vietnamese-installed Government in
Phnom Penh.

Reported to Seek Talks

Last week in Bangkok, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of the Cambodian rebel
coalition, said he had been told in Peking that Vietnam had been seeking talks
with China. Along with their disagreement over Cambodia, the Vietnamese and
Chinese have been fighting sporadically along their common border.

''We are prepared to normalize relations with China,'' the Vietnamese party's
Secretary General was reported to have said, adding that Hanoi ''firmly believes
that the friendship between the two countries will have to be restored.''

Mr. Duan's speech follows a report by Hanoi in December that acknowledged a
failure to meet nearly all the country's economic targets for 1984. Vietnam and
its allies, Laos and Cambodia, are among Asia's poorest nations.

Diplomats in Hanoi say there appear to be continuing disagreements in the Hanoi
leadership on recent experiments in liberalized economic policies, not unlike
China's moves toward a pragmatic, less ideological approach.

In the speech, Mr. Duan seemed to be, as he has been before, on the side of
liberalized changes. He was reported to have said ''dynamic and flexible
management'' was the way to ''high productivity.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

12 YEARS OF HIDING TO END IN AN OFFICIAL PAROLE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: CAMP HILL, Pa., Feb. 3


After Richard Gartner escaped from prison in 1972, he returned home, started a
family and a business and paid taxes under his own name. But in his mind, he
never stopped running.

''Every day I thought that they would come,'' he said. ''Every day for 12 years
I never answered the knock on my door.''

They came, but not until last November, when he was arrested and sent to jail to
await a decision on parole. Friday the State Board of Probation and Parole
decided he would be paroled in May.

But Mr. Gartner is angry at the system that incarcerated him only after more
than a decade of benign neglect.

''I would say I rehabilitated myself,'' the 34-year-old former fugitive said in
an interview at the state prison here before the parole decision. ''I know I
don't belong here. I belong out there, supporting my family.''

2 Tours of Duty in Vietnam

Mr. Gartner, who was reared in Bucks County, near Philadelphia, joined the
Marine Corps when he was 16 years old and had two 13-month tours of duty in
Vietnam. On his return he was assigned as a driver for military officials on a
base in Georgia.

''They threw you in dress blues, all spit and shine, right out of a combat
zone,'' he said. ''There was no deprogramming whatsoever.''

After one day, he went home, absent without leave. He and a handful of young
men, whom he described as ''just a bad crowd,'' committed a half- dozen
burglaries in Bucks County. The total take was less than $300, he said. He was
arrested and convicted.

After serving five months of a six- year sentence, Mr. Gartner walked away from
his prison camp assignment in nearby Adams County and hitchhiked home. No one
came after him.

After a series of odd jobs, he began working for a trash-hauling company. He
married, had four children and led ''a regular family life.'' In 1983, he
started his own trash-hauling busisness.

'The Fear Was Always There'

''I thought about turning myself in, but after the one kid and then another kid,
it got harder each year to turn myself in,'' he said.

Mr. Gartner said he used his own name and his old Social Security number. For
years, though, he did not answer the telephone or a knock on the door. He did
not apply for a driver's license, and he kept to himself.

''I didn't socialize with people because I didn't want them in some way finding
out about my life,'' he said. ''The fear was always there.''

One night last November, he said, ''I woke my wife up and told her I feel
something's wrong. We stayed up all night talking about it.''

He was arrested at his home the next morning, caught in the web of the Fugitive
Investigative Strike Team, an operation of Federal, state and local
law-enforcement officers that captured 3,300 fugitives in the Northeast over a
two-month period.

Since his arrest, Mr. Gartner has been in solitary confinement because of the
escape charge against him, but he will probably be moved to the general
population, prison officials said. ''I try to read but I can't really read
because I always think of my family,'' he said. ''They're the ones that are
being punished more than me.''

'An Unfortunate Problem'

Gary Hartman, the Adams County District Attorney, who dropped the escape charge
against Mr. Gartner last month, mainly because the investigating officer had
died, said the system often lost track of fugitives when they went from one
jurisdiction to another. ''All you have to do is cross a county line and you're
in another world in terms of enforcement,'' he added.

Robert O'Connell, the chief deputy United States Marshal, whose office helped
direct last fall's roundup of fugitives, said, ''It's an unfortunate problem
with the system that it does not act sooner with fugitives.''

State Senator H. Craig Lewis of Bucks County, who has lobbied for Mr. Gartner's
freedom, said today that it was ''outrageous'' that he would not be released
immediately.  ''By any human and compassionate analysis of the circumstances,
all observers agreed that Mr. Gartner should not be incarcerated,'' Mr. Lewis
said, and accused the parole board of ignoring subjective factors that are
supposed to go into parole decisions.

The board said it had considered what Mr. Gartner called his
''self-rehabilitation,'' but decided on six months of imprisonment because at
the time of his escape he would have been eligible for parole in six months.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ONE LESSON FROM THE WESTMORELAND CASE

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 205 words


To the Editor:


I was disappointed to read of the plans by Senator Jesse A. Helms and Freedom in
Media to buy stock in CBS to alter the network's ''liberal bias'' (news story,
Jan. 11). This effort misses an important lesson of the Gen William C.
Westmoreland libel suit against CBS. That trial should cause us to examine
information management by both the national news media and the Government.

The size of these and other national institutions is historically unprecedented.
The speed of modern communications, used by news media to interpret an often
secretive and divided bureaucratic hierarchy, results, unsurprisingly, in the
broadcast of conclusions that are superficial, biased or inadequately
researched. In the Westmoreland case, how could anyone make sense of a political
situation as knotty as interagency fighting over enemy troop- strength estimates
in the Vietnam War in a mere 90 minutes?  This situation is made more
problematic by the influence of televised editorial opinion. What is needed is
not more conservative or more liberal media but a citizenry that demands less
opinionated broadcast journalism, even at the risk of interpretive ambiguity.

COLIN CRAWFORD Brooklyn, Jan. 21, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
MISSION: MELT THE RUBBER IN THE PENTAGON STAMP

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 4


The first public meeting of the House Armed Services Committee had just ended,
and the new chairman, Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, was besieged by
favor-seekers.

Representative Ronald V. Dellums, a California Democrat, asked him to solve a
personnel problem and snapped, ''You're the new chairman - you change it.''
Representative Roy Dyson, Democrat of Maryland, pleaded: ''Can you sign that
letter to the Pentagon? The only way you get them to do something is to bug the
hell out of them.''

Mr. Aspin, 46 years old, has been bugging the Pentagon since he was first
elected to Congress in 1970 and became a self-appointed watchdog of military
maneuvers and machinations. Today Mr. Aspin is no longer an outsider pressing
his nose against the windows of power on Capitol Hill. Last month he engineered
one of the most startling coups in recent Congressional memory by unseating the
incumbent Armed Services chairman, 80-year-old Melvin Price of Illinois, who is
in failing health.

Ready for Battle

In his new post Mr. Aspin is in a key position to influence America's military
policy, and his impact is already visible. On Tuesday morning Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger is scheduled to testify before the Armed Services panel,
and in a letter to the Secretary last week Mr. Aspin included a statement
outlining his basic approach to the forthcoming battle over the Pentagon budget.

''In the boldest terms,'' Mr. Aspin wrote, ''what we must tell the Defense
Department is, 'Before we give you billions more, we want to know what you've
done with the trillion you've got.' ''

''What I would like the committee to do,'' he added, ''is step back and take a
broad look at the whole program - what we have accomplished and what we have yet
to do.''

This is revolutionary talk for a committee that has earned a reputation as a
rubber stamp for the Pentagon and the Reagan Administration.

In Mr. Aspin's view, the Armed Services Committee has acted more like the Public
Works Committee, playing pork barrel politics by dispensing bases and contracts
to favored districts. At a time when budget deficits are forcing Congress to
re-examine its spending priorities, he says, the committee must look behind all
the technology and hardware and ask the Pentagon to justify its requests in
terms of long-range strategy and planning.

'We Have to Question Them'

Representative Dave McCurdy, a young Democrat from Oklahoma who helped organize
Mr. Aspin's campaign for the chairmanship, said: ''We're less willing to accept
at face value what the Pentagon presents. We have to challenge them, we have to
question them, from a policy point of view.''

Perhaps more than any other committee in Congress, the Armed Services panel is
divided by a generation gap. The six senior Democrats are all outspoken
supporters of the Pentagon and of the Reagan Administration's efforts to build
military might.

One of the six, Samuel S. Stratton of upstate New York, who is a Navy veteran of
two wars, explained the gap this way: ''Those of us who grew up before World War
II, and saw what happened in Europe, have a much different understanding about
the need for a strong and credible defense than those who grew up during the
Vietnam War.''

Mr. Aspin, the seventh-ranking Democrat in seniority, joined the committee with
an eye toward monitoring the Pentagon and not just cheering for it. Since then,
more than a half-dozen other Democrats who trace their roots to the antiwar
atmosphere of the Vietnam era have joined the committee, and Mr. Aspin aims to
involve these junior members more directly in its deliberations.

Limits on His Freedom

But the pro-Pentagon forces still maintain a majority among the 27 Democrats on
the committee, and that limits Mr. Aspin's freedom. For example, he had planned
to form a subcommittee, that he would head, to look into broad questions of
military policy. This would have opened up a subcommittee chairmanship for
Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, an Aspin ally.

But the senior members put up their own candidate, Beverly Byron of Maryland, to
challenge Mrs. Schroeder. Faced with a possible ''civil war,'' Mr. Aspin
abandoned his plan for a new subcommittee.

Mr. Aspin's decision to avoid a confrontation demonstrated his determination to
bandage the wounds caused by his rebellion against Mr. Price. ''He's gone out of
his way to be conciliatory to the members who didn't support him,'' Mr. Stratton
conceded.

The new chairman is keenly aware that he does not have the votes to win on many
issues, but he can use his power in other ways. For instance, in addition to the
parade of military brass that testifies on Capitol Hill every year, the new
chairman intends to balance out the witness list with independent critics of the
Pentagon.

''We're going to have fun,'' he said one day recently as he strode rapidly from
one meeting to another.

Other Realms of Power

A committee chairman also controls who gets appointed to the staff, what issues
they study and which reports they publish for other lawmakers. He decides which
members get to go on trips and what bills the committee will consider. He can
help craft Democratic positions on military issues and expound them on
television interview shows.

Moreover, when House members meet with their Senate counterparts to put together
the final version of the military authorization bill, Mr. Aspin will head the
House delegation. ''In the conferences before, the conferees represented the
Pentagon, not the House position,'' asserted Representative Schroeder. ''It took
them all of 37 seconds before they caved.''

Mr. Aspin's first major legislative test will involve the MX missile. He has
supported the weapon for the last few years, but in his campaign for the
committee chairmanship several liberal lawmakers said he promised to switch
course and oppose the weapon when Congress considers the issue again next month.

Mr. Aspin is trying to avoid making enemies, so he says he has not decided what
to do. But one MX opponent is telling friends that if Mr. Aspin backs the
missile he will be a ''one-term chairman'' of the panel.

No matter how the MX fight comes out, the Aspin era at Armed Services promises
to be a turbulent time. ''We don't have all the answers,'' said Mr. McCurdy, one
of the chairman's chief lieutenants, ''but we have a hell of a lot of
questions.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Les Aspin

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

2 VETERANS TESTIFY ON ENEMY FOR CBS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words


Two combat veterans of the Vietnam War took the stand yesterday at Gen. William
C. Westmoreland's libel trial against CBS and, wielding a mock grenade and
tripwire, demonstrated how the Vietcong's self-defense forces rigged booby traps
that, they said, caused American casualties.

The veterans - a twice-wounded private who served as an infantryman and a
captain who graduated from West Point in 1963 when General Westmoreland was
superintendent there - were called as witnesses by CBS to counter the general's
testimony that the self- defense forces were ''basically civilians'' who posed
no offensive threat.

Both veterans said in Federal District Court in Manhattan that the part- time,
hamlet-based forces inflicted numerous injuries, some fatal.

''Those people were fighting us; we were trying to fight them,'' said Capt.
Howard Embree, now a professor of English at Mississippi State University.
''That's what we understood our job to be, and I'm very surprised to discover
that General Westmoreland did not know that's what we were doing.''

The reference to General Westmoreland was stricken from the record by Judge
Pierre N. Leval.



'Pineapple Style' Grenade

During a break between Captain Embree's testimony and that of Pfc. Daniel A.
Friedman, the mock ''pineapple style'' fragmentation grenade rested on the edge
of Judge Leval's bench.

Eyeing it somewhat apprehensively, the judge turned to David Boies, the
principal lawyer for CBS.

''Mr. Boies,'' he said as courtroom spectators broke into laughter, ''you want
to take back your grenade?''

The role of the self-defense forces in the war has been an important issue in
the 17-week-old trial, and the subject of much conflicting testimony.

The 1982 documentary that prompted General Westmoreland's suit - ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - charged that, for political and public-relations
reasons, the general imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of
enemy size, mainly by removing the self-defense forces from the official listing
of enemy strength known as the order of battle. That action in late 1967, the
program said, was part of a broader ''conspiracy'' by the general's command to
show progress in the war by understating the size and nature of the enemy.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, testified that he never set such a ceiling and that he deleted the
self-defense forces because he believed they were insignificant militarily and
could not be counted accurately and because their inclusion in the order of
battle at a high figure would mislead Washington and the press. The self-defense
forces had been newly estimated in the spring of 1967 at 120,000 - an increase,
on paper if not in the field, of 50,000.

Captain Embree served in Vietnam from May 1966 to May 1967, and was an adviser
to a South Vietnamese military unit in northern Quang Tri province.

Under questioning by Randy Mastro, a lawyer for CBS, Captain Embree said he had
received a Bronze Star ''and a minor decoration for what the Army was pleased to
call 'valor,' but which I didn't believe in, so I never wore.''

Captain Embree said that, in Vietnam, he saw combat ''almost continuously. We
were in the field, passing through villages, staying overnight, going in another
direction, often back the way we had come.''

He said he was able to distinguish between the self-defense forces and the
''guerrillas'' - who remained in the order of battle - because the latter were
more mobile, more active and better organized. Both groups ''looked like
civilians,'' he said, but the self-defense forces were responsible for ''mining,
booby-trapping and sniping in the proximity'' of their villages.

Q. How difficult was it to construct a tripwire grenade?

A. Extremely simple. I could teach anyone in this room to do it in the next 10
minutes.

Q. What would you need to do it?

A. Piece of wire and a grenade.

Whereupon, Mr. Mastro produced the elements. ''I just happen to have those
things here,'' he said.

Hooking the wire on the microphone of the witness stand, Captain Embree
proceeded to give a five-minute demonstration, showing how the grenade would be
hidden in the dust or secured by bamboo stakes and the wire would be strung
across a path or a paddy dike, ''anywhere it's predictable'' that American or
allied soldiers would pass.

At one stage, the witness observed that the wire provided to him ''looks like
picture wire, which the VC did not have, but they did have fishing line or lots
of very thin metallic wire, which was very difficult to see.'' At another point,
Captain Embree complained that ''the spring has been removed from this grenade,
unfortunately.''

''Not so unfortunate, Mr. Embree,'' Mr. Mastro interjected, as the metal spoon
covering the grenade fell to the floor, echoing through the courtroom.

''The first soldier coming by would, of course, pull the pin out, and the spoon
would fly off,'' the witness explained. ''The grenade would catch him from
behind and the next guy, even if he were spaced out properly, would catch it in
the front. So, typically, a grenade might easily get two men and wound them
severely or kill them.''

Captain Embree estimated that half the casualties he saw resulted from such
booby traps and mines.

On cross-examination, David Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, attempted
to show that Captain Embree was not responsible for overall strength
calculations in his province and that he may have attributed activities to the
self-defense forces actually carried out by guerrillas. But the witness said
there was ''an irreducible level of violence'' in some villages that ''did not
vary with the presence of outside or mobile forces.''

Captain Embree said he agreed to testify after talking to Samuel A. Adams, an
individual defendant in this case, and to Col. Gains Hawkins, a former Army
intelligence colonel who appeared on the CBS broadcast.

Private Friedman, now a veterans' counselor in Brooklyn, came to testify after
learning that lawyers for CBS wanted to interview Vietnam veterans.

The former private, who was stationed in Vietnam for most of 1968, said he ''saw
too many of my buddies go down not to be concerned'' about mines and booby
traps. He said that, after firefights, he discovered that many of the enemy dead
were the very same people who had earlier been ''waving at'' American soldiers
and taking C-rations from them. Often, he said, those people used the food cans
for explosive devices.

On cross-examination, Mr. Dorsen stressed that Private Friedman, who rose to the
rank of Specialist 4, was not an intelligence officer.

In other testimony, Joseph Fackovec, the film editor for the last two segments
of the five-act documentary, said he was unaware of material having been
''distorted.''

Mr. Fackovec said it was ''not the job'' of someone in his position to read the
full transcripts of interviews to see if the material being excerpted was in
context. Mr. Fackovec also said ''it was sort of common knowledge'' that Ira
Klein, the principal film editor for the documentary, who testified for General
Westmoreland, did not ''get along too well'' with George Crile. Mr. Crile was
the producer of the documentary and is now a defendant.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PLANS ACTIONS TO ANSWER REBUFF BY NEW ZEALAND



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5


The United States said today that it was considering a range of retaliatory
actions against New Zealand for its refusal to allow a Navy destroyer to make a
port visit next month.

The warship's visit was to have occurred at the conclusion of joint naval
exercises by Australian, New Zealand and American forces. The State Department
announced Monday that the maneuvers had been canceled.

The Reagan Administration said a firm American response was needed, beyond
calling off the maneuvers, to demonstrate that allies could not impose limits on
the movements of American military forces and get off ''cost- free.''



Deterrent for Others

A senior official said the United States, to deter other allied countries from
following New Zealand's example, was examining the following areas: a suspension
of the sharing of intelligence and other security information; an end to
preferential treatment for New Zealand in the export of lamb, wool and casein to
this country, and release for sale on the world market of surplus American
butter and other dairy products, which could hurt New Zealand's sale of those
products.

Prime Minister David Lange rejected a requested visit by the American destroyer
Buchanan because the United States would not guarantee that the ship did not
carry nuclear weapons. Mr. Lange's seven-month-old Government has barred any
ships from its waters carrying nuclear weapons or propelled by nuclear power.



'The First Step'

After announcing that the naval maneuvers, known as Sea Eagle, had been canceled
as a result of New Zealand's action, the Administration declared it was
considering ''the overall implications'' for future relations with New Zealand.

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said that the cancellation of the
exercises was only ''the first step'' and that ''we are considering other
actions we might take.'' He said Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia, who
arrived this afternoon on a previously scheduled visit, would discuss with
President Reagan whether the United States and Australia would hold their own
naval exercise as a substitute for Sea Eagle.

Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokesman, said the consideration of further
actions would be ''broad-ranging'' and go beyond strictly military matters, to
include ''our overall cooperation'' with New Zealand.

The sharp words used by the Administration were in startling contrast to the
usual expressions of close relations between the two nations, particularly since
World War II, when American troops were stationed in New Zealand and forces from
the two countries fought together, under American command, against the Japanese.
New Zealanders also fought with American forces in Italy, where they suffered
heavy casualties during the Allied assault on the German bastion at Monte
Cassino. New Zealand also contributed units in the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

Mr. Lange, in his recent statements, has maintained that his Government's policy
of seeking a nuclear-free zone was not anti-American.

Informal Assurances

A senior State Department official said that part of the reason for the
unhappiness with the Lange Government was that the New Zealanders had informally
assured Washington that a way would be found to allow the United States Navy to
continue to send ships to New Zealand, but then did not do so.

Mr. Lange and other New Zealand officials have said they want their country to
remain in the South Pacific alliance, known as Anzus. But Mr. Kalb, in seeking
to explain why the United States was considering retaliatory action, said:

''We believe that alliances require interaction of military forces and equitable
burden sharing. Some Western countries have antinuclear and other movements
which seek to diminish defense cooperation among the allied states. We would
hope that our response to New Zealand would signal that the course these
movements advocate would not be cost-free in terms of security relationships
with the United States.''

He was referring to the antinuclear movements in Japan and Western Europe that
have from time to time pressed their governments to bar American nuclear forces
from entering their countries. Japan officially bans nuclear weapons, but under
an ambiguous relationship with the United States does not demand - as New
Zealand did - to know if any particular ship carries nuclear weapons.

Norway and Denmark, members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, do not
permit the deployment in peacetime of nuclear weapons in their territory, but
like Japan they do not challenge the movements of United States Navy ships in
their waters, State Department officials said.

A Little-Noticed Pact

The sense of crisis over the Anzus alliance was unusual because the pact has
been virtually unnoticed in Washington through the years.

Unlike NATO, the Anzus nations have no integrated military structure, or forces
specifically dedicated to their defense. The Anzus foreign ministers meet every
summer to consider matters of general interest, and there are periodic
consultations among military commanders, as well as regular military exercises
involving land, sea and air forces.

One reason little is heard about Anzus is that the South Pacific is without any
significant confrontation. The three nations signed the treaty setting up the
pact on Sept. 1, 1951, in San Francisco, and it entered into force on April 29,
1952. It was created when the United States had begun a series of security
arrangements around the world, including NATO, to contain the Soviet Union and
China.

But Australia and New Zealand joined the pact not out of concern about the
Communist countries, but out of fear that the peace treaty that was to be signed
with Japan in San Francisco might not prevent a resurgent Japan from threatening
them as it had during World War II.

To win approval of the peace treaty by Australia and New Zealand, the United
States suggested the mutual defense pact. The key provision in Article 4 said:
''Each party recognizes that an armed attack in the Pacific area on any of the
parties would be dangerous to its own peace and safety and declares that it
would act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional
processes.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister David Lange

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABORTION CLINIC BOMBINGS HAVE CAUSED DISRUPTION FOR MANY

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2212 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


At 6 A.M., just when it was beginning to get light last Nov. 19, the private
security guard hired to protect the Metro Medical and Women's Center because of
bomb threats and demonstrations went home.

''The bomb went off at 6:13 or 6:15,'' said Penny Smith, the administrator of
the abortion clinic in Wheaton, Md. ''According to the detectives, it was thrown
through the front window. No one told me when I was in college preparing to be a
registered nurse that I'd be involved in guerrilla warfare.''

The anti-abortion movement, which simmered in frustration for 11 years after the
1973 Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion, exploded in violence last year.
The greatest cluster of destruction, nine bombings, occurred in and around the
nation's capital. Frequently keyed to patriotic and religious holidays, such as
the Fourth of July, Christmas Eve and New Year's Day, the bombings helped
heighten public awareness of the intense feelings on both sides of the abortion
issue.

And, as an examination of the Washington area bombings shows, they have also
confronted the authorities with a kind of radical violence reminiscent of
Vietnam War protests, placed a legal institution under seige , damaged parties
with no connection to the dispute and won strong sympathy from certain religious
ranks.

Paradoxically, the violence may also have led to more abortions.

Optometrist Is 'Very Angry'

The Wheaton explosion, the largest of the anti-abortion bombings in metropolitan
Washington, destroyed the clinic and rendered unusable three adjacent doctors'
offices: those of a podiatrist, a gastroenterologist and two optometrists. The
building has still not reopened, although the abortion clinic is operating
elsewhere.

The bombing wrecked the office of Dr. Jacalyn Ely, an optometrist specializing
in visual therapy for children and adults. ''It has put us out of business,''
Dr. Ely said. ''I am still very angry. These people don't realize that when they
do this kind of thing they affect other people's lives. There are a lot of
people affected who have nothing to do with the abortion issue.''

On that same morning, 15 minutes after the explosion in Wheaton, two more bombs
went off in nearby Rockville, behind the building housing the Planned Parenthood
clinic, which provides counseling but no abortions. The blasts did more damage
to the offices of an obstetrician-gynecologist and a small computer concern than
they did to the clinic. And they blew out bedroom and bathroom windows in a
number of nearby houses.

''Someone certainly could have been up and about and gotten hurt,'' said
Florence Seifert, director of the local Planned Parenthood chapter.

3 Charged With Conspiracy

In the case of the Wheaton clinic, there has been personal hurt. Some of the
clients were teen-age girls needing contraceptive instruction. Because of the
bombing, according to Mrs. Smith, they postponed those visits. ''They were
fearful,'' she said. ''They didn't know where else to go. When we saw them
again, they were pregnant.'' In two cases, she said, ''We have had them back as
abortions.''

Three men, including the pastor of a small Lutheran congregation, have been
arrested and charged with conspiracy in eight of the bombings, which damaged
Federal and state offices as well as homes, blew a hole in the wall of a bank,
destroyed a beauty parlor, damaged the entrance of an office of the American
Civil Liberties Union, interrupted fertility treatments for childless couples
and blew out all the windows on one side of the First Baptist Church in
Suitland, Md., which has some anti-abortion activists among its evangelical
congregation.

''In fact, they didn't even get the clinic next door,'' said Glen Niles,
associate pastor of the church. Shocked from sleep in his house several blocks
away by the two explosions on Christmas Eve, Mr. Niles and his pastor spent the
rest of the night cleaning up debris and boarding up the windows of the church
so the congregation could stay warm at Christmas services.

'I Will Continue'

''They ought to at least apologize for the inconvenience they caused the
church,'' Mr. Niles said.

The bombs were placed next door to the church, at the side of the building
housing the abortion clinic. But the clinic itself, on the fifth floor, was
untouched by the explosions. Dr. A. Gohari, who delivers babies and performs
abortions, does not know whether his landlord will renew his lease this fall.
But the bombing has left him unshaken in his determination to perform abortions.
''I will continue up to the last minute that it is legal,'' he said. ''They can
kill me to stop me.''

Since the bombing of the Hillcrest Surgi Center on Pennsylvania Avenue on New
Year's Day, and the arrest of the three men by agents of the Federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, who seized a large cache of weapons and
explosives, there have been no further bombings here. But both bomb victims and
foes of abortion suggest that the arson and bombings that have occurred around
the nation are the product of a frustration that continues to build.

''They're getting tired,'' said Thomas Herlihy, assistant coordinator of the
Pro-Life Nonviolent Action Project in suburban Maryland, which is modeled on the
protest methods of the civil rights era. ''They're getting frustrated. The
prolife movement is reaching the pressure-cooker stage.''

Civil Disobedience Urged

''If people believe what we believe,'' Mr. Herlihy said, ''they might be out
there bombing clinics.'' He said that before he discovered there was another way
to release the tension, through civil disobedience and arrest, he was close to
violence himself.

''I would say a couple of years ago, I was about at that stage,'' Mr. Herlihy
said. ''I could see myself resorting to that, going around and bombing
clinics.'' Now, at 37 years old, he has given up his job in New York to devote
himself to the protest movement here. The only way to end the violence, he
believes, is to spread the gospel of nonviolent civil disobediance.

''After a sit-in or two, these people are changed - it's a tremendous outlet for
all that frustration,'' said Mr. Herlihy, who was one of nearly 30 demonstrators
arrested in front of the Supreme Court Building on Jan. 22, the 12th anniversary
of the decision that legalized abortion.

The first bombing in the Washington area, which occurred at the Hillcrest Clinic
in Norfolk, Va., the night of Feb. 17, 1984, gave direct evidence that it was
aimed at abortions and alerted the local authorities to the reality of violence
as an anti-abortion tactic.

Arson at a Virginia Clinic

The clinic had received three telephoned bomb threats, the last just two weeks
before the bombing. But Bonita Collins, the clinic's director, had discounted
the threat. ''I was advised by the local law-enforcement officials that there
had not been a bombing in any of Norfolk in over 20 years, that people derived
satisfaction just from making the threat,'' she said.

Miss Collins accepted their advice even though the clinic was thoroughly burned
the previous May by a house painter named Joseph Grace, who opposed abortion.
''He did an excellent job - $150,000 damage,'' Miss Collins said. ''He climbed a
ladder, broke in through a window, poured kerosene throughout all our offices,
lit it, climbed back down the ladder, and drove away in his van.'' Mr. Grace is
now in a Virginia state prison.

''I was so devastated by the fire,'' Miss Collins said. ''I was so certain
afterwards that our demonstrators would go low key, to give our wounds time to
heal.'' Instead, she said: ''The picketing escalated. It became so aggressive,
so unpredictable. It was just chaotic.''

Then came the bombing. The damage was confined mainly to the ground floor office
of the Sovran Bank, where the bomb was placed against the outside wall. Bank
officials declined to discuss the bombing, but as Miss Collins walked across the
glass-strewn parking lot toward the bomb site that night, a policeman was
picking up a piece of board with messages on it.

Message for the A.C.L.U.

On one side, sprayed in red paint, were the words ''Hilcrest Murders.''

''They misspelled 'Hillcrest,' '' Miss Collins said. On the other side were the
letters AOG. Miss Collins took that to mean Army of God, the name used by some
taking reponsibility for bombings around the country.

An explosion at the Pennsylvania Avenue legislative office of the American Civil
Liberties Union left a different message. A bomb taped to the doorway exploded
about 9 A.M. Saturday, Nov. 3, according to Jerry Berman, the legislative
counsel. A secretary working in a distant room was unhurt.

''We were in the dark about who did it or why,'' because the message left behind
was enigmatic, Mr. Berman said. ''Someone wrote 'Wolverines' on the wall.''
Apparently, the reference was to a particularly violent motion picture released
last summer, ''Red Dawn,'' about a band of high school heroes who wage guerrilla
war against an invader.

The high school students in the movie called themselves ''Wolverines.'' But
Federal agents concluded that the A.C.L.U. bomb strongly resembled those used in
other explosions in the area. On Saturday, Jan. 19, after two months of
surveillance and searches of two homes and a rented warehouse space, the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms arrested three Maryland men: Michael Donald
Bray, 32 years old, of Bowie, a former Naval Academy cadet turned lay preacher;
Thomas E. Spinks, 37, also of Bowie, and Kenneth William Shields, of Laurel.

Two Suspects Released on Bail

All were charged with conspiring to bomb the clinics. They will not have a
chance to enter a plea unless grand jury indictments are made. But Robert Muse,
the Washington lawyer hired by Mr. Bray, said, ''He's going to enter a plea of
not guilty if the grand jury acts.''

A secretary for Richard Bardos, the Federal assistant public defender appointed
to represent Mr. Spinks, said that Mr. Bardos ''has no comment at this time, at
the request of Mr. Spinks.'' And Fred Sinclair, the private lawyer representing
Mr. Shields, did not return repeated telephone calls.

Mr. Bray and Mr. Shields have been released on bail. Mr. Spinks is being kept in
jail because a search of his house and rented storage space turned up hundreds
of pounds of explosive material, fuses and cylinder casings. There were also
heavy revolvers, rifles and shotguns, maps that pinpointed the sites of aborion
clinics that had been bombed and the names and telephone numbers of Mr. Bray and
Mr. Shields.

And among the papers, according to Federal agents, was a copy of ''The Anarchist
Cookbook,'' a bomb-making manual first published in the early 1970's.

'The Cover of Newsweek'

Although Federal prosecutors have described the three men as fervently religious
oponents of abortion, not much is known of Mr. Spinks and Mr. Shields. They were
unfamiliar both to Chip Ward, co-pastor of the Covenant Live Christian
Community, and to Mr. Herlihy of the Pro Life Nonviolent Action Project, the two
groups that regularly picketed the Wheaton clinic before it was destroyed Nov.
19.

Mr. Ward thinks the bombings, ''negative though they are, have actually helped
the anti-abortion cause by bringing attention to the issue.

''All of a sudden it's on the cover of Newsweek,'' he said. ''It's on '20-20.'
''

But Mr. Ward does know Mr. Bray, who has been active in the nonviolent protest
movement. He was one of the 46 people arrested at the Wheaton clinic two days
before it was bombed.

A man who said he was jogging by the clinic the morning before it was bombed
called a television station afterward to say that he recognized a man he had
seen near the clinic. The face on the newscast turned out to be Mr. Bray's.

Left Church in Dispute

''He's told us in private that he didn't do it,'' said Mr. Herlihy, who knows
Mr. Bray from repeated sit-ins and arrests with the Pro Life Nonviolent Action
Project. ''Now why would he say that if he had?''

Married, with three children, Mr. Bray worked as a $14,000-a-year lay assistant
to Alan Ericksen, pastor of Grace Lutheran Church in Bowie, Md., until the
congregation dropped his position in a philosophical dispute about a year ago.
Mr. Bray then left, taking 20 or 30 of the more conservative families with him,
Mr. Ericksen said, and the splinter congregation ordained him its pastor.

''We basically are pro-life here, but not to the degree that perhaps Mike would
like us to be,'' Mr. Ericksen said.

Mr. Bray, who began college as a cadet at the Naval Academy in Annapolis and
then attended classes at the University of Maryland and Rockmont College in
Colorado, went to Grace Lutheran with a two- year degree from the Denver
Seminary, a Baptist post-graduate theological school in Denver.

There is no support for violence at the Denver Seminary, said the academic dean
there, Ralph Covell. ''I do not like the phrase 'helping the cause,' '' he said.
''It brings it more forcefully to public attention, I suppose. But it
accelerates the possibility of the polarization of society, and in that way, it
has helped nobody's cause.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Penny Smith; photo of workers

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS WITNESS SAYS GENERAL SET CEILING

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1195 words


Col. Donald W. Blascak, an Army intelligence officer who is still on active
duty, testified yesterday that he believed Gen. William C. Westmoreland imposed
a ceiling on enemy strength estimates in Vietnam in 1967 that led to a
''corrupt'' report for President Johnson.

Colonel Blascak testified at General Westmoreland's libel trial against CBS in
Federal District Court in Manhattan that the 25-page report should have put
enemy strength at 500,000 to 600,000, twice what it reported, and should have
included the Vietcong's self-defense forces.

David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, read the colonel a sentence from the report that
said ''current evidence does not enable us to estimate the present size'' of
self-defense forces.

Q. Is that a true statement, sir?

A. No, it is not. It's a very carefully packaged lie.

David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, leaped to his feet,
objecting. The answer was ordered stricken by Judge Pierre N. Leval.

Assigned to C.I.A.

Colonel Blascak was only the second military officer on active duty to testify
in the 17-week-old trial, In 1967, the colonel was on temporary assignment to
the Vietnamese affairs staff of the Central Intelligence Agency, where he met
Samuel A. Adams, a C.I.A. analyst who is now a defendant in the case.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked the colonel - a lean, bespectacled figure with an
iron-gray crewcut - whether, at the time, he had discussed with Mr. Adams his
feelings about the estimate for the White House of Communist troop strength.

''I do not relish the answer to this question, but I must give it,'' said
Colonel Blascak as an impassive General Westmoreland studied him from a few feet
away.

Colonel Blascak said he told Mr. Adams that ''at the very highest level'' of the
military command in Saigon ''there had to have been a ceiling placed on the
numbers.''

Q. Did you tell Mr. Adams who was responsible at the highest levels?

A. I find this very difficult.

Q. I know you do, sir, but I must ask the question.

A. I believe and I told Sam Adams that I felt General Westmoreland had placed a
ceiling on the figures and would not allow his analysts to raise the estimate
higher than that figure.

General Westmoreland was commander of United States forces in Vietnam from 1964
to 1968. His $120 million suit was prompted by a 1982 CBS Reports documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' for which Mr. Adams, who left the
C.I.A. in 1973, was a paid consultant.

Program Charged 'Conspiracy'

The documentary charged that, for political and public relations reasons
intended to show that the Vietnam War was being won, the general's command
engaged in a ''conspiracy'' in 1967 to understate the size and nature of the
North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces.

Over the objections of the C.I.A., the program said, General Westmoreland had
set an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy size, mainly by
removing the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the official listing of enemy
strength known as the order of battle and insisting that a current number for
them not be included in the report for the President.

General Westmoreland testified last November that he deleted the Vietcong's
self-defense forces because he believed they posed no offensive threat and could
not be counted accurately and because their inclusion in the order of battle at
a high number would mislead Washington and the press about the real might of the
enemy. Those forces had been newly estimated in 1967 at 120,000 - an increase on
paper, if not in the field, of 50,000.

The only previous military witness at this trial who is not retired was Col.
John F. Stewart, who testified for General Westmoreland. Colonel Stewart, who
served in Vietnam in 1967, is now the head of an intelligence unit at Fort
Bragg, N.C.

Colonel Blascak, who has served 28 years in the Army, is now the senior
intelligence officer for V Corps, stationed in Frankfurt. He served twice in
Vietnam, in 1962 and 1965, and, during his duty at C.I.A. headquarters in
Langley, Va. between 1966 and 1968, made a half- dozen visits to the war zone.

For three years following that assignment, while General Westmoreland was Army
Chief of Staff, Colonel Blascak was an executive assistant in intelligence
management to Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, then the Army's chief of
intelligence. General McChristian - who was General Westmoreland's intelligence
chief in Saigon from July 1965 to June 1967 - is scheduled to testify for CBS
today.

Colonel Blascak told the jury yesterday that intelligence estimates of enemy
strength demanded ''total integrity'' and should be completely free of
''political considerations.''

Contributed to 1967 Report

During 1967, he said, he contributed to the preparation of the special report
for President Johnson, working closely with Mr. Adams and George W. Allen, who
was then deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs for the C.I.A. and who recently
testified for CBS.

''It was a very small office in terms of real estate, and it was difficult to
avoid anybody even if you might have wanted to,'' Colonel Blascak said. ''We
were tight.''

The colonel described Mr. Adams as possessing ''integrity and honesty I have
seen in few men since.'' Mr. Allen, he said, ''had only slightly less time in
Vietnam than Ho Chi Minh.''

Colonel Blascak said that, like Mr. Adams and Mr. Allen, he believed the
part-time, hamlet-based self-defense forces, who wore civilian clothes, caused
thousands of American casualties through mines, booby traps and regular arms.
Those forces, he said, ''were the absolute base of the insurgent movement.''

''An insurgency is much like an iceberg,'' the colonel testified. ''Only the top
of it protrudes from the top of the water. The rest of it is not easily seen,
but it's there and it's the element that gives you the most contentious problem
because it's everywhere.''

Colonel Blascak said he knew of no intelligence that supported the removal of
the self-defense forces from the order of battle in 1967. ''To the contrary,''
he said. He said the estimate for the President - which was ultimately approved
by Richard Helms, the Director of Central Intelligence - ''did not convey an
honest, truthful meaning'' and served ''a terribly disuseful function'' by
failing to alert the White House to enemy capabilities.

During cross-examination by Mr. Dorsen, Colonel Blascak seemed combative and
impatient. When Mr. Dorsen asked him whether he recalled certain enemy strength
figures being advanced by General Westmoreland's command, the colonel said: ''I
don't know what a recollection is. I'm telling you that the bottom line was
298,000, and that was 200,000 too low.''

Colonel Blascak conceded that a range of strength for enemy forces of 50,000 to
200,000 would be too broad to be ''a useful figure.'' Earlier in the trial,
General Westmoreland's lawyers had introduced a 1967 analysis by the C.I.A.
station in Saigon that said the military's new estimates for the self- defense
forces ''have a probability of error of minus 50 percent and plus 100 percent.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1985 International

Retaliation against New Zealand for its refusal to allow a United States Navy
destroyer to make a port visit next month is being considered by the Reagan
Administration. Officials said a firm response was needed to show that allies
could not impose limits on the movements of American military forces and get off
''cost- free.'' (Page A1, Column 1.)

Hosni Mubarak criticized Israel, saying it had not been flexible enough in the
search for peace. The Egyptian President also faulted the Israelis for not
withdrawing their forces sooner from Lebanon. (A1:1-3.) National

Military pensions were assailed as a ''scandal'' by David A. Stockman, the
Federal budget director. Mr. Stockman, in sometimes blunt testimony before the
Senate Budget Committee, said the military would ''give up on security before
they'll give up on retirement.'' He asked Congress to help curtail the spiraling
cost of the military retirement program. (A1:6.)

The nomination of Edwin Meese 3d to be Attorney General was approved, 12 to 6,
by the Senate Judiciary Committee. All 10 Republican members voted for Mr. Meese
and two of the committee's eight Democrats also joined in referring the
controversial nomination to the Senate floor. Several of the committee members
called the vote one of the hardest of their careers. (A1:1.)

An upbeat State of the Union Message

 tonight is planned by President Reagan, according to White House officials.
They said he planned to set legislative priorities for his second term with an
address that reaches out to minority groups, emphasizes deficit reduction and
tax simplification and stresses his desire to ease the threat of nuclear war.
(A1:5.)

President Reagan's use of Scripture to appeal for support of his proposed
increased military budget was criticized by several theologians and biblical
scholars. Among the criticisms were that Mr. Reagan had taken a passage from the
Gospel of Luke out of context and had failed to grasp Jesus's teaching.
(D14:3-6.)

Nine antiabortion bombings have occurred in and around Washington. The
destruction has confronted the authorities with radical violence reminiscent of
war protests, damaged people with no connection to the abortion dispute and won
sympathy from some religious groups. (A14:1-5.)

The 55-mile-an-hour speed limit has often been called the most widely broken
national law since Prohibition. Yet the 11-year-old law has attracted broad
public support, and attempts in some states to repeal it within their borders
have failed. Still, opponents are expected to renew their efforts this year to
get a 65-mile- an-hour speed limit on rural parts of the Interstate system.
(B24:2-5.)

A complaint of sexual harassment

 has led to the resignation of a tenured professor at Harvard, the university
disclosed. Harvard officials said they believed that the resignation of Douglas
A. Hibbs Jr., a professor of government, marked the first time in the
university's 348-year history that a professor had left after charges of sexual
misconduct. (B24:1.)

A plan to merge the two agencies responsible for building dams and other water
projects has been rejected by the Secretaries of Defense and Interior. However,
the Office of Management and Budget is still pressing its proposal to
consolidate the Defense Department's Army Corps of Engineers and the Interior
Department's Bureau of Reclamation. (D24:1.)

The cost of an aircraft toilet seat was lowered to $200 from $640 by a major
Pentagon contractor after the charge was protested by Senator William V. Roth
Jr., Republican of Delaware. Later, the Navy obtained a final price of $100.
(D15:2-4.) Metropolitan

The land beneath Rockefeller Center will be sold by Columbia University to the
Rockefeller Group for $400 million, the two parties announced. The Rockefeller
family has been renting the 11.7-acre site for half a century. The Rockefeller
Group, the Rockefeller family's investment company, owns the 13 buildings in the
original complex that John D. Rockefeller Jr. began constructing in 1931.
(A1:3-4.)

The illegal demolition of four buildings on West 44th Street last month brought
to midtown Manhattan an enforcement problem that has plagued New York City
officials for six years. The problem involves a string of seven or eight
Brooklyn-based companies owned in various combinations by three brothers -
Eddie, Emanuel and Frank Garofalo - who have been cited scores of times for
illegally dumping construction wastes and other offenses. (A1:4-6.)

Gen. William C. Westmoreland imposed a ceiling on enemy strength estimates in
Vietnam in 1967 that led to a ''corrupt'' report for President Johnson,
according to Col. Donald W. Blascak, an Army intelligence officer who is still
on active duty. Colonel Blascak testified at General Westmoreland's libel trial
against CBS in Manhattan that the 25-page report should have put enemy strength
at 500,000 to 600,000, double what the report cited. (B4:1-3.)

A $4.43 billion Connecticut budget that would increase spending by 10.3 percent
in the fiscal year beginning July 1 was proposed by Gov. William A. O'Neill. He
told reporters, ''It's a fair budget.'' (B2:1-2.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TROOP PENSIONS LURE RECRUITS AND CRITICS

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 322 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5


The military pension program was designed as a lure for military recruits, but
as it has swelled to an $17.8 billion-a-year budget item, it has become a cause
of controversy, as well.

The program permits military careerists to retire younger, with a greater share
of their basic pay and with better adjustments for inflation than most private
pension plans, according to private studies.

At least nine studies in the past 15 years, including five inside the Pentagon,
have called for changes in the system.

Most recently, the 1983 report of the President's Private Sector Survey on Cost
Control, chaired by J. Peter Grace, estimated that the military pension system
costs ''six times as much as the better private-sector plans.''



Examples of Retirement Pay

Under the military retirement system, officers or enlisted personnel may retire
after 20 years at half their base pay. For a lieutenant colonel with 20 years
service, for example, the pay at retirement would be $1,706.70 a month. For a
sergeant first class, it would be $702 a month.

A typical Army, Marine or Air Force lieutenant colonel or Navy commander who
leaves the service will be 43 years old and will earn almost $20,000 a year in
retirement.

A serviceman retiring after 30 years service draws 75 percent of the basic pay,
the maximum benefit.

The pension benefits are taxed, and they increase along with active military
pay, by action of Congress.

According to Pentagon officials, the military pension system is expected to pay
out $18 billion in fiscal year 1986, which begins next October 1. That is up
from $7.3 billion paid in fiscal year 1976.

The Pentagon estimates that by the year 2000, the cost will reach $44.7 billion,
including increases resulting from inflation.

The cost is expected to continue upward as men and women who joined the services
in the Vietnam military boom of the 1960's become eligible for retirement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-INTELLIGENCE AIDE SAYS WESTMORELAND DELAYED KEY CABLE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1554 words


Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who was chief of intelligence for Gen. William
C. Westmoreland in Vietnam for two years, testified yesterday that General
Westmoreland acted improperly in 1967 by delaying a cable to Washington
reporting higher enemy strength because it would be ''a political bombshell.''

''It was improper not to send a strength report forward based on political
considerations,'' General McChristian told the jury in the trial of General
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS.

General McChristian, who left Vietnam for another assignment two weeks after the
cable incident, recalled General Westmoreland saying he wanted to study the
cable, and he testified that he did not know what the commander had done with
the data in it.

The basis for General Westmoreland's suit is a 1982 CBS documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that charged a ''conspiracy'' by General
Westmoreland's command in Vietnam in 1967 to show progress in the war by
understating North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength.

General Westmoreland testified last November that he wanted a full briefing on
General McChristian's new figures and eventually informed his superiors of the
data. But General McChristian contradicted General Westmoreland's testimony
about the cable incident on a number of points. And he took issue with General
Westmoreland's testimony that the Vietcong's self-defense forces were not a
military threat and could not be counted accurately.

General McChristian held aloft a homemade hand grenade that he said was commonly
used by those part- time, hamlet-based forces, and said they were a vital part
of the enemy's strength.

The witness - a retired veteran of 38 years in the Army who also served General
Westmoreland as chief of intelligence when the latter became Army Chief of Staff
in 1968 - appeared in Federal District Court in Manhattan as the highest-ranking
military officer called by CBS in the 17-week-old trial before Judge Pierre N.
Leval.



No Eye Contact

General Westmoreland, who was seated a few feet in front and to the right of
General McChristian, showed no emotion during five hours of testimony by his
former aide. General McChristian - who, like the plaintiff, is 70 years old -
kept his eyes on the jury and the lawyers. The craggy-faced major general,
casually attired in a blue blazer, gray slacks and tan sweater, tended to rest
his head on the tips of his fingers, as if in contemplation.

In the documentary, General McChristian discussed a meeting in May 1967 with
General Westmoreland about the cable for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The former intelligence chief said on the broadcast that General Westmoreland
had been ''quite disturbed'' by the ''large increase in figures that we had
developed'' and ''by the time I left his office, I had the definite impression
that he felt that if he sent those figures back to Washington at that time, it
would create a political bombshell.''

Yesterday, General McChristian told the jury that General Westmoreland had
actually used the words ''political bombshell.''

Five-Month Analysis

General McChristian said he took the cable to General Westmoreland's office one
evening in mid-May 1967, without an appointment. The new figures in the cable,
General McChristian testified, were the result of five months of analysis on
three categories of Vietcong strength - the self-defense forces, guerrillas and
a political cadre.

General McChristian said General Westmoreland was seated at his desk, alone,
when he entered.

''I stood in front of his desk and handed the cable to him,'' the witness said
under questioning by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS. ''I gave him a little bit of
background in what it was. He read it. He looked up at me and he said: 'If I
send that cable to Washington, it will create a political bombshell.' ''

Q. Sir, I want to ask you, are you absolutely positive General Westmoreland used
the term ''political bombshell'' during that meeting?

A. Yes, I am. I am just as sure of it as I am of seeing people in front of me
right now. I was so surprised by it that there were enough words said that they
burned themselves right into my memory.

General McChristian said the commander asked no questions about the evidence or
methodology supporting the cable.

Q. Did General Westmoreland decline to send the cable you gave him?

A. When he told me it would create a political bombshell, I said, ''General, I
don't see why it should. Send me back and I'll explain to anyone who wants to
know what we've been doing to collect this information.'' And he said, ''No.
Leave it with me. I want to go over it.''

Q. At any time prior to this time in your military service had you ever had a
superior officer discuss with you the political implications of any enemy
strength estimate?

A. No, sir.

Different Versions of Incident

During an aggressive cross-examination, David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General
Westmoreland, attempted to show that General McChristian had given differing
versions of the incident.

Mr. Dorsen asked whether the witness had told Samuel A. Adams, a former Central
Intelligence Agency analyst who was a paid consultant for the CBS documentary,
that General Westmoreland had said about the cable: ''I can't understand this
and I want to be briefed.''

General McChristian said General Westmoreland had not made that statement, and
he did not recall saying as much to Mr. Adams. Mr. Dorsen showed the witness
notes made by Mr. Adams, but the major general said they did not ''refresh'' his
memory.

Mr. Dorsen asked General McChristian whether he believed that General
Westmoreland ''had the right'' to delay sending the cable, and showed the
witness a paragraph of a pretrial affidavit in which he said: ''Although this
was the first time he had ever questioned my intelligence, he certainly had
every right to do so, especially since he had not been briefed in detail on our
intelligence holdings which we used to accomplish these figures.

''He had every right to question my intelligence,'' General McChristian said,
''but this is not what happened in that meeting.''

When Mr. Dorsen asked the witness whether he believed that General Westmoreland
had attempted to ''suppress'' the data, General McChristian repeated, ''This was
the only time he exercised any control over my reporting. And he asked to hold
it up based on political considerations.''

Mr. Dorsen then showed the witness the transcript of a telephone conversation he
had in 1982 with Don Kowet, the co-author of a TV Guide article on the
documentary.

Q. Did Mr. Kowet ask you whether you believed you were being asked by General
Westmoreland to suppress the information and you said ''absolutely not''?

''I want to put this in the proper context,'' General McChristian replied.
''There's a difference between talking under oath and talking to a journalist
over the phone.'' General McChristian said he was ''guarded'' with Mr. Kowet
because he did not know him and he normally refrained from quoting General
Westmoreland.

Similiarly, General McChristian said, he did not quote General Westmoreland's
exact words when he was interviewed for the CBS documentary.

Mr. Dorsen then showed the witness an unbroadcast portion of his CBS interview
in which he said of the meeting with General Westmoreland: ''I can't recall his
exact words at this time, but that is my strong impression of exactly what
happened.''

Denied Using 'Bombshell' Term

In his own testimony, General Westmoreland denied using the term ''political
bombshell'' and recalled saying to General McChristian: ''Joe, if this cable
goes in without further explanation it will create a public relations problem.''

The former commander said he also told General McChristian that the self-
defense forces were ''basically civilians'' who did not belong in the military
listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

General McChristian testified that he did not remember General Westmoreland
making those statements.

According to documents produced earlier in the case, General Westmoreland and
his immediate superior - Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, the commander of American
forces in the Pacific - were briefed on the higher figures for irregulars in
late May 1967, two weeks after General McChristian presented the cable, and the
Joint Chiefs were informed several months later. By then, General McChristian
had taken up a new assignment as commander of the Second Armored Division at
Fort Hood, Tex.

Later in 1967, General Westmoreland made a decision that was strongly opposed by
Mr. Adams and other C.I.A. analysts and that would ultimately be scrutinized by
the CBS documentary: He removed the self-defense forces from the order of
battle.

The C.I.A. argued in 1967 for a total enemy strength estimate of 500,000 to
600,000. Without the self-defense forces, and with the placement of the
political cadre in a separate nonmilitary listing - both decisions that General
McChristian said yesterday were unwarranted - General Westmoreland's command
successfully advanced a total of enemy military strength between 223,000 and
248,000. That range was a decline of about 50,000 from the figure then in use.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Maj. Gen. Joseph McChristian (page B6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SUPPORTERS OF THE MILITARY ASSAIL STOCKMAN'S REMARKS ON PENSIONS

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1320 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


An attack on the military pension system by David A. Stockman, the budget
director, drew angry responses today from veterans' groups, Pentagon officials
and some Congressional champions of the military.

But some key members of Congress picked up Mr. Stockman's call for reform and
said this might be the year for a major overhaul of military compensation.

''I would have said it differently, but Stockman is right,'' said Representative
Les Aspin, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the House Armed Services Committee.
''Military retirement is too expensive. The Pentagon has failed to grapple with
this issue.''



Pensions Called 'a Scandal'

Mr. Stockman said Tuesday that the military retirement system, which allows men
and women in uniform to retire at half pay after 20 years' service, was ''a
scandal'' and ''an outrage.''

''The institutional forces of the military are more concerned about protecting
their retirement than they are about protecting the security of the American
people,'' he told the Senate Budget Committee.

Mr. Stockman also antagonized farmers and their Congressional supporters by
telling the senators that farmers' debts were ''willingly incurred by consenting
adults'' and that the Government would help them ''because basically we're
threatened with a kind of blackmail situation.''

At a news conference today, called to describe the Administration's newly
expanded plan to give farmers emergency credit, Agriculture Secretary John R.
Block refused to comment on Mr. Stockman's remarks. (Page A18.)

Asked about the budget director's testimony, Larry Speakes, the White House
spokesman, would say only that Mr. Stockman ''was expressing a personal opinion
probably not shared by the President.'' Later the White House issued a statement
that commended ''the sacrifice and contribution of the men and women in
uniform'' but made no direct comment on the pension issue.

In other quarters, Mr. Stockman's blunt remarks drew a furious response.

This morning, the Senate Armed Service Committee chairman, Barry Goldwater,
acknowledging that he himself received a pension for his 37 years of active and
reserve duty, said: ''I found Mr. Stockman's remarks about as distasteful as
anything I've heard coming out of this Administration, or any preceeding it.''

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, according to a senior aide, ''regarded
what Stockman said as an unqualified attack on the military. It was insulting
and demeaning.''

The Veterans of Foreign Wars sent President Reagan a telegram declaring: ''The
V.F.W. will not be satisfied until the 4-F draft-dodging Stockman has been fired
and you have repudiated his views.'' Mr. Stockman was exempt from the military
draft during the Vietnam War because he was enrolled in a divinity school.

Mr. Stockman's spokesman, Edwin L. Dale Jr., issued a ''clarification'' this
evening, saying the budget director ''in no way intended to impugn the
patriotism or devotion of our men and women in uniform, but was expressing
personal frustration with bureaucratic resistance - not peculiar to the
Department of Defense - to reform.''



Dole Defends Stockman

But the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, defended Mr. Stockman for his
willingness to take on ''sacred cows.'' Some influential members of Congress
backed the budget director's call for change in the pension program, which is
projected to cost $17.8 billion in 1986, up from $7.3 billion in 1976.

Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee, while deploring Mr. Stockman's language, called for an overall
examination of military pay and benefits, saying the current system encourages a
drain of needed skills.

The military retirement system has been criticized for at least 15 years, but
proposals for changes have repeatedly stalled either in the military services or
in Congress.

Critics have said that the retirement system is more generous than necessary to
recruit and retain skilled personnel, now that basic pay has been improved.
Moreover, critics have said, the system encourages officers and enlisted men to
retire just as they have mastered the skills needed.

''The more important reason to change the system is to get a more effective
fighting force,'' said Martin Binkin, a Brookings Institution economist who has
specialized in military manpower issues. ''Under the current system, you're
keeping a lot of people on that you shouldn't be keeping on, and you're
encouraging people to leave that could still make a contribution to national
security.''



Pensions Called Inducement

Defenders of the system say the retirement plan is a valuable inducement to men
and women who want to make the military a career.

Lawrence J. Korb, Assistant Secretary of Defense for manpower, said in an
interview today that if the retirement plan was made less generous, skilled
people might leave the military before they served even 10 years.

''The 20-year retirement says to these people, 'If you can hang on for 10 more
years, we'll make it up to you,' '' Mr. Korb said. ''We've found that a very,
very powerful determinent. It hurts you with people over 20 years, but in the
10- to 20-year group, you keep more. On balance I think you come out ahead.''

Next year, the Pentagon forecasts, the Government would pay $18.3 billion to
military pensioners if there were no changes in the system. President Reagan has
proposed to save about $500 million of that by suspending the increase normally
awarded each year to cover increases in the cost of living.

This year, the military pension trust fund will pay benefits to 440,000 retired
officers, with a typical lieutenant colonel receiving $26,028. It will pay
915,000 retired enlisted men, with a typical retired master sergeant receiving
up to $10,716.

Ninety percent of military retirees in 1983 were under 50.

''The most telling statistic is that the average military retiree serves 23
years and collects a pension for 32 years,'' said one Congressional aide, who
spoke on the condition he not be named. ''There is a saying in the military that
you're dumb to work beyond 20 years, because you're working for half pay.''

Some critics add that many retirees put their military experience to work in
highly paid jobs with Pentagon contractors after they leave the service.

Pension Payments Balloon

The criticism has become more intense as the pension payments have ballooned
from $422 million in 1955, to $1.4 billion in 1965, to $6.2 billion in 1975.

Col. Frederick F.Y. Pang, director of compensation for the Pentagon, said that
more than half of the growth has been due to inflation. The rest is due to
improvements in military pay in the late 1960's and the creation of a volunteer,
career-minded military.

Proposals for change usually focus on reducing the incentives to retire early.

One Pentagon study completed last year, and headed by Mr. Korb, estimated that
the Government would save $2.6 billion a year by giving those who retire after
20 years only 35 percent of their pay, and by providing somewhat less generous
cost-of-living raises until the retirees reach age 62. That proposal also
included one-time payments for those who left the military early after the
change was made.

However the military services refused to support the recommendations, fearing
that the compensation payments would be eliminated by Congress, and no
Administration proposal has resulted.

The President's Private Sector Survey on Cost Control proposed in 1983 a more
drastic set of changes, including paying no pensions until retirees reach age
62. The Pentagon said this would cut the annual pension costs by more than half.

Mr. Binkin said that any cutback in benefits for early retirement should be
accompanied by increased bonuses and incentives for men and women with the most
valuable skills.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SKETCHES LEGISLATIVE GOALS FOR NEXT 4 YEARS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


President Reagan urged the nation today to forge ''a second American revolution
of hope and opportunity'' with an agenda of tax revision and economic growth and
the elimination of the threat of nuclear war for the next four years.

In a State of the Union Message to Congress designed to set the legislative
goals of his second term, Mr. Reagan sounded the same buoyant note that marked
his triumphal Presidential campaign last year. He said:

''The time has come to proceed toward a great new challenge, a second American
revolution of hope and opportunity; a revolution carrying us to new heights of
progress by pushing back frontiers of knowledge and space; a revolution of
spirit that taps the soul of America, enabling us to summon greater strength
that we've ever known, and a revolution that carries beyond our shores the gold
promise of human freedom in a world at peace.''



'Opportunity' Is Theme

Dominating his speech was the theme of ''opportunity'' for all Americans as the
economy burgeons. ''There are no constraints on the human mind, no walls around
the human spirit, no barriers to our progress except those we ourselves erect,''
Mr. Reagan said.

Urging the nation to build on the economic as well as the foreign-policy record
of his first term, Mr. Reagan outlined a broad program that aimed to reduce the
Federal budget deficits while helping the needy, that cited the ''dream'' of
banning nuclear weapons from earth while seeking a space-based shield against
missiles.



Alliances Are Called Strong

''Our alliances are stronger than ever, our economy is stronger than ever,'' Mr.
Reagan said. ''We have resumed the historic role as a leader of the free world,
and all of these together are a great force for peace.''

Addresssing the joint sesssion of Congress, Mr. Reagan spoke almost flawlessly
and with good humor. He was interrupted by applause 36 times by the legislators,
Supreme Court Justices, the diplomatic corps and government officials who packed
the House chamber.  Near the conclusion of the speech, Mr. Reagan unexpectedly
introduced two women who he said symbolized the opportunity and values of the
nation.

One of them, Jean Nguyen, a Vietnamese refugee who came to the United States 10
years ago, is a West Point cadet scheduled to graduate in May.  The other, Clara
Hale, is a 79- year-old Harlem resident who provides care for infants whose
mothers are heroin addicts. Both women were given prolonged standing ovations,
and Mrs. Hale wept.

Heroes, Mr. Reagan said, come from all walks of life. ''Anything is possible,''
Mr. Reagan added, ''if we have the faith, the will and the heart.''

Mr. Reagan's speech came two days after he sent Congress a Federal budget that
contemplates overall spending of $973.7 billion by shrinking numerous domestic
programs while sustaining a buildup of the military. Members of Congress from
both parties have already begun criticizing the proposed military budget as too
large.

In his speech, Mr. Reagan sought to evoke hope and optimism for all Americans
and for those abroad who yearn for freedom. Threaded through the message was a
commitment to assisting blacks and members of other minority groups who have
criticized his proposed cuts in domestic spending.

He also urged a ''historic reform of tax simplification for fairness and
growth,'' and he said the new Treasury Secretary, James A. Baker 3d, would meet
with leaders of both parties to shape a tax measure.

Domestic Programs Cited

Saying ''there must be no forgotten Americans,'' Mr. Reagan renewed his call for
designation of decaying urban areas for tax benefits to assist blacks and
members of other minority groups.

He then turned to face the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.  ''Tip,
you could make that a birthday present,'' said a smiling Mr. Reagan, who turned
74 today.

Other programs sought by Mr. Reagan included training the jobless, encouraging
low-income housing residents to own their own dwellings and suspending the
minimum wage for teen-agers who seek summer jobs.

''Despite our strides in civil rights,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''blacks, Hispanics
and all minorities will not have full and equal power until they have full
economic power.''

Mr. Reagan pointedly coupled arms control with a strong military. ''Now our
determination to maintain a strong defense has influenced the Soviet Union to
return to the bargaining table,'' he said.

Reagan Presses for the MX

In moving toward arms control, Mr. Reagan urged Congress to endorse a key
weapon, the MX missile. Both the House and the Senate are to vote this spring on
the procurement of 21 more of the missiles.

Beyond this, Mr. Reagan spoke in strong terms about his long-range plan to build
a shield against incoming missiles. ''It is the most hopeful possibility of the
nuclear age,'' said Mr. Reagan, who conceded that ''it's not well understood.''

In foreign policy matters, Mr. Reagan deplored the Nicaraguan Government and
said, ''It is essential that the Congress continue all facets of our assistance
to Central America.''

The President urged allies ''to join us in a practical program of trade and
assistance'' that seeks to spur economic development in the third world.

''We cannot play innocents abroad in a world that's not innocent,'' Mr. Reagan
said. ''Nor can we be passive when freedom is under siege. Without resources,
diplomacy cannot succeed; our security assistance programs help friendly
governments defend themselves and give them confidence to work for peace.''

Mr. Reagan also said the Administration ''will be studying potential changes''
in trade policy over the next few weeks and urged a new round of trade
negotiations next year.

In keeping with his theme of ''a second American revolution'' Mr. Reagan spoke
of his commitment to new technology and industry, as well as opening the
''frontier of space'' for research and development.

Mr. Reagan intertwined his theme that the nation was ''poised for greatness''
with a discussion of the social causes that he has long supported. He repeated
his call for a ban on abortion and urged Congress to permit organized prayer in
public schools.

He called for changes in the nation's criminal code, on the basis of an
''explosion of violent crime.'' Mr. Reagan urged ''the use of the death penalty
where necessary.''

Mr. Reagan also repeated his calls for a constitutional amendment that would
require a balanced budget and a proposal to empower the President to revamp,
item by item, appropriations passed by Congress.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

5 ASIAN NATIONS URGE SOVIET TO HALT AID TO HANOI FORCES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 514 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 6


With Vietnamese troops continuing to press Cambodian rebels, five of the six
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations summoned Soviet
Ambassadors today to ask Moscow to stop backing the Vietnamese forces, according
to the Thai Foreign Ministry.

The coordinated protest came as four Vietnamese divisions were reported to be
trying to close in on the major military center of the Khmer Rouge at Phnom
Malai in Cambodia, near the Thai border. Thai military officers said the
Vietnamese bombarded a string of rebel bases, while moving tanks and armored
personnel carriers closer to the Khmer Rouge headquarters.

Thailand has charged that Moscow has been transporting military equipment
directly to Vietnamese and Cambodian Government troops in the field through the
Cambodian port of Kompong Som, formerly Sihanoukville, on the Gulf of Siam.

The Foreign Ministry said that in today's protest to Moscow's Ambassadors, the
Soviet Union was told that the Vietnamese were able to continue their war in
Cambodia only because of Soviet backing. The protest to Moscow came from
Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Indonesia. Brunei, which has
not yet established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, did not take
part.

Direct Soviet Ties?

There is some concern in the region that the Soviet Union may be developing the
port for its own uses, possibly as a fallback for Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam,
according to Squadron Leader Prasong Soonsiri, head of Thailand's National
Security Council. In a recent interview he said there was some evidence that
Moscow may be trying to forge direct ties with the Phnom Penh regime independent
of Vietnam.

The Vietnamese and Cambodian forces loyal to the Vietnamese-installed Government
of Heng Samrin are fighting three rebel groups loosely joined in a coalition.
The Khmer Rouge, the best armed and most numerous of the three, ruled Cambodia
under a reign of terror until they were overthrown by the Vietnamese in early
1979. The other groups in the coalition, both non-Communist, are the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front and a small force loyal to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk.

The Khmer Rouge, according to their clandestine radio and the Thai military,
were attacking the Vietnamese from ridges as Hanoi's troops advanced. Phnom
Malai, about 12 miles south of Aranyaprathet, is in hilly country near the
Cardamom Mountains, rougher terrain to fight in than the plains north of
Aranyaprathet, where Vietnamese forces drove another group of rebels from the
bases in November, December and early January.

About 10,000 Cambodian civilians are thought to have fled into Thailand in the
last two days from the most recent fighting, bringing the total number of new
refugees during this offensive to at least 150,000.

There have also been reports of Khmer Rouge forces moving away from exposed
targets to regroup. However, Khmer Rouge movements of any kind are difficult to
confirm, because reporters do not have the same access to their camps that other
anti-Vietnamese guerrillas allow.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCHLESINGER SAYS DISTRUST HINDERS FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


Former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger asserted today that President
Reagan's main difficulty in winning support for his Pentagon budget, Nicaragua
policy and missile defense proposal was Congressional distrust of Administration
objectives and credibility.

''A national consensus cannot simply be wished into being,'' he told the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee. ''It can be restored only gradually over time, if
at all. It will come about only through the development of mutual trust,
reasonable success and the sustained credibility of the executive branch.''

In a review of American foreign policy, Mr. Schlesinger called President
Reagan's hope for a total strategic defense to protect American cities an
illusory plan that would cost ''well over half a trillion dollars and probably
will exceed a trillion.'' Moreover, he said, the ''Star Wars'' proposal shatters
political consensus by breaking with nation's past strategic doctrine.

The Budget's Influence

Mr. Schlesinger, who has served in both Republican and Democratic
Administrations, asserted that ''there is no way'' the Administration can
sustain its military buildup in the face of enormous deficits without a tax
increase. So long as there are sharp divisions on the budget, he added, it is
virtually impossible to obtain a consensus on foreign policy.

On Central America, he said the debate over whether to resume aid to Nicaraguan
rebels was less influenced now by policy considerations than by the breakdown of
trust between the executive and legislative branches of government because, he
said, the Administration had not openly spelled out clear and consistent
objectives.

''Nicaragua has moved beyond a substantive issue to an issue of trust between
the two branches,'' he said in response to questioning by Senator Richard G.
Lugar, the committee chairman, who has organized hearings on the broad scope of
foreign policy.

''That issue of distrust has to be resolved,'' Mr. Schlesinger added. ''This is
an issue that transcends the oversight function of the intelligence committees
because they are not charged with judging policy.''

Policy and Credibility

The central theme of his broad- gauged assessment of American power and
commitments abroad was that no administration could sustain a policy unless it
maintained credibility with Congress. He drew on his experience as Secretary of
Defense under Presidents Nixon and Ford, Director of Central Intelligence under
President Nixon and Energy Secretary under President Carter.

Under questioning by Senator Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican, Mr.
Schlesinger quickly took issue with President Reagan's hope that his ''Star
Wars'' proposal would render nuclear weapons obsolete.

''The notion of a defense that will protect American cities is one that will not
be achieved, but it is that goal that supplies the political magic, as it were,
in the President's vision,'' he said. But he found a more limited defense,
shielding American land-based missiles ''well worth examining.''

Mr. Schlesinger took sharp issue with estimates that a limited defense would
cost only about $60 billion. That, he said, was an unconvincing estimate and a
come-on price to gain support. The actual costs, he said, would be much higher
but could not be known until more research was done.

2 Major Problems

In a broadly analytical opening statement, Mr. Schlesinger asserted that since
the early postwar period American foreign policy had suffered from two major
problems: first, a decline in American power without a matching decline in
overseas commitments, and second, a breakdown in the political consensus behind
foreign policy since the Vietnam War, which brought increasing Congressional
assertiveness.

Despite Congressional cries for reducing American commitments abroad, Mr.
Schlesinger argued against moves to ''reduce or jettison'' such commitments,
saying these might embolden ''predatory powers'' to challenge American
interests.

He sided with Secretary of State George P. Shultz in his policy debate with
Secretary of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, who has argued against
American involvement in wars abroad without public approval in advance.

''I cannot concur with the emerging belief that the United States must only
fight popular, winnable wars,'' he said. ''The role of the United States in the
world is such that it must be prepared for, be prepared to threaten and even be
prepared to fight those intermediate conflicts that are likely to fare poorly on
television.''

He said he meant conflicts between such ''glorious little wars'' as the quick
seizure of Grenada and a longer, full- scale conventional war in Europe.

But under questioning by Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, he
warned repeatedly that the Administration would have to make greater efforts to
restore its credibility with Congress by setting out its objectives clearly.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Schlesinger

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM SCHLESINGER'S SENATE TESTIMONY

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


Following are excerpts from the testimony of former Secretary of Defense James
R. Schlesinger before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today on American
commitments abroad:

The United States has lost its pre- eminence. While it remains the leading
nation on the international scene, its power, which earlier was scarcely
disputable, is now very much disputable. Simultaneously - and not simply by
coincidence - national unity has been fractured - both in terms of the national
consensus and in terms of the agreement between the executive and the
legislative branches.

In short, these changes imply that the costs and risks of sustaining our
international position have risen. Despite the relative decline of American
power, not only in relation to the Soviet Union but even in relation to some
third world countries, the degree of American commitment worldwide has generally
not altered.

The unchanged state of U.S. commitments accompanied by the relative decline of
American power and the evaporation of national unity have led to two distinct
gaps. These are the commitments-power and the consensus-policy gaps.

The Central Commitment

The central foreign policy commitment of the United States since World War II
has been to sustain a free Europe - and it is to this commitment that the
overall cost and structure of the American military establishment has primarily
been addressed.

From time to time attempts have been made to curb our involvement in other parts
of the world, which appear less central to American foreign policy.


For any great power - and most notably the protecting superpower of the West -
to back away from commitments is more easily said than done.

In practice, the loss in prestige may actually reduce our power more than the
reduced claims on our military resources enhances that power. In that may lie
the supreme irony. Closing the power-commitments gap may not be possible through
reduction of commitments. The United States, as a great power, has essentially
taken on the task of sustaining the international order. And any abandonment of
major commitments is difficult to reconcile with that imposing task.

The upshot is that our commitments will remain large and that our military power
will remain more modest in relation to those commitments than it has been in the
past. That implies a degree of risk that we must acknowledge and accept. Try as
we will there is no acceptable way that we can escape from either these
responsibilities or these risks.

Vietnam Brought Change

It is, of course, the recognition of these costs and risks that has led to the
so called consensus-policy gap. Fulfilling our commitments was relatively simple
in the past. When we had the visible power simply to smash our potential foes -
as in the 50's and 60's - there was little difficulty in sustaining domestic
agreement. Vietnam brought a sea change in domestic attitudes. The human and
financial costs of conflict were brought home to the American public.

Since then there has been a notable reluctance to see American forces become
engaged notably in third areas of the world.

In such places as Lebanon or Central America there is little question regarding
the raw physical power of the United States to impose its will. There is no
power-commitment gap but rather a consensus-policy gap. Other nations have come
to doubt not the abstract power of the United States to achieve its goals but
rather its staying power in sustaining them.

Consensus and Power

Thus, ultimately we are faced with a paradox. In dealing with what is the
central strategic problem of the United States, the formidable capabilities of
the Soviet Union in relation to finite American power, there is at base a
domestic consensus - with respect to both protection of the North American
continent and our obligations in Europe. Yet paradoxically, it is here in this
arena in which the consensus is not seriously challenged that we may face a real
gap between power and commitments.

By contrast, in much of the third world, in which our power is certainly
commensurate with our commitments, there is simply no domestic consensus
regarding the prospective use of force. Thus, overall, in all parts of the world
we are likely to have to contend with at least one of the two gaps. Such is the
penalty for the loss of our postwar pre-eminence.

These perplexities lie behind the disputes between the Secretary of State and
the Secretary of Defense. In effect, the Secretary of Defense has insisted upon
domestic consensus before U.S. forces become employed. Given the circumstances,
that is indeed a demanding requirement. Were it to be rigorously implemented, it
would virtually assure other powers that they can count on not facing American
forces.

The Likeliest Challenges

Much as I personally sympathize with the concerns of the Department of Defense
in the post-Vietnam era, I cannot concur with the emerging belief that the
United States must only fight popular, winnable wars.

The likeliest physical challenges to the United States come in the third world -
not in Europe or North America. If the more predatory states in the third world
are given assurance that they can employ, directly or indirectly, physical force
against American interests with impunity, they will feel far less restraint in
acting against our interests.

Americans historically have embraced crusades - such as World War II - as well
as glorious little wars. The difficulty is that the most likely conflicts of the
future fall between crusades and such brief encounters as Grenada or Mayag"uez.
Yet these in-between conflicts have weak public support. Even the best of times
- with national unity and at the height of our power - public enthusiasm for
Korea and Vietnam evaporated in just a year or two.

The problem is that virtually no opportunity exists for future crusades - and
those glorious wars are likely to occur infrequently. The role of the United
States in the world is such that it must be prepared for, be prepared to
threaten, and even be prepared to fight those intermediate conflicts - that are
likely to fare poorly on television.

No Way Out

Is there a path out of these perplexities? I wish I could suggest one to you.
However, there is none. We shall have to bear continuously a degree of risk that
is unwelcome.

In the aggregate, our international commitments exceed our capabilities to
fulfill all of them simultaneously. Prudent planners will argue that we are
running a bluff. Worriers will simply worry. But in fact it will represent the
conscious acceptance of risk - and a conviction that not everything will go
wrong simultaneously.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE;
THE 2D TERM: GENTLEMEN, START YOUR ENGINES

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


At a social gathering of several veterans of White House trench warfare, barbs
about a new addition to President Reagan's senior staff flowed as freely as the
moderately priced white and red wine.

The bantering had as its target Patrick J. Buchanan, the high-profile
conservative whom the new White House chief of staff, Donald T. Regan, appointed
Tuesday to see that the President effectively communicates his messsage through
speeches, press events and other devices in the second term.

In drafting Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Regan placed in an important position a man who is
praised as much as he is criticized. But with that appointment and a number of
others made at the same time, Mr. Regan has also served notice of an intent to
put his own stamp on the White House staff, according to assessments by White
House officials and those on the outside such as lobbyists and politicians.

A Solid Team, They Say

They also say that, in the process, Mr. Regan has satisfied both practical and
political considerations and has assembled a solid team that is well-balanced
and has the potential of reinvigorating the White House senior staff.

Besides Mr. Buchanan, the chief of staff named to senior positions Max L.
Friedersdorf and Edward J. Rollins. In addition, he said that another senior
aide, Jack A. Svahn, would remain as the chief domestic policy adviser.

At a news conference where the appointments were announced, Mr. Regan provided a
vision of how he sees the staff operating, while aggressively defending the
selections.

''Policy is not set by one person dictating it,'' he said. ''Policy will be set
by discussions among a lot of us, finally the President deciding on the policy
and then going from there. When you accept the King's shilling, you sign
aboard.''

But what that will mean in the day- to-day operations of the White House is not
clear. Exact duties and responsibilities, beyond the general job descriptions,
are still being sorted out in a transition in which some senior aides are
leaving and others are coming aboard.

Telephone calls for Mr. Buchanan, for example, are now routed to Mr. Regan's
office. Those seeking Alfred H. Kingon, the new official in charge of Cabinet
affairs, are instead given the office of Craig L. Fuller, the departing head of
that operation.

''It's like the fall of Saigon,'' said one senior aide.

Mr. Regan held long talks on White House personnel several weeks ago with the
departing chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, who took over for Mr. Regan as
Treasury Secretary. In chosing his senior staff, he apparently sought to avoid
some pitfalls of the first term in defining some of the positions of the new
aides. For example, Mr. Buchanan, who replaces David A. Gergen as communications
director, will lack control over the day-to-day press activities, a
responsibility that will continue to rest with the White House spokesman, Larry
Speakes.

Mr. Speakes, who Mr. Regan emphasized will report directly to him and Mr.
Reagan, had frequent run-ins with Mr. Gergen in the first term, especially when
both were performing similar tasks. In taking the job, Mr. Buchanan, a columnist
and broadcast commentator who attended his first senior staff meeting today, is
said to believe that part of his role and responsibilites will emerge once he
begins the job.

Some White House officials are waiting to see if that results in turf battles.
One official laughed when asked if that would occur. Another, explaining the
role of Mr. Buchanan, said he would be an ''excellent spokesman for conservative
policies,'' then quickly identified him as an ''architect'' instead of
''spokesman.''

With the announcements, Mr. Regan indicated a desire to move quickly on the
President's legislative agenda in Congress, which will include such goals as
extensive budget cuts and tax revision. Mr. Friedersdorf is a veteran of Capitol
Hill lobbying and held the post of chief legislative assistant in Mr. Reagan's
first term when his spending and tax reduction proposals cleared Congress.

''He doesn't want to be cut short,'' a senior aide said of Mr. Regan's selection
of Mr. Friedersdorf. ''He wants somebody to spend the time without being
burdened with the day-to-day flow of the Hill.''

Mr. Friedersdorf said of his decision to take the job: ''I really feel deeply
about his programs. This year is like '81 - the President is at the peak of his
popularity. Those of us who can help him ought to be there. I could see they
were trying to put together a crackerjack team.''

Another effect of the appointments is to quell potential criticism from
conservatives, who have lobbied for the appointment of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick to a
senior White House post. Mr. Regan apparently made no overtures to Dr.
Kirkpatrick, who is leaving as chief United States delegate to the United
Nations. But by retaining Mr. Svahn and naming Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Regan will have
in senior positions two authentic conservatives, with Mr. Buchanan better known
on the right than Mr. Svahn.

''Buchanan, as far as we're concerned, is a 10-strike,'' said Edwin J. Feulner
Jr., president of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington study
group. ''He's one of us.''

In appointing Mr. Friedersdorf and Mr. Rollins, some officials say, Mr. Regan
returns to the White House two senior officials regarded as knowledgeable and
effective based on their performance in Mr. Reagan's first term.

''Friedersdorf is head and shoulders above anyone else that has been in that
job, and Rollins has been through the battles,'' one said.

The apppointments are expected to provide continuity. Mr. Buchanan and Mr.
Friedersdorf served together in Mr. Reagan's first term and also worked in the
Nixon White House.

Problems Anticipated

But the appointments do present problems. Mr. Buchanan is viewed by many as an
antagonist of the press. Both Mr. Rollins and Mr. Friedersdorf have been
associated with moderate elements who have been frequent targets of the right.

Mr. Rollins's appointment, in particular, is seen by some as keeping open a
high-level channel to such former White House aides and campaign officials as
Mr. Baker and Michael K. Deaver, the White House deputy chief of staff, along
with Richard G. Darman and Stuart Spencer. But it has also raised some concerns
among some Republican factions eyeing the 1988 Presidential campaign, since Mr.
Rollins has already indicated that he supports Vice President Bush.

The new jobs are not expected to affect the paper flow in the White House, with
Robert McFarlane, the national security adviser, maintaining the ability to
report to Mr. Reagan and not through Mr. Regan. But some officials suggested
that the roles of the officials could change slightly, with Mr. Friedersdorf in
effect becoming deputy chief of staff once Mr. Deaver formally leaves.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Max Friedersdorf; photo of Patrick Buchanan; photo of Edward
Rollins

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-AIDE SPENT 14 YEARS IN MILITARY INTELLIGENCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


Joseph A. McChristian, Gen. William C. Westmoreland's intelligence chief in
Vietnam from July 1965 until June 1967, is a 70-year-old West Point graduate who
served 38 years in the Army before retiring as a major general in 1971.

As assistant chief of staff for intelligence in the United States Military
Assistance Command, he supervised activities of all Army, Navy and Air Force
intelligence personnel except those assigned to the Central Intelligence Agency.

During his Army career, General McChristian spent 14 years in intelligence
activities, both in the United States and abroad.

A native of Chicago, he was brought up in Miami Beach and, after graduation from
high school there in 1932, he enlisted in the Army in order to enter preparatory
school for West Point.

When he received his second lieutenant's commission he went into the infantry,
but most of his service in World War II was in armored divisions. Toward the end
of the war he was chief of staff of the 10th Armored Division in the final
assault on Germany.

His intelligence work began shortly after V-E Day when he became assistant chief
of staff for intelligence under Gen. George S. Patton in the Third Army. Two
years later he went to Vienna as deputy director of intelligence for American
forces in Austria.

After attending several advanced training centers, including the Armed Forces
Staff College and the Army War College - he had previously attended the Command
and General Staff School and had taught there - he spent four years as military
attache in Greece.

Promoted to brigadier general in 1963, he served as assistant chief of staff for
intelligence at the Army's Pacific Command in Hawaii. Two years later he joined
General Westmoreland's staff in Saigon.

When he left Vietnam in mid-1967, General McChristian was made commander of the
Second Armored Division, in which he had served under General Patton. In 1968 he
went to Washington as the Army's assistant chief of staff for intelligence, a
post he held until his retirement in 1971.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joseph A. McChristian

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Pact Challenged On Agent Orange

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


Several lawyers who say they represent thousands of Vietnam veterans and their
relatives asked a Federal judge yesterday to rescind his approval of a
settlement on the Agent Orange lawsuit. Under the settlement, a fund was created
for those claiming harm from the herbicide's use in the Vietnam War.

One of the attorneys, Benton Musslewhite, argued before the judge, Jack B.
Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, that the $180 million fund was
''too little'' because claims have been filed on behalf of at least 150,000
veterans or their relatives.

Judge Weinstein rejected the motion of one of the lawyers yesterday and said he
would hear arguments on the motions of the two other attorneys, including Mr.
Musslewhite, on March 18.

The judge, who had been presiding over the suit, gave the accord his final
approval last month. The fund was agreed upon last May. At subsequent hearings,
veterans have been bitterly divided over whether the fund was sufficient.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1985 International

Australia will have to renege on a pledge to aid American planes in monitoring a
planned MX missile test. In an announcement that apparently startled American
officials, Prime Minister Robert Hawke said he would have to cancel the
agreement to provide Australian base facilities for United States surveillance
planes because of opposition in his party. (Page A1, Column 4.)

About 100 Jewish survivors who were brutalized in the Auschwitz medical
laboratories of Dr. Josef Mengele have gathered in Jerusalem for an
international hearing. The meeting, attended by twins, dwarfs and others, is
part of worldwide ceremonies marking the 40th anniversary of the liberation of
the death camp. The hearing is designed to draw attention to the crimes of the
Nazi doctor, who remains at large. (A1:3-5.)

Israeli forces, facing rising attacks in southern Lebanon, conducted major raids
on several Shiite Moslem villages that have been centers of armed resistance.
(A9:1-3.)

There is no need for papal diplomacy in Central America now, Pope John Paul II
said as he returned home from Latin America. (A3:4-6.)

President Reagan's main difficulty in winning support for his high military
budget, Central America policy and plan to develop missile defenses in space are
Congressional distrust of the Reagan Administration's objectives and
credibility, according to former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger.
(A14:3-6.) National

President Reagan urged the nation to forge ''a second American revolution of
hope and opportunity'' with a four- year agenda of tax revision, economic growth
and elimination of the threat of nuclear war. In his fifth State of the Union
Message, Mr. Reagan sounded the same buoyant themes that marked his triumphal
re- election campaign. (A1:6.)

The Democrats broadcast a half-hour television program aimed at showing that
their party was willing to listen to the complaints of voters who have defected
to the Republican Party in recent years. In light of President Reagan's
landslide re-election, the unusual, low key film treated Mr. Reagan relatively
gently. (A1:5.)

Economic growth next year will be slower and the Federal budget deficit will be
larger than President Reagan's 1986 budget estimates, according to Rudolph G.
Penner, the director of the Congressional Budget Office. He told Congress that
the agency's analysts expected higher interest rates, leading to a higher cost
of interest on the national debt, and less economic growth, leading to lower tax
revenues. (B7:5-6.)

David A. Stockman's criticism of the military pension system set off a political
storm, generating angry replies from veterans' organizations, Pentagon officials
and some members of Congress. But some key legislators joined the budget
director's call for reform and said that 1985 might be the year for a major
overhaul of military pensions. (A1:2-3.)

A plan to end most price supports and subsidies for farmers over five years was
defended by Agriculture Secretary John R. Block. Speaking at a news conference,
he said that two- thirds of the nation's farmers derived all their income from
the marketplace without aid. (A18:1.)

Senators backed the nomination of Lee M. Thomas to head the Environmental
Protection Agency, but raised questions about his ability to act under pressure
from the Federal budget office. However, every member of a Senate committee
voted to recommend the nomination of Mr. Thomas, who has been the acting
administrator of the agency since the resignation of William D. Ruckelshaus last
month. (B7:4-6.) Metropolitan

Port cost differentials between New York City and other East Coast cities would
be reduced for steamship lines under an agreement announced by the industry, the
longshoremen's union and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Under
the agreement, a fee that steamship companies pay for each container of cargo
would be reduced by about a third. The container fee is used to finance fringe
benefits for New York City dock workers. (A1:1.)

Gen. William C. Westmoreland acted improperly in 1967 by delaying a cable to
Washington reporting higher enemy strength than previously reported because it
would be ''a political bombshell,'' according to testimony by Maj. Gen. Joseph
A. McChristian, who was chief of intelligence for General Westmoreland in
Vietnam for two years. (A1:6.)

The bail of Bernhard H. Goetz was reduced to $5,000 from $50,000 by a state
judge after Mr. Goetz pleaded not guilty. He is charged with possession of
unlicensed weapons, including the gun he used to shoot four youths in a subway
train in December. (B3:5-6.)

The Professor of the Year, according to the Council for the Support and
Advancement of Education, is Dr. Charles Pine, a teacher of physics and
mathematics. Dr. Pine, who was cited for excellence in teaching and his impact
on his students at the Newark campus of Rutgers University, does not exactly
lecture but rather implores. Acknowledging a tendency toward exhibitionism, he
said, ''If I reach the end of a blackboard, I keep writing on the wall.''
(A1:1-2.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STATE OF THE UNION: 'SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION';
TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S STATE OF UNION ADDRESS TO CONGRESS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4340 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's State of the Union Message last
night, as recorded by The New York Times:

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mr.  President,
distinguished members of the Congress, honored guests and fellow citizens. I
come before you to report on the state of our Union. And I am pleased to report
that, after four years of united effort, the American people have brought forth
a nation renewed - stronger, freer and more secure than before.

Four years ago, we began to change - forever, I hope - our assumptions about
government and its place in our lives. Out of that change has come great and
robust growth - in our confidence, our economy, and our role in the world.

Tonight, America is stronger because of the values that we hold dear. We believe
faith and freedom must be our guiding stars, for they show us truth, they make
us brave, give us hope, and leave us wiser than we were. Our progress began not
in Washington, D.C., but in the hearts of our families, communities, workplaces,
and voluntary groups which, together, are unleashing the invincible spirit of
one great nation under God.

Four years ago, we said we would invigorate our economy by giving people greater
freedom and incentives to take risks, and letting them keep more of what they
earned.

We did what we promised, and a great industrial giant is reborn. Tonight we can
take pride in 25 straight months of economic growth, the strongest in 34 years;
a three- year inflation average of 3.9 percent, the lowest in 17 years; and 7.3
million new jobs in two years, with more of our citizens working than ever
before.

Seeds for Future Success

New freedom in our lives has planted the rich seeds for future success:

For an America of wisdom that honors the family, knowing that as the family
goes, so goes our civilization;

For an America of vision that sees tomorrow's dreams in the learning and hard
work we do today;

For an America of courage whose servicemen and women, even as we meet, proudly
stand watch on the frontiers of freedom;

For an America of compassion that opens its heart to those who cry out for help.

We have begun well. But it's only a beginning. We are not here to congratulate
ourselves on what we have done, but to challenge ourselves to finish what has
not yet been done.

We're here to speak for millions in our inner cities who long for real jobs,
safe neighborhoods and schools that truly teach. We're here to speak for the
American farmer, the entrepreneur and every worker in industries fighting to
modernize and compete. And, yes, we're here to stand, and proudly so, for all
who struggle to break free from totalitarianism; for all who know in their
hearts that freedom is the one true path to peace and human happiness.

Proverbs tell us, without a vision the people perish. When asked what great
principle holds our Union together, Abraham Lincoln said, ''Something in (the)
Declaration giving liberty, not alone to the people of this country, but hope to
the world for all future time.''

Nation Is Poised for Greatness

We honor the giants of our history not by going back, but forward to the dreams
their vision foresaw. My fellow citizens, this nation is poised for greatness.
The time has come to proceed toward a great new challenge - a Second American
Revolution of hope and opportunity; a revolution carrying us to new heights of
progress by pushing back frontiers of knowledge and space; a revolution of
spirit that taps the soul of America, enabling us to summon greater strength
than we've ever known; and, a revolution that carries beyond our shores the
golden promise of human freedom in a world at peace.

Let us begin by challenging our conventional wisdom: There are no constraints on
the human mind, no walls around the human spirit, no barriers to our progress
except those we ourselves erect. Already, pushing down tax rates has freed our
economy to vault forward to record growth.

In Europe, they're calling it ''the American Miracle.'' Day by day, we are
shattering accepted notions of what is possible. When I was growing up, we
failed to see how a new thing called radio would transform our marketplace.
Well, today many have not yet seen how advances in technology are transforming
our lives.

In the late 1950's, workers at the A.T.&T. semiconductor plant in Pennsylvania
produced five transistors a day for $7.50 apiece. They now produce over a
million for less than a penny apiece.

Threshold of Great Advances

New laser techniques could revolutionize heart bypass surgery, cut diagnosis
time for viruses linked to cancer from weeks to minutes, reduce hospital costs
dramatically and hold out new promise for saving human lives.

Our automobile industry has overhauled assembly lines, increased worker
productivity and is competitive once again.

We stand on the threshold of a great ability to produce more, do more, be more.
Our economy is not getting older and weaker, it's getting younger and stronger;
it doesn't need rest and supervision, it needs new challenge, greater freedom.
And that word - freedom - is the key to the Second American Revolution that we
mean to bring about.

Let us move together with an historic reform of tax simplification for fairness
and growth. Last year, I asked Treasury Secretary-then, Regan, to develop a plan
to simplify the tax code, so all taxpayers would be treated more fairly, and
personal tax rates could come further down.

We have cut tax rates by almost 25 percent, yet the tax system remains unfair
and limits our potential for growth. Exclusions and exemptions cause similar
incomes to be taxed at different levels. Low-income families face steep tax
barriers that make hard lives even harder. The Treasury Department has produced
an excellent reform plan whose principles will guide the final proposal that we
will ask you to enact.

One thing that tax reform will not be is a tax increase in disguise. We will not
jeopardize the mortgage interest deduction that families need. We will reduce
personal tax rates as low as possible by removing many tax preferences. We will
propose a top rate of no more than 35 percent, and possibly lower. And we will
propose reducing corporate rates while maintaining incentives for capital
formation.

To encourage opportunity and jobs rather than dependency and welfare, we will
propose that individuals living at or near the poverty line be totally exempt
from Federal income tax. To restore fairness to families, we will propose
increasing significantly the personal exemption.

And tonight, I am instructing Treasury Secretary James Baker - I have to get
used to saying that - to begin working with Congressional authors and committees
for bipartisan legislation conforming to these principles. We will call upon the
American people for support, and upon every man and woman in this chamber.
Together, we can pass, this year, a tax bill for fairness, simplicity and
growth, making this economy the engine of our dreams and America the investment
capital of the world. So let us begin.

The Promise of Opportunity for All

Tax simplification will be a giant step toward unleashing the tremendous pent-up
power of our economy. But a Second American Revolution must carry the promise of
opportunity for all. It is time to liberate the spirit of enterprise in the most
distressed areas of our country.

This Government will meet its responsibility to help those in need. But policies
that increase dependency, break up families and destroy self-respect are not
progressive, they're reactionary. Despite our strides in civil rights, blacks,
Hispanics and all minorities will not have full and equal power until they have
full economic power.

We have repeatedly sought passage of enterprise zones to help those in the
abandoned corners of our land find jobs, learn skills and build better lives.
This legislation is supported by a majority of you. And Mr. Speaker, I know we
agree that there must be no forgotten Americans. Let us place new dreams in a
million hearts and create a new generation of entrepreneurs by passing
enterprise zones this year. And Tip, you could make that a birthday present.

Nor must we lose the chance to pass our youth employment opportunity wage
proposal. We can help teen-agers who have the highest unemployment rate find
summer jobs so they can know the pride of work and have confidence in their
futures.

We will continue to support the Job Training Partnership Act, which has a nearly
two- thirds job placement rate. Credits and education and health care vouchers
will help working families shop for services that they need.

Our Administration is already encouraging certain low-income public housing
residents to own and manage their own dwellings. It's time all public housing
residents have that opportunity of ownership.

The Federal Government can help create a new atmosphere of freedom. But states
and localities, many of which enjoy surpluses from the recovery, must not permit
their tax and regulatory policies to stand as barriers to growth.

Let us resolve that we will stop spreading dependency and start spreading
opportunity, that we will stop spreading bondage and start spreading freedom.

There are some who say that growth initiatives must await final action on
deficit reductions. Well the best way to reduce deficits is through economic
growth. More businesses will be started, more investments made, more jobs
created and more people will be on payrolls paying taxes. The best way to reduce
Government spending is to reduce the need for spending by increasing prosperity.
Each added percentage point per year of real G.N.P. growth will lead to
cumulative reduction in deficits of nearly $200 billion over five years.

Overall Spending to Be Frozen

To move steadily toward a balanced budget we must also lighten Government's
claim on our total economy. We will not do this by raising taxes. We must make
sure that our economy grows faster than the growth in spending by the Federal
Government. In our fiscal year 1986 budget, overall Government program spending
will be frozen at the current level; it must not be one dime higher than fiscal
year 1985. And three points are key:

First, the social safety net for the elderly, the needy, the disabled and
unemployed will be left intact. Growth of our major health care programs,
Medicare and Medicaid, will be slowed, but protections for the elderly and needy
will be preserved.

Second, we must not relax our efforts to restore military strength just as we
near our goal of a fully equipped, trained and ready professional corps.
National security is Government's first responsibility, so in past years,
defense spending took about half the Federal budget. Today it takes less than a
third. We've already reduced our planned defense expenditures by nearly $100
billion over the past four years, and reduced projected spending again this
year. You know, we only have a military industrial complex until a time of
danger; and then it becomes the arsenal of democracy. Spending for defense is
investing in things that are priceless: peace and freedom.

Third, we must reduce or eliminate costly Government subsidies. For example,
deregulation of the airline industry has led to cheaper airfares, but on Amtrak
taxpayers pay about $35 per passenger every time an Amtrak train leaves the
station. It's time we ended this huge Federal subsidy.

Our farm program costs have quadrupled in recent years. Yet, I know from
visiting farmers, many in great financial distress, that we need an orderly
transition to a market-oriented farm economy. We can help farmers best, not by
expanding Federal payments but by making fundamental reforms, keeping interest
rates heading down and knocking down foreign trade barriers to American farm
exports.

Protect Taxpayers From Government

We are moving ahead with Grace Commission reforms to eliminate waste and improve
Government's management practices. In the long run, we must protect the
taxpayers from Government.

And I ask again that you pass, as 32 states have now called for, an amendment
mandating the Federal Government spend no more than it takes in. And I ask for
the authority used responsibily by 43 Governors to veto individual items in
appropriations bills. Senator Mattingly has introduced a bill permitting a two-
year trial run of the line-item veto. I hope you will pass and send that
legislation to my desk.

Nearly 50 years of Governmentliving beyond its means has brought us to a time of
reckoning. Ours is but a moment in history. But one moment of courage, idealism
and bipartisan unity can change American history forever.

Sound monetary policy is key to long-running economic strength and stability. We
will continue to cooperate with the Federal Reserve Board, seeking a steady
policy that insures price stability without keeping interest rates artificially
high or needlessly holding down growth.

Reducing unneeded red tape and regulations and deregulating the energy,
transportation and financial industries have unleashed new competition, giving
consumers more choices, better services and lower prices. In just one set of
grant programs, we have reduced 905 pages of regulations to 31.

We seek to fully deregulate natural gas to bring on new supplies and bring us
closer to energy independence. Consistent with safety standards, we will
continue removing restraints on the bus and railroad industries; we will soon
end up legislation, or send up legislation I should say to return Conrail to the
private sector, where it belongs. And we will support further deregulation of
the trucking industry.

Every dollar the Federal Government does not take from us, every decision it
does not make for us, will make our economy stronger, our lives more abundant,
our future more free.

New Possibilities in Space Research

Our Second American Revolution will push on to new possibilities not only on
earth, but in the next frontier of space. Despite budget restraints, we will
seek record funding for research and development.

We have seen the success of the space shuttle. Now we are going to develop a
permanently manned space station and new opportunities for free enterprise.
Within the next decade, Americans and our friends around the world will be
living and working together in space.

In the zero gravity of space, we could manufacture in 30 days lifesaving
medicines it would take 30 years to make on earth. We can make crystals of
exceptional purity to produce super computers, creating jobs, technologies and
medical breakthroughs beyond anything we ever dreamed possible.

As we do all this, we will continue to protect our natural resources. We will
seek reauthorization and expanded funding for the Superfund program to continue
cleaning up hazardous waste sites which threaten human health and the
environment.

Now there's another great heritage to speak of this evening. Of all the changes
that have swept America the past four years, none brings greater promise than
our rediscovery of the values of faith, freedom, family, work and neighborhood.

We see signs of renewal in increased attendance in places of worship; renewed
optimism and faith in our future; love of country rediscovered by our young, who
are leading the way. We have rediscovered that work is good in and of itself;
that it enobles us to create and contribute no matter how seemingly humble our
jobs. We have seen a powerful new current from an old and honorable tradition -
American generosity.

From thousands answering Peace Corps appeals to help boost food production in
Africa, to millions volunteering time, corporations adopting schools, and
communities pulling together to help the neediest among us at home, we have
refound our values. Private sector initiatives are crucial to our future.

I thank the Congress for passing equal access legislation giving religious
groups the same right to use classrooms after school that other groups enjoy.
But no citizen need tremble, nor the world shudder, if a child stands in a
classroom and breathes a prayer. We ask you again: Give children back a right
they had for a century and a half or more in this country.

Anti-Abortion Legislation Sought

The question of abortion grips our nation. Abortion is either the taking of
human life or it isn't. And if it is - and medical technology is increasingly
showing it is - it must be stopped.

It is a terrible irony that while some turn to abortion, so many others who
cannot become parents cry out for children to adopt. We have room for these
children; we can fill the cradles of those who want a child to love. And
Tonight, I ask you in the Congress to move this year on legislation to protect
the unborn.

In the area of education, we're returning to excellence; and again, the heroes
are our people, not Government. We're stressing basics of discipline, rigorous
testing and homework while helping children become computer-smart as well. For
20 years, Scholastic Aptitude Test scores of our high school students went down.
But now they have gone up two of the last three years.

We must go forward in our commitment to the new basics, giving parents greater
authority and making sure good teachers are rewarded for hard work and
achievement through merit pay.

Of all the changes in the past 20 years, none has more threatened our sense of
national well-being than the explosion of violent crime. One does not have to be
attacked to be a victim. The woman who must run to her car after shopping at
night is a victim; the couple draping their door with locks and chains are
victims; as is the tired, decent cleaning woman who can't ride a subway home
without being afraid.




Compassion for Crime Victims

We do not seek to violate rights of defendants. But shouldn't we feel more
compassion for the victims of crime than for those who commit crime? For the
first time in 20 years, the crime index has fallen two years in a row we've
convicted over 7,400 drug offenders and put them, as well as leaders of
organized crime, behind bars in record numbers.

But we must do more. I urge the House to follow the Senate and enact proposals
permitting use of all reliable evidence that police officers acquire in good
faith. These proposals would also reform the habeas corpus laws and allow, in
keeping with the will of the overwhelming majority of Americans, the use of the
death penalty where necessary.

There can be no economic revival in ghettos when the most violent among us are
allowed to roam free. It is time we restored domestic tranquility. And we mean
to do just that.

Just as we're positioned as never before to secure justice in our economy, we're
poised as never before to create a safer, freer, more peaceful world.

Our alliances are stronger than ever. Our economy is stronger than ever. We have
resumed our historic role as a leader of the free world - and all of these
together are a great force for peace.

Since 1981, we've been committed to seeking fair and verifiable arms agreements
that would lower the risk of war and reduce the size of nuclear arsenals. Now
our determination to maintain a strong defense has influenced the Soviet Union
to return to the bargaining table. Our negotiators must be able to go to that
table with the united support of the American people. All of us have no greater
dream than to see the day when nuclear weapons are banned from this earth
forever.

Defense and Meaningful Arms Pact

Each member of the Congress has a role to play in modernizing our defenses, thus
supporting our chances for a meaningful arms agreement. Your vote this spring on
the Peacekeeper missile will be a critical test of our resolve to maintain the
strength we need and move toward mutual and verifiable arms reductions.

For the past 20 years we have believed that no war will be launched as long as
each side knows it can retaliate with a deadly counter- strike. Well, I believe
there is a better way of eliminating the threat of nuclear war.

It is a Strategic Defense Initiative aimed ultimately at finding a non-nuclear
defense against ballistic missiles. It is the most hopeful possibility of the
nuclear age. But it's not well understood.

Some say it will bring war to the heavens - but its purpose is to deter war, in
the heavens and on earth. Some say the research would be expensive. Perhaps, but
it could save millions of lives, indeed humanity itself. Some say if we build
such a system, the Soviets will build a defense system of their own. Well they
already have strategic defenses that surpass ours; a civil defense system, where
we have almost none; and a research program covering roughly the same areas of
technology that we're now exploring. And finally, some say the research will
take a long time. Well the answer to that is: ''Let's get started.''

Harry Truman once said that, ultimately, our security, and the world's hopes for
peace and human progress, ''lie not in measures of defense or in the control of
weapons, but in the growth and expansion of freedom and self-government.''

Nourishing Freedom and Democracy

And tonight we declare anew to our fellow citizens of the world: Freedom is not
the sole prerogative of a chosen few; it is the universal right of all God's
children. Look to where peace and prosperity flourish today. It is in homes that
freedom built. Victories against poverty are greatest and peace most secure
where people live by laws that insure free press, free speech, and freedom to
worship, vote, and create wealth.

Our mission is to nourish and defend freedom and democracy, and to communicate
these ideals everywhere we can.

America's economic success is freedom's success; it can be repeated a hundred
times in a hundred different nations. Many countries in East Asia and the
Pacific have few resources other than the enterprise of their own people. But
through low tax rates and free markets, they've soared ahead of centralized
economies. And now China is opening up its economy to meet its needs.

We need a stronger and simpler approach to the process of making and
implementing trade policy and will be studying potential changes in that process
in the next few weeks.

We have seen the benefits of free trade and lived through the disasters of
protectionism. Tonight, I ask all our trading partners, developed and developing
alike, to join us in a new round of trade negotiations to expand trade and
competition, and strengthen the global economy - and to begin it in this next
year.

There are more than three billion human beings living in third world countries,
with an average per capita income of $650 a year. Many are victims of
dictatorships that impoverish them with taxation and corruption. Let us ask our
allies to join us in a practical program of trade and assistance that fosters
economic development through personal incentives to help these people climb from
poverty on their own.

Role When Freedom Is Under Siege

We cannot play innocents abroad in a world that's not innocent. Nor can we be
passive when freedom is under siege. Without resources, diplomacy cannot
succeed; our security assistance programs help friendly governments defend
themselves, and give them confidence to work for peace. And I hope that you and
the Congress will understand that dollar for dollar security assistance
contributes as much to global security as our own defense budget.

We must stand by all our democratic allies. And we must not break faith with
those who are risking their lives - on every continent, from Afghanistan to
Nicaragua - to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure rights which have
been ours from birth.

The Sandinista dictatorship of Nicaragua, with full Cuban Soviet-bloc support,
not only persecutes its people, the church, and denies a free press, but arms
and provides bases for communist terrorists attacking neighboring states.
Support for freedom fighters is self- defense, and totally consistent with the
O.A.S. and U.N. Charters. It is essential that the Congress continue all facets
of our assistance to Central America. I want to work with you to support the
democratic forces whose struggle is tied to our own security.

Now tonight I have spoken of great plans and great dreams. They are dreams we
can make come true. Two hundred years of American history should have taught us
that nothing is impossible.

Ten years ago, a young girl left Vietnam with her family - part of the exodus
that followed the fall of Saigon. They came to the United States with no
possessions and not knowing a word of English. Ten years ago - the young girl
studied hard, learned English, and finished high school in the top of her class,
and this May - May 22d to be exact - is a big date on her calendar - just 10
years from the time she left Vietnam she will graduate from the United States
Military Academy at West Point.

I thought you might like to meet an American hero named Jean Nguyen.

Now there's someone else here tonight, born 79 years ago. She lives in the inner
city where she cares for infants born of mothers who are heroin addicts. The
children born in withdrawal are sometimes even dropped on her doorstep. She
helps them with love. Go to her house some night and maybe you'll see her
silhouette against the window as she walks the floor, talking softly, soothing a
child in her arms. Mother Hale of Harlem, and she, too, is an American hero.

Jean, Mother Hale, your lives tell us that the oldest American saying is new
again - anything is possible in America if we have the faith, the will and the
heart.

History is asking us, once again, to be a force for good in the world. Let us
begin - in unity, with justice, and love.

Thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you for making the 35th time I have
been 39 the happiest of them all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jean Nguyen, Nancy Reagan and Clara Hale

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DANGER TO V.A. LOANS IS SEEN IN BUDGET PLAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


Spokesmen for veterans' groups and mortgage lenders said today that provisions
in President Reagan's budget that would raise fees on many mortgages could mean
the death of the Veterans Administration home loan program.

''The Administration really wants to submarine a program whose intent for 40
years has been to help veterans buy their first home,'' Richard Weidman,
director of government relations for the Vietnam Veterans of America, said at a
news conference here.

The President's budget for the fiscal year 1986 would raise fees to 5 percent
from 1 percent on Veterans Administration loans and to 5 percent from 3.8
percent on loans guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration.

The Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Association and the Government National Mortgage Associationwould also receive
fee increases.

A 'Thinly Disguised Tax'

Robert J. Spiller, president of the Mortgage Bankers Association, termed the
proposed fees a ''thinly disguised tax on the backs of lower- and
moderate-income Americans'' and said the increases could discourage future loans
to veterans by reflecting badly on lenders.

''We would probably stop taking V.A. applications,'' Mr. Spiller said of his
bank, the Boston Five Cents Savings Bank, where he is chairman and chief
executive officer. ''I don't want that stigma on my head,'' he added, referring
to the higher charges.

Last year, according to Mr. Weidman, 60 percent of the more than 251,000 loans
granted by the veterans agency were loan, that required no down payment. If
Congress approves the 5 percent origination fee, he said, ''V.A. loan usage
would drop by more than half.''

Mr. Spiller said borrowers would need a higher income to qualify, ''effectively
undercutting the whole purpose of the program.''

Edwin L. Dale Jr., spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget, said the
proposals would not disqualify applicants because of a lack of capital. ''The
additional up-front insurance fees will simply be added to the principal, adding
very slightly to each monthly payment,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
MORALISM'S LIMITS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


It is ''no virtue'' to be tolerant of

abortion, Prof. Richard Baer of

Cornell University has written to The New York Times (Feb. 5, 1985), because the
abortion debate concerns ''whether the fetus is a human being'' entitled to the
protection of the law, and is not ''just about personal preferences.''

Professor Baer did not specifically defend the recent rash of bombings of
abortion clinics. But since he was responding to a Times editorial condemning
the bombings, his letter seems to me emblematic of a dubious moralism too often
seen in American attitudes toward actions that by customary legal standards are
criminal.

The abortion-clinic bombings are a dramatic example. Numerous justifications
have been offered on grounds that those taking part in the bombings held deep
moral convictions against abortion - hence were acting morally. Professor Baer,
in my judgment quite speciously, implicitly compared the bombings to the sit-ins
of 25 years ago, and argued that in those days ''civil rights activists
regularly tried to embarrass and shame racists.''

Even Thomas Herlihy of the Pro- Life Nonviolent Action Project in Maryland told
Dudley Clendinen of The Times that he could understand the bombers: ''They're
getting frustrated (by legal abortion). The pro- life movement is reaching the
pressure-cooker stage.'' Frustration is also the rationale most frequently cited
by defenders of Bernhard Goetz, who shot four young blacks, two of them in the
back, on a New York subway train in December. In this view, Mr. Goetz was
justified not just because he felt threatened by the four young men, but because
- like many Americans - he was frustrated and angered by the prevalence of urban
crime and the inability of police and courts to cope with it. Thus, Mr. Goetz's
violent response is seen as a needed and laudable moral protest against crime in
the streets.  These defenses suggest, if they do not specifically claim, that
the actions of the clinic bombers and Mr. Goetz - I draw no other parallel
between them - amount to civil disobedience, rather like that of some civil
rights protesters and peace activists of the 50's and 60's. I see, however, a
crucial distinction between what I'd call moral vigilantism and civil
disobedience.

Both are characterized by moral certainty as to the rightness of some particular
view - whether against abortion and crime, or for withdrawal from Vietnam or an
end to segregation laws. But moral vigilantism, by my definition, not only
breaks the law but tends to a direct, violent (hence possibly lethal) attack on
the thing abhorred, and is essentially destructive - not just physically but to
the democratic process.

Civil disobedience also breaks the law, but by nonviolent protest or assertion,
designed to call attention to and dramatize the abhorrence of the thing
abhorred. Civil disobedience is essentially constructive, an attempt to move the
democratic process to needed action.

Neither moral vigilantism nor civil disobedience, however, can or should absolve
the activist of the normal penalties of the law. In the case of true civil
disobedience, it is precisely the human injustice of a legal penalty for a moral
act that is counted upon to arouse the desired public indignation.

By no means could all the actions of the civil rights and peace movements be
dignified, let alone justified, as civil disobedience, whatever the grievances
and motives of those involved - the looting and burning of other people's
property, for example, or the blowing up of a college building.

It nevertheless seems to me intellectually fallacious to equate bombing an
abortion clinic with the civil rights sit-ins - in which the protesters
themselves not only suffered the violence but also the legal penalties, and
offered no physical threat to anyone else.

It may be true that clinic bombers hope to ''embarrass and shame'' those who
acquiesce in abortions; but trying to do so by violence and destruction seems to
me morally disreputable by comparison with the actions of those who marched
nonviolently against Bull Connor's police dogs and cattle prods, often to be
beaten and jailed themselves for their challenge to an unjust legal order.

And what about those Americans who from religious and moral motives are defying
the Government in order to transport and shelter refugees from what they believe
is violence and death in Central America? They're not shooting and bombing -
quite the opposite - although they risk indictment and jail. Even in that case,
it seems to me, the prime object should be to generate public revulsion against
the Government's reluctance to lift the lamp and open the door. In the long run,
more lives will be saved that way than by the operation of an underground
railway.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Laos to Search For Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


The United States announced today that it would conduct a joint excavation with
Laos from Feb. 10 to Feb. 21 of the site where a United States C-130 cargo plane
crashed in southern Laos after it was shot down in December 1972.

The State Department spokesman, Bernard Kalb, said Laos had agreed to the
excavation ''prompted by its humanitarian policy toward the families of the
Americans missing in action'' during the Southeast Asian war.

Laos agreed in principle to the excavation last July. The site is northeast of
Pakse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER REASSERTS POLITICS LED TO LOW ESTIMATES OF ENEMY STRENGTH

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS documentary on the Vietnam War,
testified yesterday that he believed when the broadcast was made that Gen.
William C. Westmoreland had reduced enemy strength estimates in 1967 for
''political reasons.''

The information he gathered for the January 1982 broadcast, Mr. Crile said in
Federal District Court in Manhattan, convinced him that ''the best intelligence
was stopped, and stopped for political reasons, and all that followed was
colored by that fact.''

Mr. Crile, who appeared as the 14th witness for CBS in the trial of General
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit, was questioned extensively about his
state of mind during the preparation of the documentary in 1981. The 39-
year-old producer, who is also a defendant in the case, had previously been
called to the stand by lawyers for General Westmoreland and testified for nine
days as a ''hostile'' witness. Much of his testimony yesterday resembled his
earlier answers.

To prevail in his suit, General Westmoreland must prove that the material in the
1982 broadcast was defamatory, related to him and false. As a public figure, he
must also establish that the false statements were made with knowledge that they
were false or with ''reckless disregard'' for their truth or falsity. The latter
element has come to be known as a ''state of mind'' issue.

The 17-week-old trial is now expected to end later this month. Judge Pierre N.
Leval allotted each side 150 hours to present direct evidence and cross-examine;
General Westmoreland has used about 140 hours, and CBS 125.



Working on Charge to Jury

At least one juror, for personal reasons, has asked in recent days to know when
the trial will finish. Yesterday, Judge Leval requested a list of CBS's
remaining witnesses, and indicated that, in consultation with the lawyers, he
had considerable work to do on the charge he will give to the jury.

One of the many points on which the litigants are still at odds is an acceptable
definition of the ''categories of evidence'' that relate to the question of
recklessness. Judge Leval said yesterday that CBS may be seeking to exclude too
much.

''I think there are a lot of things, like bias, like not interviewing witnesses,
a number of other subjects,'' the judge said out of the presence of the jury,
''which, while they may not be sufficient evidence to make out recklessness,''
may be ''appropriate evidence on that issue.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States troops in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, contends that the documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' defamed him by saying that he had lied to President Johnson and the
Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong
forces in late 1967.

The broadcast charged that, for political and public relations reasons intended
to show that the war was being won, the general's command had deliberately
understated enemy strength. It said that General Westmoreland had imposed an
''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on estimates of that strength, mainly by
deleting the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the military listing of enemy
capabilities known as the order of battle.

Besides Mr. Crile, the individual defendants are Mike Wallace, the narrator of
the broadcast, and Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst
who was a paid consultant for the program.

Estimate Cut in Half

Mr. Adams, like some C.I.A. colleagues and military analysts, favored a
total-enemy-strength estimate in 1967 of approximately 500,000 to 600,000.
General Westmoreland's command argued, successfully, for a figure approximately
half that size.

Mr. Wallace is expected to testify in the next week or two. When Mr. Adams was
on the stand last month, David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, led him over the
broadcast in much the fashion he did yesterday with Mr. Crile. As the
documentary was shown on the half- dozen television sets in the courtroom, the
witness was asked whether he believed various statements in it at the time it
was made, and why.

At one stage Mr. Crile and others in the courtroom were jolted by a loud
commercial for a detergent that inadvertently had not been removed from the
program. Later, video technicians who are paid jointly by the parties to the
lawsuit had equipment trouble that necessitated an hour's interruption.

It showed, Mr. Boies quipped to the jury, that ''not every problem in a
broadcast is intentional.''

Mr. Crile testified that he did not believe General Westmoreland had been
''forthright and straight with us'' when he was interviewed for the documentary
in May 1981.

From other sources, Mr. Crile said, he believed that the quarrel over enemy
strength in 1967 between the C.I.A. and General Westmoreland's command had been
''long and bitter'' and ''over critical issues.'' And while C.I.A. headquarters
was thousands of miles away from Vietnam, he said, such agency analysts as Mr.
Adams and George W. Allen, the C.I.A.'s deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs, had
spent much time in the war zone and were perhaps even more knowledgeable about
the enemy's capabilities than was the military.

A 'Desk Analyst'

But General Westmoreland, Mr. Crile pointed out, had insisted in his interview
that ''the C.I.A. was very remote; we were on the scene'' and that the argument
over enemy strength was ''rather absurd, and didn't last very long.'' Moreover,
the witness said, the general ''presented the clear impression that his
officers, his intelligence command'' were in full accord with the military
position ''and that the C.I.A. had only had this sort of minor difference of
opinion'' because of Mr. Adams - this ''desk analyst, as he put it.''

This, Mr. Crile told the jury, was ''completely contradictory'' to what he was
learning elsewhere.

The producer said he believed in 1981 not only that General Westmoreland's
actions had led to a ''perversion'' of the intelligence-gathering process but
also that the White House and the Pentagon were deceived by command's
''dishonest'' position.

He noted that General Westmoreland, in his interview, had said that ''the people
in Washington,'' as well as ''the media,'' were ''not sophisticated enough to
understand and evaluate this thing'' about enemy strength. But ''the people in
Washington'' that the general meant, Mr. Crile said, referring to an interview
question that was not in the broadcast, had to have included President Johnson
and the Joint Chiefs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: A NEW BOOK ON INVASION OF IWO JIMA

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 890 words


BILL D. ROSS has had hundreds of bylines since he went to work 45 years ago on a
weekly newspaper in Cherokee, Iowa. But he will become a book author for the
first time on Feb. 19, the 40th anniversary of the invasion of Iwo Jima, when
Vanguard Press publishes his ''Iwo Jima: Legacy of Valor.''

A number of writers older than the 63-year-old Mr. Ross have recently been
published in book form for the first time, but his ordeal in getting the book
into print illustrates how publishing attitudes about war books have changed in
recent years.

Mr. Ross actually completed the 200,000-word manuscript six years ago and it
made the rounds of the publishing houses without benefit of an agent. It was
politely rejected by at least 20 publishers, he said, most often with the
explanation that there wasn't a market for such a book. That was because of
lingering bitterness over the American involvement in Vietnam, which prompted
editors to shy away from books even about World War II.

Mr. Ross withdrew the manuscript, but he continued working virtually full time
on it, rewriting and trimming it to about 150,000 words. When the market for
such books improved a few years ago, he sent out a 46-page proposal, and within
three weeks four publishers asked to see the completed manuscript. Mr. Ross
signed with Vanguard in November 1983.

Then Mr. Ross worked steadily for almost a year polishing the manuscript with
Vanguard's editor in chief, Bernice Woll, a meticulous editor for whom he has
unqualified praise. The finished book is still relatively big: 376 pages plus 4
pages of maps and 20 pages of photographs - many of which, according to Evelyn
Shrifte, Vanguard's president, are the work of Marine Corps photographers that
have never been published before.

The long wait appears to have been worth it. The book is a main selection of the
Military Book Club. It is being syndicated to newspapers. It is about to go into
its second printing. And it comes with an impressive lineup of blurbs from a
total of 10 scholars, authors and military officers, including Henry Steele
Commager, William Manchester, Leon Uris and Lieut. Gen. James H. Doolittle.

Iwo Jima is the tiny volcanic island in the Pacific that was the scene of one of
history's bloodiest battles. For 36 days, 75,000 United States Marines battled
20,000 Japanese, often hand to hand, according to Mr. Ross's account. Almost
26,000 Americans were killed or wounded, and only about 1,000 Japanese survived.
Of the 353 Americans who received the Congressional Medal of Honor during World
War II, 27 won it at Iwo - including 13 who were awarded it posthumously.

Mr. Ross was a combat correspondent on Iwo Jima with the Third Marine Division.
After the war, he was a Washington correspondent for the Associated Press, then
he was sent to Korea as an A.P. correspondent, landing with the first wave of
Marines at Inchon. But he never forgot those harrowing five weeks at Iwo. His
book is not a personal memoir, however. ''Instead,'' he said, ''it is a
chronicle of why the battle was fought, how it was planned and waged, the story
of the drama and infighting among top brass of the U.S. armed forces, the
battle's importance in the conquest of Japan. It was a battle the likes of which
mankind will probably never witness again.''

2d Suit Against Matthiessen Is Dismissed by Judge

The second of two libel suits brought against Peter Matthiessen, author of ''In
the Spirit of Crazy Horse,'' has recently been dismissed. On Jan. 25, Merton B.
Tice Jr., a judge in the Seventh Judicial Circuit Court in Rapid City, S.D.,
dismissed the $25 million suit by David Price. Mr. Price, an agent for the
Federal Bureau of Investigation in South Dakota from 1973 through 1977, claimed
that he had been libeled in the book.

The book, published in 1983 by Viking Press, describes the activities of the
American Indian Movement in the 70's, focusing on the case of Leonard Peltier,
an Indian activist who was convicted of murdering two F.B.I. agents in 1975 on
the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation.

Last year, Judge Gene Paul Kean of the Second Judicial Circuit Court in Sioux
Falls dismissed a $24 million suit by Gov. William J. Janklow of South Dakota,
who charged that the book defamed him by falsely portraying him as a racist and
a rapist. The suit was filed against Mr. Matthiessen, Viking and three South
Dakota bookstores. The Governor's lawyers appealed the decision to the South
Dakota Supreme Court on Jan. 9, asking that the suit be reinstated.

Arthur Miller Writing His Autobiography

After a long career that earned him a Pulitzer Prize, the gold medal for drama
of the National Institute of Arts and Letters and many other awards, Arthur
Miller has begun writing his autobiography.

Mr. Miller's principal publisher is Viking Penguin, but his autobiography will
be published by Harper & Row. ''I've known Arthur for 20 years,'' Aaron Asher,
Harper's executive editor, said. ''I first met him when I became his editor at
Viking for most of the 60's.''

In the late 70's, when Mr. Asher was at Farrar, Straus and Giroux, he edited
''Chinese Encounters,'' in which Mr. Miller provided a book- length text for
photographs taken by his wife, Inge Morath.

The manuscript of the autobiography, as yet untitled, is expected to be
delivered next year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WALTERS, LONGTIME DIPLOMAT, GETS KIRKPATRICK POST AT U.N.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


Gen. Vernon A. Walters, an experienced envoy and former Central Intelligence
Agency official, was nominated by President Reagan today to succeed Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick as chief United States delegate to the United Nations.

After the announcement, the 68-year- old retired Army general told reporters at
the State Department, ''I will do my best to continue the superb work that
Ambassador Kirkpatrick has done in the United Nations to restore and enhance the
position of the United States.''

In accepting the post, General Walters made it clear that he would hold Cabinet
rank, as had Dr. Kirkpatrick. In recent weeks, Administration officials have
said Secretary of State George P. Shultz was seeking to remove the post from
Cabinet status.

Speaks Seven Languages

The general said, in response to a question, ''My understanding is the position
is the same as it was in the case of my predecessor.''

Since 1981, General Walters, who speaks seven foreign languages, has served Mr.
Reagan as an Ambassador at Large. He has visited about 100 countries, the State
Department said, usually on secret missions.

A diplomat who shuns personal publicity, he has worked for five Administrations
in the last 40 years and has been involved in missions in Europe, the Middle
East, Africa, Asia, South America and Central America.

He said today that he considered his appointment to be the pinnacle of his long
career. ''It is a great honor to have received this mark of confidence,'' he
said.

In response to a question, he said: ''I think the United Nations is necessary
for the world. Otherwise, I wouldn't consider accepting this job.''

Discussing Dr. Kirkpatrick, one of the most promninent conservatives in the
Administration, he said: ''I think she's done a fantastic job. I think the
position of the United States today in the United Nations is quite different
from what is was four years ago.

''If I can do half as well,'' he said, ''I will be quite pleased.''

Kirkpatrick Leaves in March

Dr. Kirkpatrick is planning to leave the United Nations post in March and return
to Washington to resume her academic career. Although she had sought a
high-level foreign policy job in the Administration, she apparently was not
offered a post she wanted.

Although General Walters undertook many confidential journeys in recent years,
he said today that ''none of these missions have really been secret per se.''

He added: ''I've never traveled under false names or under disguise. I haven't
sought any publicity. I have come to the conclusion that there's no amount of
good that you can't do if you don't care who gets the credit for it.

''It's sometimes frustrating because I am not a modest man,'' he said, remarking
that his travels in the last four years have totaled about a million miles.

Was Deputy Chief of C.I.A.

The White House statement on his appointment said, ''His special assignments
included serving directly under Presidents Truman, Eisenhower and Nixon.''

General Walters was Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency under
Presidents Nixon and Ford. He played a minor part in the secret diplomacy ending
American involvement in Vietnam, and he also took part in negotiations leading
to the renewal of United States ties to China. He was an aide to W. Averell
Harriman at the Marshall Plan headquarters in Paris, and served as an assistant
to President Eisenhower on his foreign trips.

The three-star general, who retired from the Army in 1976 after 35 years'
service, has published memoirs, ''Silent Missions,'' on his dealings and
experiences with many world leaders.

In recent years, he went to Cuba to explore the possibility of improving
relations with Fidel Castro, and in 1982 he visited Argentina to explain why the
United States supported Britain in the conflict over the Falkland Islands.

Voiced Concern to D'Aubuisson

Last year his missions took him, insofar as is known, to El Salvador, Sri Lanka
and several African countries. The secret mission to El Savador was to voice
concern to the rightist leader, Roberto d'Aubuisson, about rumors of an
assassination attempt against the United States Ambassador, Thomas R. Pickering.
The general apparently asked Mr. D'Aubuisson to use his influence to halt any
such attempt.

General Walters is especially known for his linguistic skills. He speaks French,
Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, German, Dutch and Russian.

It has been reported that he preferred to slip into a country unannounced before
diplomatic discussions so he could ride buses and brush up on local slang.

He had told the White House that he would decline the United Nations post unless
it held Cabinet rank, Administration officials said. The White House
announcement said he, like Dr. Kirkpatrick, would serve on the National Security
Council as well as hold ''Cabinet rank.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
WALTERS, LONGTIME DIPLOMAT, GETS KIRKPATRICK POST AT U.N.

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Feb. 8


In ''Silent Missions,'' his memoir, Gen. Vernon A. Walters relates a
conversation he had at a reception in 1964 with the Soviet Ambassador to Brazil.
The Ambassador complained to General Walters, then the United States military
attache in Brazil, that Americans always wanted to speak English. Even when they
try to learn a foreign tongue, he continued, they suffer because they do not
have the Slavs' ear for languages.

General Walters, a gifted linguist, bluntly switched to Russian, asking him if
he would like to speak Portuguese instead. The Ambassador, insulted, replied,
''Walters, you may be good soldier, but diplomat you are not.''

Now Vernon Anthony Walters, 68 years old, the 6-foot-3-inch former soldier and
Ambassador at Large, will have the opportunity to prove his diplomatic skills as
successor to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick as chief American delegate to the United
Nations.



Interpreter to Presidents

The highly visible, Cabinet-level job will mean a new challenge for the man who
has made his reputation as a global trouble-shooter who does not call attention
to himself. General Walters speaks seven foreign languages, five of them
fluently, and has served part- time as interpreter to five Presidents.

Of his outspoken predecessor, the general said in a recent telephone interview:
''She's done a terrific job of restoring the position of the United States in
the U.N. Everyone has a different style, but it's the same President and
basically the same policy.''

Supporters of General Walters say they are confident he will bring both candor
and loyalty to the United Nations job.

''He's been everywhere in the world, speaks all the languages and can debate
very effectively, '' said William E. Colby, former Director of Central
Intelligence. ''When he worked for me, he was fearless in expressing his views
and totally loyal once a decision was made. I used him as a total alter ego.''

But critics assert that although he has been effective when acting under
instructions, he has never been called upon to craft policy or make major policy
judgments.

A practicing Roman Catholic and fervent anti-Communist, he is also an unabashed
American flag-waver who has called the Vietnam War ''one of the noblest and most
unselfish wars'' in American history. He says his world view is determined by
what he calls his ''certain idea about the United States - that it is the last
best hope for mankind.''

Human rights advocates, like Lawrence Birns of the Council on Hemispheric
Affairs, a private study group, have criticized what they characterize as his
lack of concern for human rights abuses and his long history of warm relations
with extreme right-wing military governments, such as the Pinochet Government in
Chile and Argentina's former military junta.

Some rights advocates say they recall his response to a reporter's question in
1981 on Guatemala's poor human rights record. He said: ''There are some problems
that are never resolved. One has to define a solution that respects a being's
right to live without fear. But as I see it, the best way to do that is not to
impose the ideas of one nation on top of another.''

Born in New York on Jan. 3, 1917, the youngest of three children, he attended
French and English Catholic schools but dropped out at the age of 16 to work in
his British-born father's insurance company.

He enlisted in the Army in 1941 and is fond of telling friends: ''Adolf Hitler
did at least one good deed in his life. He got me out of my father's insurance
company - with my father's blessing.''

Within a year he was a second lieutenant. As a bright aide who used his
linguistic abilities to befriend foreign generals and diplomats, he rose rapidly
through the ranks. In World War II, he was assigned to be a liaison officer with
the Brazilian forces fighting in the United States Fifth Army in Italy under
Gen. Mark Clark. His language abilities brought him to General Clark's
attention, and ultimately to the attention of Gen. Alfred M. Gunther, the Fifth
Army's chief of staff. He was aide-de-camp to General Clark during the
liberation of Rome.

From military attache in Rio de Janeiro and Paris, he rose to become a senior
officer of the Defense Intelligence Agency. After 35 years in the service, he
retired as a three-star general.

Although he may not have made history himself, he has certainly seen it
firsthand. He served as W. Averell Harriman's aide in the early years of the
cold war, accompanied President Truman on his historic meeting with a defiant
Gen. Douglas MacArthur and shuttled with President Eisenhower to a series of
summit meetings from Geneva to White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.

As translator for Vice President Nixon during his good-will tour of Latin
America in 1958, General Walters was cut in the mouth by broken glass when a mob
stoned their car in Caracas.

Later, as military attache in Paris, General Walters is remembered for smuggling
Henry A. Kissinger in and out of France for clandestine meetings with Le Duc Tho
of North Vietnam.

''He was great as our James Bond, getting us in and out secretly, even giving us
code names,'' said Winston Lord, president of the Council on Foreign Relations,
who accompanied Mr. Kissinger to the secret talks with the Vietnamese.

Just weeks after becoming deputy director of the C.I.A. under President Nixon,
General Walters carried out instructions from the White House chief of staff, H.
R. Haldeman, to warn the F.B.I. that the Watergate investigation could
compromise intelligence operations in Mexico. ''It simply did not occur to me
that the chief of staff to the President might be asking me to do someting that
was illegal or wrong,'' he wrote in his memoirs.

He sat out the Carter years, becoming a private consultant, including among his
clients an American company interested in selling arms to Morocco. He gave up
the lucrative work when President Reagan offered him the job of roving
Ambassador in 1981.

Since then, General Walters has visited 100 countries and logged an average of
10,000 miles a week as the Reagan Administration's chief trouble- shooter.

A lifelong bachelor who does not smoke, drinks little and has an acknowledged
weakness for good chocolates, General Walters combines straight talk with a
raconteur's charm. ''I've always felt I could get more done with no publicity,''
he said in the interview. ''Things will be different now, but basically if you
don't worry about who gets the credit, you can do a lot of good.''

''This is further than I ever expected to get,'' General Walters said of his new
job. ''Maybe I'm not so much of an amateur as the Soviet Ambassador thought I
was.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Vernon A. Walters and Bernard Kalb (page 5)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY SPEECH IS SHOWN TO JURY IN TRIAL FOR LIBEL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words


The image and voice of Robert F. Kennedy, disillusioned in early 1968 by the
course of the Vietnam War, filled the Federal courtroom yesterday that, for 17
weeks, has been the scene of the trial of Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel
suit against CBS.

Jurors and spectators watched and listened intently to a film clip of a February
1968 speech by the 42-year- old Senator in which he said the Tet offensive had
''finally shattered the mask of official illusion with which we have concealed
our true circumstances, even from ourselves.'' It was, he said only four months
before his death, ''a time for truth.''

The film was introduced in Federal District Court in Manhattan by CBS to support
the testimony of George Crile, the producer of the 1982 documentary that
prompted General Westmoreland's $120 million suit and one of the defendants in
it.

The broadcast - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - charged a
''conspiracy'' by the general's command in 1967 to show progress in the war by
understating the size and nature of Communist forces. The effect of this
''conscious effort,'' the documentary said, was to leave President Johnson and
American troops ''totally unprepared'' for the Tet offensive that began on Jan.
30, 1968.



Producer Ends Testimony

Mr. Crile, who completed his second and final appearance on the stand yesterday
by testifying about his ''state of mind'' during the preparation of the
documentary, said that Mr. Kennedy's speech was among the materials he reviewed
for the program. He told David Boies, the principal lawyer for CBS, that he
almost included portions of the speech in the broadcast.

Q. What was the significance, if any, to you of Mr. Kennedy's speech, Mr. Crile?

A. I think he raised a number of questions that have to be considered, and the
main one was the question: Who were we fighting if the estimates that were given
were to be believed?

Senator Kennedy, Mr. Crile said, had attempted to add up the figures on enemy
strength and losses after the Tet offensive, ''and he came up with an
irreconcilable result.''

''There wasn't any enemy if you accepted those figures,'' he said. ''And that
was the exact time when General Westmoreland was asking for an additional
200,000 Americans troops to come out to Vietnam.''

Testified for 11 Days

Including his first appearance as a ''hostile witness'' called by lawyers for
General Westmoreland, Mr. Crile testified for 11 days, the longest of any
witness in the trial before Judge Pierre N. Leval. In effect, Mr. Crile was
cross-examined during his direct testimony as a ''hostile witness.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from January
1964 to June 1968, was on the stand for nine days. The 70-year old plaintiff
contends that CBS defamed him in the program by saying he deliberately misled
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about enemy strength in the
months before the Tet offensive.

Yesterday, in one of the brief interim summations allowed by Judge Leval, Mr.
Boies challenged Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's chief lawyer, to question
Mr. Crile about ''those parts of the broadcast that are critical of General
Westmoreland and ask Mr. Crile whether he believes they are true.

''One of the things you have not heard,'' Mr. Boies told the jury, ''is a
specification of whatever the plaintiff believes is false.''

After a conference with the lawyers, initiated by Mr. Burt, Judge Leval told the
jury Mr. Boies's remarks were ''certainly appropriate.''

''On the other hand,'' the judge said, ''Mr. Burt is entitled to conduct his
case as he sees fit.''

Asked One Question

When Mr. Burt chose to put only one question to Mr. Crile yesterday, Mr. Boies,
in another interim summation, asked the jury to consider ''why it is'' that, if
General Westmoreland ''really believes'' there are false statements in the
broadcast about him, Mr. Burt did not pursue Mr. Crile further.

Mr. Burt responded with his own interim summation.

''I spent a lot of time asking Mr. Crile why he put in the broadcast what he put
in,'' Mr. Burt said. ''We've all been here a long time, and we're not fighting
over nothin'.''

Mr. Burt pointed to his client a few feet away. ''We've got a general over there
who spent his life in the military,'' he said. ''Take that broadcast, and you'll
have it with you, in context. It said that General Westmoreland lied to his
superiors and caused a lot of damage to a lot of people.''

Mr. Burt's only question on cross- examination yesterday was whether Mr. Crile
had told CBS executives after the broadcast that the Tet offensive was a
''terrific military victory for the United States.'' The lawyer showed Mr. Crile
notes taken by one of those executives during an internal CBS investigation of
the documentary in mid-1982.

Mr. Crile ackowledged that he made the remark, but he recalled that ''that was
only a small portion'' of what he had said then, and he observed that it was
followed in the notes by an ellipsis.

If you just counted dead bodies, the producer told the jury, the Tet offensive
''was a victory for us.'' But the real test of success, he said, is whether
''you break your opponent's will, like the Vietminh did to the French.'' And, in
those terms, he said, the Tet offensive was ''a body blow to the nerve center of
this country, a colossal defeat for us.''

Cites Meeting of 'Wise Men'

On direct examination, Mr. Crile reviewed some of the written materials he had
relied on in 1981, including a book about President Johnson and the war - ''The
Unmaking of a President'' - by Herbert Y. Schandler.

Mr. Schandler's book, Mr. Crile pointed out, cites a briefing on the Tet
offensive given by the military on March 25, 1968, to a group of Presidential
advisers informally called ''the wise men.'' Among the advisers was Arthur
Goldberg, then chief United States delegate to the United Nations, and Mr.
Schandler quoted him as having said to a general who listed enemy ''effectives''
at 230,000:

''Well, General, I'm not a great mathematician, but with 80,000 killed, and with
a wounded to killed ratio of 3 to 1, or 240,000 wounded, for a total of 320,000,
who the hell are we fighting?''

Mr. Crile said he called Mr. Goldberg before the broadcast and verified this
statement.

The speech of Senator Kennedy shown to the jury was given on Feb. 8, 1968, a
month before he announced his intention to seek the Democratic nomination for
President.

Mr. Kennedy said it was past time to re-evaluate American policy in Vietnam.
And, while he took issue with the military's assessment of enemy capabilities
even before the Tet offensive, he made a point very similiar to Mr. Goldberg's.

''I ask,'' he said, ''who is now doing the fighting?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN WHO DROVE ON SIDEWALK GUILTY OF MURDER AND ASSAULT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif., Feb. 8


A man who drove a speeding automobile down a crowded sidewalk here in July,
killing a tourist from New York and injuring dozens of other pedestrians, was
convicted today of first-degree murder and 48 counts of attempted murder.

Daniel Lee Young, 21 years old, of Inglewood, had pleaded not guilty by reason
of insanity. He has been diagnosed a paranoid schizophrenic and has a history of
mental problems.

Mr. Young now faces proceedings to determine whether he was sane at the time of
the assault. If he is found to have been sane, he could be sentenced to prison
for the rest of his life. If he is found to have been insane, he will be sent to
a state mental hospital.

Mr. Young admitted in the trial that he ran down the pedestrians the evening of
July 27 in Westwood, a shopping and movie theater district near the site of the
1984 summer Olympics.

'Tonight I Got Back'

He said he was angry because he had never been paid billions of dollars owed him
for songs he believed he had written, under orders from Congress, for such rock
stars as Prince and Michael Jackson and for the hit films ''Ghostbusters'' and
''Purple Rain.''

''Tonight I got back,'' Mr. Young told the police in a confession taped shortly
after his arrest.

Mr. Young told the police he had ''meant to kill as many people as possible'' in
order to ''go to court and settle this thing.'' He said he had planned to drive
another block or two, hitting more pedestrians, but was stopped when the car
smashed into a bus kiosk.

48 Attempted Murder Charges

A 15-year-old tourist from New York City, Eileen Deutsch, was killed. Fifty-
four other pedestrians were injured, and most of them testified at the trial
about their injuries, which included skull fractures and broken limbs.

One of the most seriously injured was Nghi Truong, a 22-year-old immigrant from
Vietnam who fled to the United States in 1978. She lost her right leg and was
paralyzed from the waist down.

A 2-year-old girl in a stroller was swept out her mother's hands as Mr. Young's
car roared past. She spent 10 days in a coma and remains paralyzed on the right
side, unable to speak.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SAM A. JAFFE, 55; REPORTER DID WORK FOR ABC AND CBS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 45, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 329 words


Sam A. Jaffe, a former television correspondent who covered the United Nations
for CBS News and reported from Moscow, Hong Kong and Vietnam for ABC News, died
of lung cancer yesterday at his home in Bethesda, Md. He was 55 years old.

In 1976, Mr. Jaffe told a United States Senate committee that he had reported
regularly to the Federal Bureau of Investigation on activities of the Soviet
delegation to the United Nations in the late 1950's and early 1960's, when he
worked for CBS. At the time there were many charges that intelligence agencies
had infiltrated news organizations.

Mr. Jaffe denied ever taking money from the F.B.I. and said he never worked for
the Central Intelligence Agency or any foreign agency. He said he had been
unable to find a job in journalism after leaving ABC in 1969 because of a false
charge by a Soviet defector that he had once been a Soviet agent.

He spent years trying to clear his name by obtaining classified files under his
name. A Federal judge in 1983 ruled that all derogatory references to him in the
files either came from discredited sources or consisted of gossip or inuendo.

His uncle, the actor Sam Jaffe, was unable to find work for years in the 1950's
because he was accused by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin,
of associating with Communists.

Sam Adason Jaffe was born and grew up in San Francisco, graduated from the
University of California at Berkeley and attended Columbia University. He was a
reporter for the International New Service in the late 1940's, was a marine in
Korea in 1950 and 1951 and was a Life magazine reporter until he joined CBS at
the United Nations in 1955.

Switching to ABC in 1961, he was a correspondent in Moscow until 1965 and in
Hong Kong and Vietnam until 1969.

He is survived by his wife, the former Elizabeth Jeune Georgeson; a son, David,
of New York City; and three daughters, Linda Franklin, of Katonah, N.Y., and
Deborah and Leah, of Bethesda.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam Jaffe

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS RUSSIANS TRY TO MAKE SATELLITE OF CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


A new Administration white paper says the Soviet Union, using Cuba, is trying to
turn all of Central America into a satellite of the Eastern bloc.

An introduction by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, citing papers seized
in Grenada, quotes Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko as saying that the region
is ''a boiling cauldron'' ripe for ''revolutionary expansionism,'' and that Cuba
and Nicaragua are ''living examples for countries in that part of the world.''

The paper, which has not been made public, was prepared as part of an effort to
persuade Congress to approve the Administration's new aid package for Central
America.  A copy was obtained from sources outside Government, but senior
Administration officials elaborated on its assertions. It is to be printed and
given widespread distribution soon.

Since 1981, the Administration has contended that the Soviet Union and Cuba were
behind several Communist insurgencies in Central America, and it has published
several white papers to mobilize public and Congressional support.

Administration critics have been skeptical about the conclusions of some of the
papers, particular the first one, in 1981, charging connections between the
Soviet Union and the Salvadoran guerrillas.

A senior Government official who is familiar with much of the intelligence used
to prepare the new paper said, ''Sometimes they make more out the intelligence
information than is warranted, in my view.''

The latest paper contends that the Soviet Union and Cuba are actively promoting
Communist revolution in every country of Central America except Costa Rica, and
in Colombia as well. It provides new details to support those claims but in most
cases does not explain the source of the information. An Administration official
said that was to protect intelligence sources and methods of operation.

''At the moment,'' the paper says, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Colombia
''appear to be be high on the Cuban priority list.'' Nicaragua, it says, is
already a virtual Soviet satellite, a charge the Sandinista Government has
denied.

''There is no doubt,'' the paper adds, ''that the countries of Central America
and the Carribean are at a critical juncture. But that can be the impetus for
the United States to devote the resources necessary to assist the countries of
the region.''

The Administration's budget proposal, announced last week, requests more than
$1.1 billion in military and economic aid for Central America. In addition, Mr.
Reagan, in his State of the Union Message Wednesday, urged Congress to renew aid
to the Nicaraguan rebels, whom he called ''freedom fighters.''

If the United States does not continue and accelerate its military and economic
aid to Central America, the paper asserts, ''the United States could be faced
with these developments:''


- ''A perception in the world that the Soviet Union can establish a military
presence anywhere it chooses, and that the United States is powerless to impede
Soviet agression, even on its own border.


- ''Far more complicated defense planning to keep open the sea lanes through
which pass half the U.S. imported petroleum and more than half of the resupplies
and reinforcements needed by the North Atlantic Treaty Alliance in time of war.


- ''Expanded centers for terrorist operations against the United States.''

Seized Documents Cited

Central to the Administration's case are several documents seized after the
United States-led invasion of Grenada in October 1983. One of them, which has
not been disclosed before, describes a meeting beween Mr. Gromyko and Maurice
Bishop, who was Grenada's Prime Minister until he and five of his deputies were
slain by radical members of his own party in the days before the invasion.

The meeting took place in April 1983, and afterward the Soviet press reported
that ''much attention was given to the dangerous development of the situation in
Central America and the Caribbean, where the U.S.A. persists in pursuing its
hegemonist policy.''

The Grenadian document said Mr. Gromyko ''warned the Grenadians to move
carefully in their revolutionary expansionism so as not to signal their plans to
the 'imperialists,' '' the white paper says.

In Nicaragua, the paper says, ''the mask of Sandinismo has slipped away,''
adding, ''What is revealed is the mask of Communism.''

Reiterating a longstanding Administration theme, the paper says ''this newborn
Marxist-leaning state has received more firepower, by far'' from the Soviet
Union and its allies ''than all her neighbors in the region combined.''

Lists Soviet Arms Supplies

The Soviet Union has recently provided Nicaragua with 110 medium battle tanks,
it says, 30 light amphibious tanks, 200 armored personnel carriers, 70
long-range artillery pieces and nearly 500 rocket launchers, howitzers and
anti-aircraft guns.

Nicaragua's recent acquisition of river-crossing equipment, the paper contends,
''implicitly threatens Honduras and Costa Rica, whose borders are mostly defined
by rivers.''

The paper describes several military-related construction projects in Nicaragua,
costing several hundred million dollars and paid for by the Soviet Union or
Cuba. ''Such a large investment in Nicaragua indicates that Soviet leaders
consider that country an important complement to Cuba in the Soviet's
opportunistic strategy to increase pressure on the southern border of the
U.S.,'' it says.

The Administration has often asserted that Nicaragua has been the main supplier
of arms to Salvadoran rebels. But it has been unwilling to make public much of
the evidence it says it has gathered to support that claim.

Rifles Traced to Vietnam

As one piece of evidence, the paper reasserts that ''the bulk of the M-16 rifles
that the Salvadoran military has captured from the guerrillas have been traced
by serial number to shipments by the U.S. to South Vietnam'' more than a decade
ago, and which were ''consequently captured by the Communist forces after the
fall.''

The paper also describes some of the supply routes and methods it contends are
used to deliver rifles and other materiel to the Salvadoran guerrillas. An
Administration official said only that the information had come from
''intelligence reports.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBELS REPORT ATTACKING VIETNAMESE FROM REAR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: PHNUM THMEI, Cambodia, Feb. 9


Khmer Rouge guerrillas have replied to the Vietnamese Army's attempt to pin them
against the Thai border by moving to attack the Vietnamese from the rear, Thai
military officials and guerrilla leaders said today.

The Communist Khmer Rouge are staging ambushes and are trying to stall Hanoi's
dry-season offensive until monsoon rains bog down their heavy weapons, a senior
Thai military officer said.

The officer said that while Vietnam had used artillery to pound Khmer Rouge
positions, its ground forces had not been able to enter key areas.

The Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, speaking at the Phnum Thmei enclave, 12
miles southeast of the key Thai border town of Aranyaprathet, said: ''The
Vietnamese are trying to prevent us from going inside, but they have failed. We
still remain and are moving forward.''

He said the guerrillas, undaunted by the Vietnamese offensive, had staged their
deepest penetrations of the Cambodian interior since the war started six years
ago.

Mr. Khieu Samphan and other Khmer Rouge leaders were on hand to welcome Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, who crossed from the Thai frontier to the cheers and applause
of about 1,000 Cambodian villagers.

Price Sihanouk, who heads a three- party resistance coalition that includes the
Khmer Rouge, vowed to fight until Cambodia was liberated from the Vietnamese,
and he repeated an earlier warning that China had promised to teach Vietnam ''a
second lesson.''

He said China, which fought a border war with Vietnam in 1979, would once again
hit back at Vietnam. ''The only question is when,'' he said.

Prince Sihanouk made his two-hour visit to Phnum Thmei to receive the
credentials of Ambassadors from Senegal, Bangladesh, Mauritania and North Korea
to his coalition, which is recognized by the United Nations.

 Vietnam Aids U.S. Team

BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 9 (AP) - Vietnam has given a visiting United States
technical team new information on American servicemen listed as missing in
action from the Vietnam War, the Hanoi radio reported today.

The radio said the specialists also visited a site in Ha Son Bihn Province where
an American warplane crashed during the war. Hanoi is in that province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
'BIRDY' WATCHING HAS ITS REWARDS

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1803 words


In all the rush of movie openings at the year's end, and with all of the
publicity about the staggering popularity of ''Beverly Hills Cop'' and the
possible financial disasters of ''Cotton

Club'' and ''Dune,'' a couple of most interesting and entertaining films have
been in danger of being overlooked. They are ''Birdy,'' the screen adaptation of
William Wharton's fine, eccentric 1979 novel, and ''The Flamingo Kid,'' a
familiar sort of coming-of-age comedy but one that is so witty and decent as to
appear almost avant-garde.

Of the two, ''Birdy'' is the one to get to first, if only to keep it from
slipping off into that limbo inhabited by so-called cult movies that can only be
seen in theaters at midnight. Even with the competition from the new,
mid-February releases - including 13 openings in New York next week - ''The
Flamingo Kid'' will, I trust, be staying around for some time to come.

''Birdy,'' directed by Alan Parker from a screenplay by Sandy Kroopf and Jack
Behr, is so good and intelligent and moving - and so difficult to categorize in
any succinct way - that it may be time for an upward reevaluation of all the
work by this consistently idiosyncratic, not conventionally likable English film
director.

In the manner of ''Birdy,'' the book as well as the film, Mr. Parker is not
easily pigeonholed, which is something that tends to put off critics who feel
most comfortable when attaching labels to directors and making them stick. So
far, each of Mr. Parker's movies has been so different from the one preceding it
that any such labeling has been difficult indeed.

After a successful career in television commercials in England, Mr. Parker made
his theatrical film debut nine years ago with the improbably funny and stylish
''Bugsy Malone,'' an ebullient satire of 1920's gangster movies played by a cast
of precocious children, including the 14-year-old Jodie Foster. The idea was
just whimsical enough to make most of us cringe in anticipation. It sounded like
an Our Gang Comedy revisited on the Big Screen, with children running around
miming adult behavior in a fashion whose time has long since gone.

However, by some sleight-of-hand, with his own mysterious talent and with lots
of help from his associates, including Paul Williams, who wrote the movie's
excellent score, Mr. Parker pulled it off. ''Bugsy Malone'' turned out to be an
unexpected lark, played not exactly straight but with the same kind of
understated, mock gravity that made the stage version of Sandy Wilson's ''Boy
Friend'' so much fun.



Having thus established himself as a satirist - Mr. Parker wrote the screenplay
for ''Bugsy'' as well as directing it - he pulled a fast one on all of us by
making ''Midnight Express'' (1978), the brutally hair-raising story about a
young American drug smuggler in a Turkish prison. The movie, a big popular
success, was expertly acted by Brad Davis, Bo Hopkins, Randy Quaid and John
Hurt, but one couldn't help feeling that there was something profoundly,
gratuitously nasty about its sensationalism. The very slickness of the
melodrama, which had the effect of reinforcing the brutality, obscured the
director's technical virtuosity.

The following year, Mr. Parker moved in another direction entirely with
''Fame,'' a ''Chorus Line''-like musical about students at New York's High
School for the Performing Arts and a movie that appeared to have no relation to
either of his earlier films except in its stylishness, which is not necessarily
a nice word. After ''Fame'' there were, in quick sucession, ''Shoot the Moon''
and ''Pink Floyd: the Wall,'' both released in 1982.

I never did see ''Pink Floyd,'' a musical film, but with ''Shoot the Moon'' it
was apparent that Mr. Parker must have something more going for him than the
kind of brisk modishness we often mistrust for its associations to television
hucksterism at its best. ''Shoot the Moon,'' with a good script by Bo Goldman,
is a small domestic drama about the bitter end of a marriage, in which the
husband and wife alternately refuse to acknowledge the painful facts of their
lives.

Like the Parker films that preceded it, ''Shoot the Moon'' has occasional,
ill-chosen moments that threaten to neutralize all the good things in it.
However, it also gives evidence of the director's guiding intelligence, which
successfully rivets the attention and gives the film a clean-cut, emotional
definition. The moods of the Parker films may vary wildly, but there's seldom
any doubt that a Parker film is not the vision of the person in control of the
production, that is, the director.

This statement might amuse the director who, in an interview a few years ago,
spoke somewhat acidly of the auteur theory and of critics who automatically
credit the director with having done everything in a movie, good and bad, as if
assuming that the production of any film is not the complicated collaborative
process it actually is. Up to a point, he is right to be skeptical.

However, there are some directors whose personalities are so strong that it's
apparent that their choices - if not their actual inventions - have given the
film the shape it possesses. It now seems possible to say that Mr. Parker is one
of these, even though it's not possible to isolate the obsession that carries
over from one Parker film to the next. That obsession might just possibly be the
desire to investigate a story that interests him, no matter what the theme or
point, so thoroughly that we in the audience eventually come to share his
interests. That's called craftsmanship, but craftsmanship in the service of junk
is quickly forgotten, and no matter how one feels about any particular Parker
film, not one of them would qualify as junk.

The most distinguishing feature of any Parker film is his consistently excellent
work with actors, which involves initial casting choices as well as obtaining
performances from those actors when they're on the set. I can't think of one
second-rate performance in any of his films, with the exception of those given
by some of the smaller members of the cast of ''Bugsy Malone.'' ''Shoot the
Moon'' remains memorable not only for the performances of Diane Keaton and
Albert Finney in the central roles, but also for those of Peter Weller, Karen
Allen and an extremely young actress named Dana Hill, as the child most damaged
by the separation of her parents.



''Birdy'' is similarly distinguished by the leading performances of Matthew
Modine, as the catatonic Vietnam veteran who wants to escape an irrational world
by becoming a bird, an oddball who is as tough and determined as he is
sweet-natured, and Nicolas Cage, as Birdy's battle-scarred childhood friend, Al.
It's Al who attempts to bring Birdy back to reality, to save himself as well as
Birdy. As fine as both Mr. Modine and Mr. Cage are, however, their work does not
exist in a vacuum. It's supported by a stunning cast of actors including John
Harkins as Birdy's Army psychiatrist, Sandy Baron as Al's father, George Buck as
Birdy's father, Karen Young as Birdy's nurse in the psychiatric hospital, and
Dolores Sage, a nonprofessional, as Birdy's mother.

What, exactly, is ''Birdy'' about? I'm still not sure and I've now seen it
twice, appreciating it even more the second time than the first. It is - I think
- as much about growing up as ''The Flamingo Kid.'' ''Birdy,'' however, is told
in terms that describe far more poignantly the unspeakable, unrecognized terrors
of coming of age, of arriving at that point in awareness when one accepts
irrationality as the universal, governing system.

Mr. Parker and the screenwriters have done a remarkable job in fitting the
source material to the screen, making cinematic what, in the original, is a
series of interior monologues alternating between Birdy and Al. The film, which
opens and closes in Birdy's hospital, is seen through interlocking flashbacks
that, also remarkably, never give one the old flashback feeling, roughly
translated as ''Oh, oh, here we go again.''

''Birdy'' is a mystery story that successfully moves forward even while looking
backward, sometimes scarily and sometimes to hugely comic effect, all the while
exploring the depth of one particular friendship. Among his other achievements,
Mr. Parker shows us what is, in effect, a love scene between a young man and a
canary without allowing us a single titter, and when Birdy, at last, achieves
his release and ''flies,'' the sequence has the breathtaking quality of a dream
one doesn't want to end. Levitation is not an unknown art, and ''Birdy'' makes
it absolutely reasonable.

Catch it before it gets away.



''The Flamingo Kid,'' directed by Garry Marshall and written by him and Neal
Marshall, who is no relation, is, perhaps, the perfect comedy for the Yuppie
era, being, ultimately, a most winning and funny send-up of the values
associated with today's young, materially inclined achievers. It's set in the
summer of 1963, still thought of as a time of idealism, so it is not
anachronistic. To be perfectly frank, it has the reassuring shape of a sit- com.
However, the quality of the situations and of the comedy is of high order as it
recounts the adventures of Jeffrey Willis (Matt Dillon), an earnest, bright
18-year-old Brooklynite, the son of a plumber who takes pride in his job, as he
learns about life while working as a cabana boy at ''the El Flamingo Club'' at
Far Rockaway.

Will Jeffrey's head be turned by the glamorous life in which he participates at
the El Flamingo? Will he decide that the members of his family, especially his
father, are hopelessly old-fashioned when compared to the nouveaux riches at the
beach club? Will he have an idyllic affair with the kind of blond beauty that is
only bred in Southern California? Will he eventually come to his senses?

You've been hiding under a rock if you don't know all the answers. The surprise
of ''The Flamingo Kid'' is not in what happens but in how, as well as in the
sharply written and acted roles, beginning with Mr. Dillon's - his best
performance to date - and including every member of the large cast, especially
Richard Crenna, Jessica Walter, Janet Jones (as the California dream), and
Hector Elizondo (as Jeffrey's dad).

Garry Marshall, who created such hit TV series as ''Happy Days'' and ''Mork and
Mindy,'' is clearly a very funny man as well as a very efficient filmmaker. One
of the many pleasures of ''The Flamingo Kid'' is its terseness. Characters and
situations are established with the kind of swift economy I associate with the
old two-reel comedies when there simply wasn't time to waste.

Not since Elaine May's ''Heartbreak Kid,'' written by Neil Simon, has there been
as wise and as satisfying an American comedy of ethnic manners as ''The Flamingo
Kid.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS ;

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman, Caroline Rand Herron and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


Intelligence AideTestifies AgainstWestmoreland



A two-star general who served as the chief of intelligence in Vietnam for two
years testified against his former commander last week. Maj. Gen. Joseph A.
McChristian told the jury in the 17-week-old CBS libel trial that Gen. William
C. Westmoreland had delayed reporting estimates of higher enemy strengths to
Washington with the explanation, ''If I send that cable to Washington, it will
create a political bombshell.''

The testimony was elicited by CBS attorneys to support the charge in the 1982
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that the former
United States commander in Vietnam understated North Vietnamese and Vietcong
strength in 1967. His purpose, according to the documentary, was to hold back
evidence that indicated the war was not progressing favorably.

General Westmoreland, who maintains that he delayed passing along the estimates
to his superiors only until he had had a chance to review them, is suing CBS for
$120 million.

General McChristian is the highest-ranking officer to be called by CBS. Holding
up a homemade hand grenade of the sort, he said, that was commonly used by the
Vietcong's self-defense forces, he took issue with General Westmoreland's
testimony that the part-time forces were not a military threat and could not be
counted accurately. He called them a vital part of the enemy's defense.

Under vigorous cross-examination that brought out some discrepancies between his
trial testimony and his previous accounts of the incident, General McChristian
held to his position that it was ''improper'' to delay troop estimates because
of political considerations.

During his five hours of testifying, he kept his eyes averted from General
Westmoreland, seated a few feet away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM THE PULPITS TO THE BARRICADES

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


In the 1960's and 70's religious leaders were prominent among those who marched
for civil rights and an end to the Vietnam War. Today, after a period of
relative quiet, social and political activism by church figures is again on the
rise. Now the causes include the welfare of illegal aliens from Central America
and the fight against racial segregation in South Africa.

''Under the Reagan Administration, there has been a coalition of issues,'' says
Thomas Fox, editor of the National Catholic Reporter, an independent liberal
journal. ''One is budget cuts and the harm they are doing to the poor. Another
is Central America and the harm our nation's policies are doing to those poor
countries. Third is the arms build-up and the harm to ourselves and the entire
planet.''

Often, church officials say, the decision to engage an issue is a local rather
than a national initiative. ''It isn't the '70s, that's for sure,'' says Paul
Moore Jr., Episcopal Bishop of New York and a leading activist over the years.
''You just can't jump on a movement these days. The movements aren't out there
in the same way. Social action has to be more self-generated.''

The Rev. D. Douglas Roth, a Lutheran minister who is serving a jail term for
refusing to obey the order by his superiors that he step down as his church's
pastor, exemplifies the local nature of some of today's protests. Pastor Roth
had made Trinity Lutheran Church in Clairton, Pa., a champion of the large
numbers of unemployed workers in the Pittsburgh area. He and other ministers
accused big corporations, including Mellon National Bank and U.S. Steel, of
failing to do enough to create work for the unemployed. The campaign has divided
local churches, with many parishioners pressing Lutheran authorities for Pastor
Roth's ouster.

But some issues are more than local. Concern over South Africa, for example, has
existed at the highest church levels for decades, but the awarding of the 1984
Nobel Peace Prize to South African Bishop Desmond Tutu, a leading opponent of
his government's racial laws, gave fresh energy to the cause. Religious leaders
have been prominent among the demonstrators outside the South African Embassy in
Washington. ''The church's role has been affirmed and people in the churches
feel good about it,'' says the Rev. Arie Brouwer, eneral secretary of the
National Council of Churches.

Politicals or Illegals?

The cause of Central Ameri ans has likewise been gaining increasing support.
Scores of churches have declared their willingness to shelter those hey consider
re ugees from political oppression. They invoke the historic concept that
fugitives may find safety within a place of worship. The Government counters
that the Central Americans are not political refugees but illegal aliens who
have come here simply to better their economic fortunes. ''This is an alien
smuggling conspiracy,'' said Donald M. Reno Jr., the Assistnt United States
Attorney who is the leading prosecutor in the cases in Arizona.

In December, 16 church workers were indicted for providing sanctuary, touching
off a debate over church-state issues. United States Attorney A. Melvin McDonald
said in announcing the indictments of the church workers that ''merely because
they wear the garb of the clergy, they have no greater or no lesser rights than
anyone else.'' The indictment was condemned by several church groups, including
the National Council of Churches and the United States Catholic Conference, and
those offering sanctuary said they would continue to challenge the Government's
interpretation of the law.

The new upsurge of activism, grounded in a view of justice that ties together
domestic and international concerns, recalls the position of the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr. that racial bias in this country was connected to America's role
in the Vietnam War.

''There is greater consciousness among a lot of church people that there are
some kinds of injustices that must be protested wherever they are,'' says Dr.
Donald L. Shriver Jr., president of Union Theological Seminary. He discerns a
wider recognition among church people that ''religious ethics sometimes compel
them to stand against the civil law.''

Opposition to the Reagan Administration is seen by activists as a major rallying
point. ''There is a kind of decency revolt against the mean-spirited policies of
the Administration,'' says Mr. Brouwer. ''People are appealing to religious
convictions to preserve an American sense of human dignity.''

The Administration has responded to this sort of criticism by saying that the
poor have been deprived of dignity by social programs that have made them
dependent on the state and that by encouraging individual initiative, it is
seeking to bolster a sense of dignity.

Though religious activists welcome the quickening pace of social involvement,
they recognize the popularity of the Administration's approach. ''The last
election,'' Mr. Fox observes, ''shows all these forces of dissent together don't
amount to much.'' But, he goes on, ''regardless of the outcome of any election,
I think those forces have shown they are here to stay. They will ferment and
grow. They have to be reckoned with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Lutheran pastor embracing Salvadoran refugees

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STOCKMAN TOOK HIS SHOT, AN IT'S STILL RICOCHETING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


WASHINGTON

THE swift knife and sharp tongue of budge directo David Stock n have henaced g
ld number of sacred cows. Few have protested as loudly ab vetera s group did
last week hen he alled e $18 b'llion- Jear military retirement system ''a
scandal.'' The outcry ll but rowned out the rotests of farm rs and Aducator ,
whom, in a busy week of castigating, Mr. Stockman had also characterized as
greedy special pleaders.

The attack on military pensions was so incendiary, in part, because of how it
was phrased. ''The institutional forces in the militar ,'' Mr. Stockman declared
to Congress, ''are more concerned about protecting their retirement benefits
than they are a out protecting the security of the American people.'' The
outcries of wounded patriotism included references to Mr. Stockm n's being excus
d from military service during the Vietnam War because he was a student at
Harvard Z- School. The next day, a udget office spokesman said Mr. Stockman had
not meant to demean the men and women in niform only t vent h !  st tion a a
program that remains invio able wh n almo everyt ing el as b t.  3ew at [loye
offer/ lik of t Penagon's ension lan, G pro des r I en t hal ay af 20 s of vice
Q t enef aded a nually foK fla . T ensiomay be l h: ical ire ter ean $ 6 a 1 a I
tenant colonel $26,028.  ut they provi e a good fina l un inni K a , V 1

ost + r K ve the service when they are in their early orties. Not a f w of th m
put tYZ.  rience ;=I or def = t actors

The system evolved wh n career milita y pay was poor. Now, by offici estimates,
it 's withi few perce age po hts of comparable civilian work. But wha' was a
consolat on prize has be ome an ntitle nt.

efende say th pensi is still justified compensation for a job entailing tr el,
family sep ation, nd, po''ntially, physi l dange . Sena lr Barr M. Goldwater,
prominent among the objecters to Mr. Stockman's sta'ement, escribe it as 'the si
ver rung at th top of 'he ladder.'' The Pentagon says that in todays
career-oriented military, the 20 ear pe sion ke ps many fficer and en sted
personnel from dropping out after 10 years. Critics say that it virtual y ass
res the will a ter 20 t wh n they ave needed leadership and technical skills,
and keeps a lot of deadwood desk officers hanging around marking off the days
until they can move the trailer home to Sun City.

A suc ession of studi s, including on last yAar by a Pentago commission, has
suggested reshaping the system. Most call for making it less attrac ive to etire
b fore 30 years; ome sug est adding inducements for people with needed skills to
stay on. But in the past the ve erans' rotests have co vinced ongress and the
Pentagon's civilian overseers that change was too complex and politically unrew
rding. ''If we ere starting from ground zero, we might propose a different
system,'' Lawrence J. Kor , Assistant Sec etary of Defens for manpower, baid
las' week. ''But the transition might not be worth it.''

This year ay be differeLt. For one thin , the ta get s grown so large. At $17.8
billion for 1986, pensions will eat up one-fourth of the Pe tagon's personn l
budget. And c itics h ve ascended to powerful positions. Pension changes have
long been a pet proj'ct of Represent tive Les Aspin the new airm h of the House
Armed Services Committee. Mr. Stockman, in his recurring role as the Cassandra
of the Reagan Administration, may have prodded the process along. Another
question in Washington last week was whether he also had hastened his own
retirement. Asked if he shared Mr. Stockman's views, the President said: ''No. I
hav to thi k this s a lit'le dif I t th n any other pension program you want to
name.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Budget director David A. Stockman

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS IN SUMMARY ;

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


Walters NamedTo U.N. Post

Conservatives were also happy not to lose an outpost at the United Nations. To
replace Dr. Kirkpatrick as chief delegate, the President named Gen. Vernon A.
Walters, who has a similar outlook though a greatly different background and
training. Dr. Kirkpatrick is an academic, General Walters a military,
intelligence and language expert who has spent much of his 44-year career on
discreet, often shadowy missions in various trouble spots around the world.

At 68, General Walters enters the diplomatic limelight for almost the first
time. His previous functions ranged from interpreting for Presidents at meetings
with other heads of state to reading the riot act in private to Roberto
d'Aubuisson, the Salvadoran rightist, who was suspected of plotting the murder
of an American Ambassador. His involvement in secret dealings, such as the
behind-the-scenes talks that Henry Kissinger conducted in Paris to end the
Vietnam War, earned him comparisons with James Bond.

In the past, Secretary of State George P. Shultz had been reported opposed to
continuing to accord cabinet rank for the United Nations post so as to establish
greater control, but the general said he expected to have the same position as
Dr. Kirkpatrick. Even so, the former ambassador-at-large under Mr. Shultz is
considered less independent-minded than Dr. Kirkpatrick.

''I do not intend to be just a messenger boy,'' he told reporters, ''but I do
not intend to make difficulties for the policymakers of the United States,'' he
said. But in any of the seven languages he knows, he is expected, like Dr.
Kirkpatrick, to espouse a tough line against leftist insurgency and Soviet
expansionism in the third world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Vernon A. Walters

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STOCKMAN TOOK HIS SHOT, AND IT'S STILL RICOCHETING

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE swift knife and sharp tongue of budget director David A. Stockman have
menaced a good number of sacred cows. Few have protested as loudly as veterans
groups did last week when he called the $18 billion-a-year military retirement
system ''a scandal.'' The outcry all but drowned out the protests of farmers and
educators, whom, in a busy week of castigating, Mr. Stockman had also
characterized as greedy special pleaders.

The attack on military pensions was so incendiary, in part, because of how it
was phrased. ''The institutional forces in the military,'' Mr. Stockman declared
to Congress, ''are more concerned about protecting their retirement benefits
than they are about protecting the security of the American people.'' The
outcries of wounded patriotism included references to Mr. Stockman's being
excused from military service during the Vietnam War because he was a student at
Harvard Divinity School. The next day, a budget office spokesman said Mr.
Stockman had not meant to demean the men and women in uniform, only to vent his
frustration at a program that remains inviolable when almost everything else has
been cut.

Few private employers offer the likes of the Pentagon's pension plan, which
provides retirement at half pay after 20 years of service, with the benefits
adjusted annually for inflation. The pensions may not be lavish: A typical
retired master sergeant gets $10,716 a year, a retired lieutenant colonel
$26,028. But they provide a good financial underpinning for a second career, and
most military retirees leave the service when they are in their early forties.
Not a few of them put their experience to work for defense contractors.

The system evolved when career military pay was poor. Now, by official
estimates, it is within a few percentage points of comparable civilian work. But
what was a consolation prize has become an entitlement.

Defenders say the pension is still justified compensation for a job entailing
travel, family separation, and, potentially, physical danger. Senator Barry M.
Goldwater, prominent among the objecters to Mr. Stockman's statement, described
it as ''the silver rung at the top of the ladder.'' The Pentagon says that in
todays career-oriented military, the 20-year pension keeps many officers and
enlisted personnel from dropping out after 10 years. Critics say that it
virtually assures they will after 20, just when they have needed leadership and
technical skills, and keeps a lot of deadwood desk officers hanging around
marking off the days until they can move the trailer home to Sun City.

A succession of studies, including one last year by a Pentagon commission, has
suggested reshaping the system. Most call for making it less attractive to
retire before 30 years; some suggest adding inducements for people with needed
skills to stay on. But in the past, the veterans' protests have convinced
Congress and the Pentagon's civilian overseers that change was too complex and
politically unrewarding. ''If we were starting from ground zero, we might
propose a different system,'' Lawrence J. Korb, Assistant Secretary of Defense
for manpower, said last week. ''But the transition might not be worth it.''

This year may be different. For one thing, the target has grown so large. At
$17.8 billion for 1986, pensions will eat up one-fourth of the Pentagon's
personnel budget. And critics have ascended to powerful positions. Pension
changes have long been a pet project of Representative Les Aspin, the new
chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. Mr. Stockman, in his recurring
role as the Cassandra of the Reagan Administration, may have prodded the process
along. Another question in Washington last week was whether he also had hastened
his own retirement. Asked if he shared Mr. Stockman's views, the President said:
''No. I have to think this is a little different than any other pension program
you want to name.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Stockman

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


CHILDHOOD, by Nathalie Sarraute. (George Braziller, $8.95.) In 71 vignettes the
French novelist Nathalie Sarraute, born in 1900, recounts her early years.
Reviewing ''Childhood'' last year, Roger Shattuck wrote here: ''In these
beautifully paced pages the reader can watch a literary sensibility hunting
persistently for that most ridiculed of literary prizes: the truth - about what
happened, particularly to ourselves.''

THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN, THE DAY OF THE SCORPION, THE TOWERS OF SILENCE and

 A DIVISION OF THE SPOILS, by Paul Scott. (Avon, $4.50 each.) These novels,
which chronicle the British raj, or rule, in India, are being reissued
individually and as a boxed set, perhaps as a result of the artistic success of
the television series ''The Jewel in the Crown,'' based on all four.
(Collectively, the four, published from 1966 to 1975, have been titled ''The Raj
Quartet.'') Reviewing the final volume, ''A Division of the Spoils,'' Webster
Schott wrote here: ''One of the longest and most successfully executed works of
19th-century fiction written in the 20th century simply stops. It stops rather
than reaches a conclusion because Scott is a man of reason as well as emotion.
There is no resolution, except through the erosion of time, to the human
conflicts and physical contradictions of India.''

LET THE TRUMPET SOUND: The Life of Martin Luther King Jr., by Stephen B. Oates.
(Mentor/New American Library, $4.95.) This biography draws on interviews,
previously unpublished material at Presidential libraries and holdings of the
Martin Luther King Jr. Center in Atlanta. In 1982, Eric Foner said in The Book
Review that in ''Let The Trumpet Sound,'' Stephen B. Oates, who had focused
primarily on the public man, had written ''the most comprehensive account of
King's life yet published,'' and clarified the roles of prominent contemporary
personalities in King's life.

AN IMAGINARY LIFE, by David Malouf. (George Braziller, $6.95.) In A.D. 8 the
Emperor Augustus exiled Ovid, the Roman poet, to a barely civilized Black Sea
village. In 1978 our reviewer, Katha Pollitt, called David Malouf's ''An
Imaginary Life'' ''a work of unusual intelligence and imagination,'' a sort of
''fantasia on what Ovid's life in exile might have been and, as time went by,
became, as the quintessentially civilized man of letters was forced to come to
terms with a harsh, pre- rational, thoroughly alien world.''

THE CONQUEST OF AMERICA: The Question of the

Other, by Tzvetan Todorov. (Colophon/Harper & Row, $6.95.) This book explores
what happens when two different cultures meet. The French writer and critic,
Tzvetan Todorov, approaches the subject as a semiotician, a student of signs,
interested in the systems of signification through which cultures articulate the
world and enable it to have meaning. Spain's conquest of America in the 16th
century, he says, led to ''the greatest genocide in human history.'' An
estimated 90 percent of Central America's population perished in 50 years. Last
year, Jonathan Culler remarked in these pages that ''The Conquest of America,''
translated by Richard Howard, is ''an engaging book that presents fascinating
and often disturbing material clearly.''

BIRDY, by William Wharton. (Avon, $3.50.) Two boys, close friends - a bird lover
and an athlete - are the focus of this novel. World War II separates the youths;
later they meet again. Our reviewer, Julian Moynahan, wrote that William
Wharton's ''Birdy,'' a first novel, ''is a success, chiefly because of the
touching, believeable ties between the two temperamentally distinct lower
middle-class boys, and because Birdy's crazy fantasies about the bright, darting
and melodious careers of canaries are grounded in the author's impressive
knowledge of this domesticated species.''

THE BATTLE FOR THE FALKLANDS, by Max Hastings and Simon Jenkins. (W. W. Norton,
$9.95.) The Falkland Islands conflict is described from the British perspective
in ''The Battle for the Falklands.'' In 1983, Drew Middleton, military
correspondent of The Times, said the book ''probably will endure as the standard
history of the campaign.'' Max Hastings, a reporter and former paratrooper,
covered the shooting war; Simon Jenkins, an editor at The Economist, examined
the politics and diplomacy.

THE FOUR WISE MEN, by Michel Tournier. (Aventura, $8.95.) In 1982, Jonathan
Baumbach observed here that the French writer Michel Tournier ''shows himself to
be a philosophic novelist who likes to work with received material - the story
of the Magi in this case - and play ironic variations on his subject, a writer
for whom paradox and irony become a source of vision.'' He added, '' 'The Four
Wise Men' is a work of extraordinary clarity.'' The translation is by Ralph
Manheim.

THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES, by Richard Norton Smith. (Touchstone/Simon &
Schuster, $11.95.) Although for many years a winner - a celebrated Manhattan
District Attorney and three-time Governor of New York - Thomas E. Dewey was
considered a loser in the end because of his defeats for the Presidency by
Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 and Harry S. Truman in 1948. According to our
reviewer, Geoffrey C. Ward, Richard Norton Smith's biography, ''Thomas E. Dewey
and His Times,'' is ''a readable account, at its sensitive best when seeking to
discover how Dewey's sadly crippled personality came into being.''

A TOAST TO TOMORROW, by Manning Coles. (Leete's Island Books, New Haven, $5.95.)
Manning Coles's fictional spy, Tommy Hambledon, ''was the brightest creation of
modern espionage fiction,'' our reviewer, Anthony Boucher, once said. In 1968,
Mr. Boucher wrote that although ''A Toast to Tomorrow'' was ''serious in theme -
Tommy Hambledon's mission in Germany during (World War II), Coles mixed in some
wondrous comic scenes.''

WAR YEAR, by Joe Haldeman. (Avon, $2.95.) John Farmer is 19 years old, an Army
private slated to do 12 months' duty in Vietnam. ''War Year'' follows this foot
soldier from his first enemy attack in Vietnam to the end of his tour. Our
reviewer, George Davis, wrote in 1972 that Joe Haldeman's book ''contains an
excellent description of the day-to-day life of a grunt in Vietnam. It is a
hard, realistic piece of writing.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Paul Scott

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 13, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words


ANIMAL PAINTINGS


An exhibition of the work of George Stubbs will open Wednesday at the Yale
Center for British Art in New Haven. The 18th-century English painter whose
skill ''was undervalued by the label 'Mr. Stubbs the Horse Painter,' '' Stubbs
has never had a comprehensive show in the United States, according to a
spokesman for the center, Constance Clement.

The center may be the largest repository in the world for Stubbs works. Some of
it is in a collection of 125 drawings for the Comparative Anatomical Exposition
purchased from the Free Public Library of Worcester, Mass., by Paul Mellon, Yale
class of '29 and the benefactor of the museum.

The exhibition was organized by the center in cooperation with the Tate Gallery
in London, where it was seen from last October to Jan. 6. Although some of the
objects were too large or too fragile to travel, the collection includes others
on loan from Queen Elizabeth II, the Tate, the British Museum, the Fitzwilliam
Museum and the Royal Academy.

On this side of the Atlantic, the lenders include the National Gallery, the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Philadelphia Museum, the Kimball Museum and the
Yale University Art Gallery.

Much of Stubbs's work represents the relationship of animals and people in
English country life and sporting life. Taking little or nothing from
traditional art, he drew and painted with a meticulous eye and a loving heart.

A number of talks will accompany the exhibition, including a major symposium
March 8 and 9, ''British Art and Yale Unversity: The Last Two Decades.''

The continuing ''Art in Context'' series at the center will feature items in the
exhibition at 12:30 P.M. on Tuesdays 2 P.M. on Thursdays this month, as well as
on some days next month and in April. They will cover such subjects as ''George
Stubbs and Josiah Wedgewood: Partnership Between Art and Industry,'' a reference
to the enameled plaques designed by Stubbs and manufactured by Wedgewood, and
''Stubbs's Anatomical Drawings in Context.''

Another series of lectures, which will cost $35, will be at the Yale Art Gallery
at 11 A.M. on Tuesdays through March 5. ''George Stubbs: The Exotic Pursuit of
the Real,'' ''Animals in Art'' and other topics related to the show. Call
436-0574 to reserve seats.

Viewing hours at the center, at 1080 Chapel Street, are from 10 to 5 Tuesdays
through Saturdays and 2 to 5 Sundays. The exhibition will close April 7. There
is never a charge for admission or for special events. Call 432-4594 for more
information. THE WORLD OF CHOCOLATE


On the assumption that no self-respecting chocaholic would miss such an event
and that Greater Hartford has one large collective sweet tooth, Women's American
ORT (Organization for Rehabilitation Through Training) is sponsoring a Chocolate
Exposition from noon to 6 P.M. today in the Parkview Hilton Hotel, Asylum and
Ford Streets, in Hartford.

With St. Valentine's Day as justification, chocolate gluttons may sate
themselves and their loved ones on chocolate greeting cards, roses, hearts,
heart-shaped lollipops and reverse chocolate-chip cookies - solid chocolate
impregnated with bits of cookie. Chocolate sculptures, chocolate truffles,
old-fashioned fudge, chocolate cakes and ice cream round out the menu, and
probably the waistline. However, there will also be dietetic chocolates.

Free samples will abound.

The proceeds from sales will benefit the worldwide network of vocational and
technical schools operated by ORT.

Admission is $3.75 for adults and $2 for children. ART BY VIETNAM VETERANS


''Back in the World'' was the G.I.'s phrase for coming home from Vietnam. It is
also the title of an art exhibition by people who served in Vietnam that may be
seen until March 8 at the Aetna Institute for Corporate Education on Farmington
Avenue in Hartford.

''It's a show highlighting the veterans, not the war,'' an Aetna art consultant
and curator of the show, Harrison Jenkins, said. ''I had a lot of artist friends
who went over. We spent a lot of time talking about it. Many of them do not
reflect anything in their work about their experiences in 'Nam.' They have left
it behind. Others have been influenced by it.

''The show is a celebration. A bunch of vets getting together to talk about the
future, not the past. And art is their avenue.''

The work of at least 30 veterans is on view, and not all of it is painting.
There are commercial photographs, poetry, short stories, books and pieces of
journalism.

''Many of them are not professional artists, and they've never shown their work
before,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''We were afraid opening night might be an
overemotional thing, but it wasn't. The bond they had as Vietnam vets was
transformed into a bond they share in their art work.''

Among the exhibitors are Michael Cipriano of the art faculty of Central
Connecticut State University; Ken Polanski, designer of the Dutton Park Vietnam
Memorial in Wallingford, and Jeanne Marie Christie, trompe l'oeil artist.

The show is open from noon to 3 P.M. weekends or by appointment, 232-2417.
EXPERIMENTS ON STAGE


With money granted to seven regional theaters by the National Endowment for the
Arts, the Hartford Stage Company has begun a one- month developmental program
that frees it from box-office pressures while allowing for closer contact with
its audience.

Called ''First Drafts,'' the two-part program contains staged workshop
performances of two new plays and noontime readings of six additional new plays.
The audiences will be involved in discussions with the actors, directors and
technicians.

Tours of the backstage areas of the theater, at 50 Church Street, are included
in some of the ticket offerings.

A 2:30 matinee today of ''No Mercy'' by Constance Congdon will be followed by
revisions and rehearsals that will produce a different version in performances
Feb. 21 through 24.

''The Hoffman Project,'' based on the tales of E. T. A. Hoffman, is the work of
Mark Lamos, artistic director of the theater; Kenneth Cavander, playwright, and
John Conklin, scenic designer. Rehearsals, followed by a discussion at 8 P.M.
Friday and 2:30 next Sunday will be open to the public.

The noon readings, all one-act plays, will be Tuesdays through Thursdays until
Feb. 21. They last about 45 minutes and will be performed by a cast of Actors
Equity and non-Equity players seated on stage. Lynne Alvarez, Laura Harrington,
Sherry Kramer, Terry Wagener, Michael McDonnell and Hudson Owen are the
playwrights.

Single-performance tickets for ''No Mercy'' cost $5. A $10 ticket covers an
additional revised performance, plus a rehearsal of ''The Hoffman Project'' and
a theater tour. The noon readings are free. Call 527-5151 for information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UCONN REPORT SCORNS 'INTELLECTUAL POVERTY'

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1822 words


A FACULTY report at the University of Connecticut at Storrs says that the
intellectual and cultural life of the university is being stunted because most
of the students are preoccupied with ''grades, graduation and a job.''

The report said that the attitude by a majority of the students discouraged
other undergraduates from traditional patterns of intellectual activity, such as
attending concerts or guest lectures or simply talking with their professors
outside of class. It said the attitudes would not change unless the university
recruited more talented students from other states and competed more vigorously
for the Connecticut high school graduates who now go to schools with reputations
for encouraging academic excellence and intellectual vitality.

Faculty members are not readily available to meet with students informally and
too many reward poor work with good grades, according to the report by the Ad
Hoc Subcommittee on the Intellectual and Cultural Quality of Undergraduate Life.
The study faulted the university's administration for failing to recognize and
reward those professors who use spare time to advise students and to help their
intellectual growth.

The report, which had been commissioned by the Faculty Senate, was finished last
fall but its release was overshadowed by the announcement that the university's
president, John A. DiBiaggio, would leave in June to become the president of
Michigan State University in East Lansing. But it will be getting more attention
this month, when another subcommittee is to meet to suggest action based on the
report.

The report comes at a particularly sensitive time in the history of the
104-year-old university. The administration is struggling to persuade state
legislators that the school is underappreciated and that it should get more
state money to enable it to become one of the nation's top research
universities.

In addition to looking for a new president, the university is moving faculty
positions from humanities departments with falling enrollments to the scientific
and technical areas, such as physics and engineering, to which students are
flocking.

The faculty report noted that a majority of UConn students ''apparently cares
only, or in the main, for grades, graduation and a job.''

Milton Stern, Distinguished Alumni Professor of English and the chairman of the
subcommittee that wrote the report, said the university had some students who
rank with the best of any institution, but that their interests and achievements
are overshadowed on campus by a less intellectual majority.

The ''other UConn,'' comprising between a fifth and a third of the students, is
''isolated and coerced,'' the report noted. ''It is self- conscious about
saying, 'There's a good symphony next week - let's all go,' and instead it
acquiesces to the louder and more numerous voices issuing from beneath the
Budweiser caps: 'It's Thursday night - let's all party.' ''

The subcommittee was particularly critical of that special facet of Storrs life
- the Thursday night party - that, it said, reflects and reinforces the low
level of intellectual and cultural activity.

By comparison with many university towns, Storrs is small and remote, a
half-hour east of Hartford. As a public, land-grant university, UConn draws more
than 85 percent of its 12,300 full-time undergraduate students from Connecticut.
To accommodate the third of them who leave Friday afternoons for weekends at
home, the dormitories and fraternities start their parties at 10 or 11 P.M.
Thursdays and often continue until 3 A.M. Fridays. As a result, many students do
not go to class on Friday morning, professors avoid giving tests or scheduling a
presentation of significant new material that day, and most guest lecturers or
artistic performers have to be scheduled for Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday
audiences.

In deploring the ''intellectual poverties'' at the campus, the report also noted
that ''a rise in the level of intellectual life at Storrs cannot be imposed upon
the undergraduates with either carrots or sticks; it must be an organic result
of the kind of life the students themselves want.''

In interviews, administrators, professors and students said the report was a
generally accurate description of campus life, but too readily blamed the
students or faculty for conditions that they could not control.

''It's an extreme statement of a problem,'' said Dr. DiBiaggio.

He said the school's admission standards are already very high for a public
institution, and that it has been actively recruiting out-of-state students.

Even at the private colleges with the toughest entrance requirements, ''student
bodies lack that curiosity and lack analytic ability,'' he said. ''It is just
more dramatically focussed at a place like this,'' where the proportion of
career-oriented students in programs such as business, engineering or law is
high in relation to those studying the liberal arts, he said.

''All of us feel the pinch of vocationalism,'' said Peter Halvorson, the head of
the Geography Department at Storrs.

But he said UConn students may well be less fixated on getting a job than are
students at other colleges.

In interviews, many students and faculty members agreed with the report's
description of a relatively low level of informal contact between teachers and
students. The report suggested a number of causes for this, including a lack of
student desire for such contact and a shortage of lounges or coffee houses on or
off campus where faculty members and students meet at other schools.

But it laid much of the problem onfaculty attitudes.

''In its teaching-advisory function and in its function as intellectual and
cultural model, the faculty closes its office doors and is only sparsely
available once the assigned classroom time is finished,'' the report said.

Students said they could generally get an appointment with an individual
professor, but said that few actively developed informal contacts because the
faculty did not particularly encourage them to do so. Faculty members said the
problem could worsen if professors cut back on student contact to devote more
time to getting their research published.

Christina Richardson, a UConn senior from Bolton who is editor of The Nutmeg,
the student yearbook, said she had no difficulty getting good advice from
faculty members but that most students ''don't take advantage'' of opportunities
to work closely with their professors. But she said the faculty report made too
much of the weekend student exodus and the lack of cultural opportunities.

''On a typical weekend, two-thirds of the students stay here, so what's the big
deal?'' she said.

Maureen Croteau, the head of the Journalism Department, recalled that when she
was an undergraduate at Storrs in the late 1960's, students demanded extra
attention from faculty.

''We wanted to stop the war in Vietnam,'' she said. ''These kids are more
concerned about doing well in their grades. They want to please you. They're
very serious.''

Other professors said that the faculty, particularly the younger, nontenured
teachers, curried favor with students by grading easily and were rewarded with
laudatory comments in the appraisals that students publish about the faculty.
The report lamented grade inflation and said professors should ''impose serious
intellectual standards.''

''We do have grade inflation,'' President DiBiaggio said, ''but our students
actually suffer by comparison with institutions with more grade inflation.''

The report noted that ''undergraduates attend cultural and intellectual events
sparsely and in desultory fashion.'' Faculty members interviewed agreed. They
said they often did not invite guests to speak because of the predictably low
turnouts.

Kirvin L. Knox, the head of the Department of Nutritional Sciences, recalled
that last fall he had invited Noel Solomon, a noted researcher at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to talk about politics and nutrition in
Central America. But only four students from outside the nutrition programs
attended, he said.

''You would think the very rural, isolated nature of the campus would give
students the opportunity and the need to interact more,'' he said. ''But it
doesn't happen. I don't understand it.''

One young woman who attended a Thursday night fraternity party last month said
of cultural activity on campus, ''If you want it, it's there. But a lot of
people don't want it.''

Other students at the party said they simply wanted to relax and have a few
beers after working at their studies for four days. The campus cultural
alternative that night was a performance at Jorgensen Auditorium by Les Ballets
Trockadero de Monte Carlo, a male dance troupe in drag that parodies classical
ballet.

''The party life isn't as hopping as they say,'' said Holly Massett, a senior
who attended a nonalcoholic dance in Ryan Refectory, the cafeteria that serves
four dormitories in the Alumni Quadrangle. She said many students who partied
Thursday nights made up for it by studying hard on Friday and Saturday nights,
when the campus is usually quiet.

The faculty subcommittee said that if professors wanted to fight the four- day
week, they should give more examinations, quizzes, class presentations and due
dates for papers on Fridays. The students said they hoped the recommendation
would not be followed.

John Manning, an English professor who was dean of students and a vice president
of the university, said the Thursday night problem would solve itself as the
school grew older.

''It's a teen-aged university,'' that did not begin to develop until the 60's
and has not formed traditions of intellectual activity, he said.

The report advised that the university must raise admission standards for
in-state students and recruit more undergraduates from the rest of the country
if it wanted to increase the level of intellectual life.

''The student body will be only as intellectual as it wishes to be,'' it said,
''and the current mix of students probably presages a continuation of a
generally nonintellectual atmosphere.''

But Julius A. Elias, the dean of the College of Liberal Arts, said such a shift
in the quality of students would not be politically acceptable.

''The University of Connecticut has gone from 'cow college' to genuine
university,'' he said. But as a publicly supported school, it cannot accept
highly qualified students from other states while telling Connecticut high
school seniors, ''you don't fit.''

In addition to Professor Stern, the members of the faculty committee and their
departments were Marilyn Altobello, agricultural economics and rural sociology;
Ruben Baron, psychology; Joseph I. Budnick, physics; Marie-Sol Ortola, foreign
languages; Chrystomos L. Nikias, electrical engineering and computer science;
Laurel A. Richards, an undergraduate, and Theodore Taigen, biology.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of library and excerpt from faculty report; Photo of students

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Team in Laos To Search for Missing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 10


A team of United States experts flew to southern Laos today to search for the
remains of Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War, a United States
Embassy official said.

He said the team of 11 experts from the Honolulu-based Joint Casualty Resolution
Center was to join Laotian officials to search for the remains of 13 American
servicemen whose C-130 transport plane was shot down near Pakse City in December
1972.

A preliminary inspection of the site by the team in December 1983 turned up
wreckage of the plane and human bones, which are still being analyzed by the
United States Army's Central Identification Laboratory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK PUBLISHING HOUSES ATTRACTING THE TOP YOUNG TALENT ONCE AGAIN

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words


After reading a recent profile of Mario Merola, the Bronx District Attorney,
Errol McDonald, a 31-year- old senior editor at Random House, went out and
signed him up to write a book to be called ''Big City D.A.''

Kathleen Anderson, a 32-year-old editor at W. W. Norton, read about the Vietnam
veterans memorial to be dedicated in New York in May, so she signed up ''Dear
America: Letters Home From Vietnam.''

James Frost, who started his publishing career in 1980 as a $10,400- a-year
secretary at Warner Books, said there is never a day that he doesn't think about
how to acquire new titles for Warner's, where he is now a 29-year-old senior
editor.

These three are prominent among the dozen or so young editors who are making
their mark in the world of book publishing. As such, they are indicative of a
small but intellectually significant turnabout.



'They're Back Again'

Publishing has always had smart young editors, but throughout much of the 1970's
the industry lagged badly in the competition for talent, according to some
publishing executives. ''A lot of bright young college graduates went into
journalism, television and the movies, because they wanted to be where they
thought the action was,'' said Richard E. Snyder, chairman of Simon & Schuster.
''Now they're back again, and the quality is astonishingly high.''

Unlike some of their contemporaries who are good at acquiring books but less
skilled at editing them, or who are adept line editors but less accomplished at
ferreting out or commissioning publishable manuscripts, each of the young
editors named has a reputation for being able to recognize, acquire and edit
books. For all three, it came as a surprise that being a book editor meant more
than polishing manuscripts.

''Becoming an editor was my dream because I had read what Maxwell Perkins did
for Thomas Wolfe and his other authors,'' said Miss Anderson, referring to the
legendary editor at Charles Scribner's Sons. ''But it doesn't take long before
you realize that being an editor is not just editing books.'' She was named
editor last April after a five-year publishing apprenticeship, and now has 10
published books and 13 under contract, including the complete correspondence of
Flaubert and Turgenev and a translation by William Arrowsmith of Eugenio
Montale, the poet and Nobel laureate. She also edits the two books of new poetry
that Norton publishes each year.

Many women editors started their publishing careers as secretaries, but the
typical apprentice today, female or male, begins as an editorial assistant - ''a
glorified secretary,'' in the words of one editor - who types letters, answers
telephones, files and reads unsolicited manuscripts. Only a small percentage of
them ever become editors, however, because the number of openings is extremely
small, and some leave for better paying jobs. Samuel S. Vaughan, editor in chief
at Doubleday, who was a senior editor at age 28, said it is hard to define with
precision what he looks for in aspiring editors. ''When you try to describe
it,'' he said, ''it always sounds like you're looking for an unpaid saint.''



Few Black or Hispanic Editors

The usual progression is from editorial assistant to assistant editor, associate
editor, editor and senior editor. But in most houses, the various titles, at
least for junior editors, tend to define salary more than responsibility.

Until about 20 years ago, the overwhelming number of book editors were men, then
a great many women became editors, first in paperback houses, then in the
traditional hard- cover houses. Today the proportion of female and male
editorial assistants is roughly equal, but there are still almost no black,
Asian or Hispanic editorial assistants or editors. Mr. McDonald, who was born in
Costa Rica and raised in Brooklyn's Bedford- Stuyvesant, said that he knows no
other black editors in trade book publishing.

Most editors agree that it is not enough for aspiring editors merely to be
intelligent. ''Most editorial assistants come from good schools, most are used
to getting A's and most have a sense that they're entitled to succeed,'' one
young editor said. ''They come with romantic notions but they don't come
prepared to hustle.''

Mr. McDonald, who holds two degrees from Yale University, learned to hustle
when, after six months as an editorial assistant, he asked Jason Epstein,
editorial director of Random House, what were the chances of being promoted.
''He said what he says to everyone, 'I can't make you an editor, you have to
make yourself an editor,' '' Mr. McDonald recalled.



Acquiring Books Is Essential

That meant acquiring books, even though literary agents or established authors
rarely deign to deal with an editorial assistant. So Mr. McDonald approached
Robert Farris Thompson, a professor of art history at Yale for whom he had been
a teaching assistant, and came away with a book contract.

Mr. McDonald is the editor of ''Bloods,'' Wallace Terry's recent oral history by
black veterans of the Vietnam War. When he was still an associate editor, he
conceived Aventura, the acclaimed series of fiction by foreign writers. He edits
that series, and is about to start a series of books about contemporary music
and musicians, in collaboration with Musician Magazine.

Mr. Frost, who has a reputation for being able to acquire and edit a broad range
of hard-cover and paperback books, took the job as secretary because he was
unable to find any other opening in publishing for almost a year after
graduating from Yale. But having to type contracts and letters to authors gave
him invaluable on-the- job training, he said. Within months of his arrival at
Warner's, he was editing adult Westerns, and before long he signed up a
self-published book, ''How to Master the Art of Selling'' by Tom Hopkins. It has
sold almost 300,000 copies in trade paperback since 1982 and is still selling
700 copies a week.

Miss Anderson signed up her first book after she convinced the author to turn
his 15-page prose poem into a novel. She still remembers the special excitement
of the day her first book arrived in the office. ''You go running around the
building showing it to everyone,'' she said, ''and wondering why they all don't
do that when their books arrive.''

But unless one is at least a full- fledged editor, acquiring books remains the
biggest hurdle for the young editor.



Problems With Agents

''My very first day as assistant editor, after I saw a steady stream of
submissions to other editors, I phoned a bunch of agents,'' Mr. McDonald said.
''Without exception, all the major agents said in effect they didn't need me.''
Miss Anderson still has a problem with one agent, who has never returned her
several telephone calls and letters, even though she recently sent the agent a
copy of every book she had edited.

While every editor dreams of working with a Hemingway or Wolfe, the young
editors say that their goal is to publish the widest range of books compatible
with the overall needs of the house.

''I now appreciate the business requirements of publishing,'' Mr. McDonald said,
''so I acquire a lot of books I wouldn't ordinarily read. If they're successful,
they allow me to publish the ones I care the most about.'' Likewise, Mr. Frost
has tried to develop an eye for books that fit into Warner's publishing
strategy. ''I learned early on that to succeed, I had to do what the company
needed,'' he said.

Miss Anderson has also changed. ''What I seem to be drawn to now,'' she said,
''are books by women and literary journalism, books about familiar subjects that
have been reworked into a more creative form. What really moves me are human
documents, letters and diaries that touch a lot of issues and a lot of lives.
Publishing those kinds of books gives me the same level of inspiration that
Maxwell Perkins gave me in the beginning. But he was really just an image.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of editors Errol McDonald, Kathleen Anderson and James Frost

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWMAKERS SAY U.S. IS MISUSING AID TO SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


A Congressional caucus accused the Administration today of having supplied
''insufficient, misleading and in some cases false information'' on aid for El
Salvador.

A report issued by the Arms Control and Foreign Policy Caucus, a bipartisan
group, says economic and military aid, which will total at least $557 million
this year, is worsening El Salvador's problems and prolonging the civil war. One
reason, the report says, is that most of the spending has been military, despite
Administration claims that most has been for economic and social development.

It says the Administration has ''provided Congress with overly optimistic
reports'' on the war.

''In a haunting reminder of Congressional-Executive relations during the Vietnam
War, the Administration has at times appeared to take on the role of cheerleader
rather than analyst,'' the report says.

It also says the United States has become increasingly involved in the war by
violating the Congressional limit of 55 on the number of servicemen in El
Salvador and by letting them become indirectly or directly involved in combat.

Spokesmen at the State and Defense Departments declined to comment until they
had read the report.

A State Department official did say that ''these charges have been raised before
and we have dealt with them.''

The report is based on four months of investigation by the caucus leadership and
staff, who said they had reviewed documents and other information ''that is far
more detailed than that which is generally available to Congress.''

The 66-page document, which was distributed today to the caucus's 130 Democratic
and Republican members in the Senate and the House, is signed by Senator Mark O.
Hatfield, the Oregon Republican who is chairman of the Senate Appropriations
Committee, which must approve foreign aid requests. Mr. Hatfield is a former
chairman of the caucus.  The report is also signed by Representative Jim Leach,
the Iowa Republican who is the present caucus chairman, and by Representative
George Miller, the California Democrat who headed the task force on El Salvador.

Edith B. Wilkie, executive director of the caucus, said the group undertook the
project ''because of Congressional concern that we were getting directly
involved in a war in El Salvador.''

The report says the United States is becoming more and more deeply involved in
the war in a manner that is ''reminiscent of Vietnam.'' It also says the Reagan
Administration has routinely misled Congress and the public to disguise that
fact.

The United States has provided $1.7 billion in aid to El Salvador since 1980.
The Administration has said three- fourths of the aid was used for economic and
social development rather than for the military.

The caucus, in tracing actual expenditures rather than budget classifications,
concluded that only 15 percent of the money had been used for development, with
the rest going into military aid.

This, the report says, has tended to intensify the civil strife without helping
solve the problems that brought it on in the first place.

''Tragically, if U.S. aid is composed in the future as it is at present,' the
report says, ''the next five years will be as violent and unproductive for El
Salvador as the past five years.''

As an example, the report says the Administration asked for an additional $93
million last year on the ground that an ''emergency'' existed in Salvadoran arms
supplies.

The caucus's research showed - and Salvadoran military officials conceded - that
the army had adequate supplies and that $32 million was still available to buy
more, the report says.

Most of the supplemental money was used to outfit new troops, not for resupply,
thus fostering increased fighting, the report adds.

It also says the Administration has ''provided false information to Congress
concerning the number of U.S. military personnel operating in El Salvador'' and
''about the roles they are performing.'' The Congressional limit of 55 excludes
embassy guards and some other exceptions.

The report says the Pentagon has been making more types of personnel exceptions,
so that ''in fact, total U.S. personnel there on any given day is probably twice
that number.''

In addition, the report says, Americans have been accompanying Salvadoran troops
on patrols and may have come under fire.

In commenting on the report, Representative Miller, the task force chairman,
said, ''We documented that U.S. personnel are selecting targeting sites for
bombing and maintaining equipment.''

''The Salvadorans, much like the Vietnamese,'' he added, ''don't have the
ability to use and maintain much of this advanced equipment.''

Representative Leach, the caucus chairman, said he hoped the report would ''add
to the discussion'' in Congress over the Administration's request for $483
million in military and economic aid for El Salvador next year.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mark Hatfield

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Reportedly Will Return Remains of 5 Troops to U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 11


Vietnam will turn over to the United States the remains of five people it says
are Americans listed as missing in action in the Vietnam War, reliable sources
disclosed today.

''It's a welcome gesture,'' an American source said. Vietnamese sources said it
might be a month before the remains were turned over.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Southeast Asia Bloc Asks Aid for Cambodia Rebels

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 11


The Association of Southeast Asian Nations issued a worldwide appeal today for
military aid to the Cambodian rebel coalition that is trying to overthrow the
Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh.

The call, following a special regional foreign ministers' meeting on Cambodia
here this morning, was contained in a communique that diplomats say was the
first unanimous expression of full political and military support for the rebels
from all six Asean nations: Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and
the Philippines.

Until now, diplomats and Asean officials said, Indonesia had been reluctant to
make so sweeping a commitment to the Cambodian resistance, and the Philippines
had remained generally distant from the problem.

Among the Asean nations, only Thailand and Singapore have been giving military
aid to the rebel coalition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NURSES DISPUTE AND DEFEND MEMOIR ON LIFE IN VIETNAM WAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: BOULDER, Colo. Feb. 11


The memoirs of an Army nurse who served in Vietnam have sparked a sharp dispute
among other Vietnam nurses, who say that the popular book and its planned movie
adaptation malign their work in the war zone.

''Home Before Morning,'' published in March 1983, recounts Lynda Van Devanter's
experiences as a surgical nurse in the South Vietnamese Highlands from June 1969
to June 1970. It was written partly as a memoir and partly, its author notes, as
therapy against the troubling memories of her experience.

Critics say some episodes in the book were invented. The book also says that
some medical personnel performed surgery while drunk or on drugs, and that some
medical staff members led promiscuous lives while in Vietnam.

They Worry About Families

These critics, aware that ''Home Before Morning'' is slated to be made into a
movie starring Sally Field, express concern that the portrayal of a nurse's life
in Vietnam will lead the families of men killed in the war to believe that their
men did not receive the best possible treatment.

''She says it is just her story but it isn't just her story,'' said Patricia L.
Walsh, who served in Danang as a civilian nurse. ''She implicates directly other
people, other nurses, doctors, anesthetists. She implicates them directly in
unethical behavior, working on casualties while under the effects of drugs and
alcohol.''

Miss Van Devanter, citing the advice of her lawyer, refused to comment on the
charges other than to say: ''Everything Pat Walsh has said is untrue. If you
read my book you would see that.''

Some nurses who served in Vietnam take Miss Van Devanter's side in the issue.
Others, joining under a group called Nurses Against Misrepresentation, or Nam,
take the opposite view.

She Has Written a Book Too

Mrs. Walsh, who was disabled in the 1968 Tet offensive, has also written a book
called ''Forever Sad the Hearts'' about her experiences in Vietnam. She said she
had withdrawn her book from consideration by television or for filming so that
her attack on ''Home Before Morning'' would not be construed as competitive
jealousy.

''We didn't challenge her until the announcement was made that Sally Field was
going to make it into a big picture, it was going to be portrayed as true,''
Mrs. Walsh said in an interview at her home here. ''And then we said, O.K.,
that's it. You're not going to do this to us or the people who lost someone in
Vietnam.''

Among other things, Mrs. Walsh and others object to a passage in ''Home Before
Morning'' that describes the nurses at Pleiku as having ''partied as hard as we
worked and when we slept, it was frequently because we had passed out from too
much alcohol or too much exhaustion.''

Rocket Attack, Then Surgery

At another point, the book reports that some of the nurses and the neurosurgeon
drank beer and smoked marijuana during a rocket attack that was followed by an
exhausting session of surgery, a passage the book's critics take to mean that
medical work was performed by intoxicated medical team members.

''She has developed her story line from other peoples's stories,'' said Lynne
Ruyle, an emergency room nurse who served with Miss Van Devanter at the 71st
Evacuation Hospital at Pleiku, and who was interviewed for the book.

''There were parties, but she makes it sound like it happened 24 hours a day,''
she said, adding that she could not recall any medical personnel working while
drunk or on drugs.

'A Lot of Personal Turmoil'

''I think what's going to happen is that there will be a lot of angry people,''
she continued. ''They will be deeply disappointed. It's painful to lose someone
and then 15 years later to have to question the legitimacy of that death. There
will be a lot of personal turmoil.''

But Marra Peche defends the book. Miss Peche, also a nurse, was a roommate of
Miss Van Devanter at 71st Evac. ''I know Van's book is authentic because I was
there,'' she said. ''I know surgeons who would work stoned. It's not the fact
that there was drinking on duty but that we were on duty 24 hours a day.''

Another Army nurse who served at another Army hospital but who would not allow
her name to be used because of the mounting publicity, also defended the book by
saying: ''I would say the book is factual if you don't read between the lines.''


She Says Book Helped Her

Besides, this nurse commented, the book's descriptions of the nightmare memories
of some nurses have helped her cope with the aftermath of her Vietnam
experience.

''She helped me see that others had experienced what I did and were hurting like
I was,'' she said. ''Her story and mine are the same and people need to hear
this because war is hell.''

Mrs. Walsh said: ''We don't need any lies or sensationalism. We don't need to
fabricate anything because the truth will make you weep.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Patricia Walsh

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CLOSING ARGUMENTS MADE IN VIETNAMESE IMMIGRANT'S MURDER TRIAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., Feb. 11


In closing arguments at the trial of a Vietnamese immigrant accused of murdering
a university professor, the prosecution today characterized the defendant as a
cold, remorseless killer and told the jury that the evidence called for a
verdict of first-degree murder.

His attorney argued in turn that because of cultural differences the defendant,
Minh Van Lam, 21 years old, showed no apparent emotion when confronted with the
death of his friend, Edward Lee Cooperman, a professor of physics for California
State University at Fullerton.

The prosecution has established no motive for the shooting, and the defense said
in closing arguments today that the lack of motive supports Mr. Lam's claim that
the death was accidental.

''It was a tragedy for Dr. Cooperman, it was a tragedy for his family, and it
was a tragedy for Mr. Lam,'' Mr. Lam's lawyer, Alan May, told the court today .
''But he didn't crack up and cry the way the white policemen expected him.

Death Penalty Possible

''He didn't grow up here,'' Mr. May told the jury. ''He came here at 16. He's
adjusted well, but that doesn't mean you can measure his emotional reaction by
what you would expect of your grandchild.''

The defendant could face the death penalty if the 12-person jury finds him
guilty of first-degree murder in the Oct. 13, 1984, shooting of the 48-year-old
Dr. Cooperman, who was found dead in his school office.

Mr. Lam admitted to the shooting, but maintained that the gun went off
accidentally in a playful wrestling match with Dr. Cooperman, a friend who had
given him a motorcycle, firearms and money.

''Based on the facts, it was a first-degree murder,'' Mel Jensen, Deputy
District Attorney for Orange County, said. ''It was a premeditated, deliberate,
wanton act with express intent to kill.''

Mr. Jensen emphasized that Mr. Lam left the scene of the shooting, which
occurred about 11:30 A.M., and failed to call for help. Instead, Mr. Lam picked
up a friend at 12:10, as he had planned earlier that morning, and went to see
the movie ''Purple Rain.''

Mr. Jensen said that the movie's portrayal of a character attempting suicide
inspired Mr. Lam to return to the scene and plant the gun in the professor's
left hand to make it appear that Dr. Cooperman had committed suicide.

Defendant Changes Story

Mr. Lam called the police after returning to the office and placing the gun in
the professor's hand. The defendant originally told the authorities he was not
present at the time of the shooting. He later recanted, and said that he had
been present when the gun went off.

The trial, in Santa Ana Superior Court before Judge Richard Beacom, has
attracted much attention because of Dr. Cooperman's active personal and
political ties to Vietnam. In 1977, Dr. Cooperman formed the U. S. Committee for
Scientific Cooperation with Vietnam and arranged to ship computer equipment,
soil-testing devices, medical supplies and other materials to Hanoi. Under
Federal law, it is illegal to ship anything but humanitarian emergency aid to
Vietnam.

Dr. Cooperman's widow, Klaaske Cooperman, and other friends testified that the
professor often took large amounts of cash, sometimes as much as $50,000, with
him on his periodic trips to Vietnam. In their testimony they said that the
professor had received numerous death threats from right-wing terrorists who
opposed his sympathy for the communists, and that he had armed himself against
assassination attempts.

No evidence was submitted in Mr. Lam's trial that he was connected with any
conspiracy against Dr. Cooperman. Mr. May said that Dr. Cooperman armed Mr. Lam
to use him as a bodyguard.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY TOLD OF ORDER TO CUT TROOP COUNT

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


Michael F. Dilley, a retired Army major, testified yesterday at the trial of
Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS that he was ordered by a
colonel in June 1967 to reduce ''arbitrarily'' estimates of the Vietcong's
political cadre.

Major Dilley - who was then a lieutenant in General Westmoreland's intelligence
operation in Saigon - said the figures for the political cadre were cut in early
June from 139,000 to 114,000 and, later that month, to a range of 90,000 to
94,000.

On neither occasion, he said, was the reduction justified by military
intelligence.

The major appeared in Federal District Court in Manhattan as the 15th witness
for CBS in the 18-week-old trial before Judge Pierre N. Leval. The basis for
General Westmoreland's $120 million suit is a 1982 CBS documentary - ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - that charged the general's command with
engaging in a ''conspiracy'' to show progress in the war in 1967 by understating
North Vietnamese and Vietcong capabilities.

Self-Defense Forces at Issue

Much of the trial has focused on General Westmoreland's decision in the fall of
1967 to delete the Vietcong's part-time, local self-defense forces from the
official listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle. The broadcast
described this move as a ''new tactic'' to keep overall estimates low. But CBS
lawyers - going beyond even the specific allegations on the broadcast - have
accused the general's command of ''arbitrarily'' reducing the figures for other
categories in the order of battle as well, including the political cadre.

The political cadre, sometimes called the Vietcong's ''shadow government'' or
''infrastructure,'' was defined by the American military as the political
apparatus by which the enemy sought to gain and keep control over the people of
South Vietnam.

Major Dilley testified that he was an analyst in the order-of-battle section of
the intelligence operation from September 1966 to September 1967, when it was
headed by Col. Gains Hawkins. The order of battle itself is a document published
monthly by the command.

The major said he was responsible for compiling data only on the political
cadre. Other elements in the order of battle - at least until changes were
instituted in October 1967 - included the enemy's regular forces, administrative
or support troops, guerrillas and self-defense units.

Major Dilley said that in the spring of 1967, as the result of a special
intelligence program, the officers in his section concluded that the political
cadre numbered 139,000 - exactly 100,000 more than the 39,000 figure that had
been inherited in the early 1960's from the South Vietnamese Government and
carried, unchanged for years, in the order of battle.

'These Numbers Are Too High'

The new figure of 139,000, the witness said, was ''briefed through channels'' to
Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who was General Westmoreland's chief of
intelligence from 1965 to June 1, 1967. ''I had a great deal of confidence in
that figure,'' the major told David Boies, the CBS lawyer.

But in early June, Major Dilley testified, he was ordered to reduce the estimate
''arbitrarily.''

Q. Who gave you those orders?

A. Col. Gains Hawkins. Colonel Hawkins said ''these numbers are too high - lower
them'' or words to that direct effect.

Q. Did Colonel Hawkins give you an evidentiary or intelligence basis for
lowering the numbers then?

A. Absolutely not.

Q. Were you aware of any intelligence that justified that order?

A. No, sir.

Major Dilley said that, on this occasion, Colonel Hawkins did not specify the
number by which the 139,000 figure should be cut. But it was reduced, the major
said, by 25,000.

A ''little later that month,'' Major Dilley continued, Colonel Hawkins asked to
have the 114,000 lowered, too.

Q. Did the colonel tell you by how much?

A. Yes, he did. He said, ''I want to be able to support an estimate between
90,000 and 94,000.''

Major Dilley said he then proceeded to slash the number of political cadre
hamlet by hamlet - ''if we showed 4 in a hamlet, for example, we made it 3.''

Q. Was there evidence to justify reductions from 4 to 3?

A. Absolutely none.

Q. Why did you do that?

A. Colonel Hawkins asked us to.

Colonel Hawkins, who was a prime source for the CBS documentary, is expected to
testify for the network today.

In May 1967, Colonel Hawkins briefed General Westmoreland on new and increased
estimates for both the self-defense forces and the political cadre. And in an
interview for the program 14 years later with George Crile, who produced the
broadcast and is now a defendant in this case, the colonel said:

''I don't want to read anyone's mind, George, but there was a great deal of
concern about the impact that this new figure would have.''

''They didn't want higher numbers,'' Mr. Crile said on the broadcast.

''That was the message,'' the colonel replied.

Apart from removing the self-de fense forces from the monthly order of battle -
and not giving a current number for them - General Westmoreland's command
decided in mid- to late 1967 to put the political cadre in a separate
''nonmilitary'' listing, at a strength of 75,000 to 85,000.

Both actions, according to documents in the trial, were made public at a press
briefing in Saigon. The immediate effect of the decisions was to lower the total
enemy strength from 295,000 to a range of 223,000 to 248,000 - half the estimate
favored by some analysts in the Central Intelligence Agency.

General Westmoreland's command announced in November 1967 that the political
cadre was being taken out of the order of battle because ''their function is not
military.'' Similarly, the general testified at this trial that he had come to
believe by 1967 that the self-defense forces were inconsequential militarily.
The general led United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

Major Dilley said yesterday that he believed the political cadre should have
remained as part of the order of battle. ''They controlled the military
operations as well as the political operations,'' he testified. ''They were very
essential and vital to the enemy's prosecution of the war.''

The major also said his ''roommate'' in Saigon, Lieut. Marshall Lynn, was
ordered to reduce the number of the Vietcong's ''administrative'' troops.

On cross-examination, David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland,
attempted to show that the military had used figures like 80,000 or 90,000 for
the political cadre in the spring of 1967 - and that the figures for that
category were so fluid that one analyst who worked with Major Dilley believed
the political cadre to number 419,000. But Major Dilley insisted that the only
valid figure was 139,000.

Mr. Dorsen also brought out that Major Dilley, who served for 20 years in the
Army and only became a major on the day of his retirement last fall, had
virtually no contact with senior officers in Saigon who were responsible for
high-level decision making.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

No Death Rate Impact Found In U.S. Study of Agent Orange

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 211 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


A new study of airmen exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange in the Vietnam War
showed they did not suffer a higher death rate than people not in contact with
the chemical, the Air Force said today.

The study is part of a 20-year survey the Air Force is making on the possible
health effects of Agent Orange on the airmen who used the defoliant, which
contained deadly dioxin.

About 12 million gallons were sprayed over Vietnam to kill underbrush and expose
enemy troops.

A statement today said the new study of airmen exposed to Agent Orange and a
control group not exposed ''did not reveal any statistically significant
differences in the deaths recorded.''

Veterans exposed to the chemical have argued it caused a variety of illnesses,
including birth defects.

The companies that made the defoliant, without admitting responsibility, agreed
in May 1984 to settlement of claims evaluated at $180 million.

In the study made public today, the Air Force said it found that officers and
pilots who were exposed to Agent Orange had a slightly lower death rate than the
control group, and ground personnel had a slightly higher death rate.

But it added: ''None of these differences were statistically significant.''

About 1,200 people were in each group.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE ;
President Resigns At Midway Airlines

BYLINE: By Kenneth N. Gilpin and Todd S. Purdum

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 445 words


Neal F. Meehan is resigning as president and chief operating officer of Midway
Airlines, the carrier said yesterday. No successor has been chosen.

Only last month, Arthur C. Bass resigned as chairman and chief executive of the
Chicago-based carrier. He had recruited Mr. Meehan from New York Air in October
1982.

David R. Hinson, an original investor in the six-year-old airline and a
director, was named on Jan. 18 to succeed Mr. Bass and try to restore the
airline to profitability.

Mr. Meehan was unavailable for comment yesterday, but Louise M. Gilliam, a
Midway spokesman, said, ''Neal left amicably; it's just that Dave Hinson wants
his own guy in the post.''

She added that Mr. Bass and Mr. Meehan had a ''very close relationship, sharing
the same philosophy about business and life in general.'' Mr. Bass, who is 53
years old, and Mr. Meehan, who is 43, had steered the former no-frills carrier
in a new direction for the last two and a half years.

They crafted Midway Metrolink, a single-class service for the business traveler
featuring fine food and extra-wide seating at fares below those of most
competitors. The switch, however, required an expensive refurbishing of planes.

''They gave Metrolink a real good effort, establishing a fine product,'' said
David G. Sylvester, an airline industry analyst with Hambrecht & Quist in San
Francisco. ''It's just that people haven't beaten a path to their door.''

Last fall, the company took over many of the assets and routes of Air Florida,
which was in bankruptcy proceedings. It operates those routes under the name
Midway Express. It was an attempt to balance the seasonal variability of
Metrolink with a discount carrier to the warm weather vacation markets.

So far, the performances of Metrolink and Midway Express have disappointed
analysts. Mr. Sylvester noted that Midway's quarter-to-quarter systemwide load
factor - a measure of passenger volume - did not appreciably improve in 1984.
Midway, which lost money in 1983, has acknowledged that it will be in the red
again for 1984.

Mr. Meehan received a B.A. and an M.B.A. from St. John's University in Queens.
From 1962 to 1966, he was a captain in the Marine Corps, serving some of that
time in Vietnam.

After leaving the service, Mr. Meehan worked in sales, financial and marketing
positions with American Airlines and Continental Air Lines.

He then became vice president for sales and service of Texas International
Airlines and, later, senior vice president of its parent, the Texas Air
Corporation. He left that position in 1980 to become founding president and
chief executive officer of another Texas Air subsidiary, New York Air.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
POLITICS AND THE PRESS

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


WASHINGTON

In the last few days, two prominent

journalists have left their jobs

here to join the Reagan Administration as advisers on public relations. They
were Bernie Kalb of CBS, who became assistant to Secretary of State Shultz, and
Pat Buchanan, an independent TV and newspaper columnist, who became the new
White House communications director.

Both are of sound mind and limb, and respected by their colleagues, so maybe
this justifies an explanation.

As everybody knows, it's more fun to spout your own ideas than to peddle
somebody else's. And it is equally obvious that the last thing Ronald Reagan
needs is instruction on the arts of public persuasion, now being demonstrated at
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue here to the envy of Madison Avenue in New York.

There used to be two arguments against ''crossing the line'': first that if a
reporter jumped the fence into the Federal trough, he would be obliged to
swallow the official garbage on the other side.

And second, that once having done so, he would have lost the confidence of the
public when he came back to his typewriter, assuming such old- fashioned
machines then existed.

So why, for the love of Pat and Bernie, did they do it?

One possible reason is that if you're hooked on television, you can get more
time on television in politics than you can get on the networks or the weekend
shows.

Bernie got more space to report the news when he was at The New York Times than
he got at CBS, which gave him only a minute and a half occasionally to explain
the Reagan Administration's policies. Now, as spokesman for the State
Department, he will be on television explaining it all the time. This may or may
not be an advantage.  Pat Buchanan has a different problem. Unlike Mr. Kalb,
he's not a reporter but a preacher, and a darn good one too. But also unlike Mr.
Kalb, he will not be the spokesman at the White House - it has a very good
Speakes- man. Pat will be the image-maker for the President and the press, both
of which he has criticized in the past without excessive modesty.  Still,
there's something to be said for reporters going into government for awhile,
provided they don't inhale the poison on the other side. And provided also they
and their bosses know what they're doing.

President Eisenhower was the guy who figured this one out. Ike trusted Jim
Hagerty, his press secretary, to know what was going on in the White House, even
to read the daily cables when necessary, and know what was on the President's
mind. Ike didn't worry about his ''image'' any more than he worried about his
syntax, but he relied on Jim to tell him one thing: what the headlines would be
in the morning papers if he said this or that.

Since then, it's amazing how dumb smart Presidents have been about anticipating
the public consequences of their decisions. Most of the time they've been as
ignorant as swans.  If Kennedy had asked Ike's Hagerty question before the Bay
of Pigs invasion . . . if Johnson had asked it before he plunged deeper into
Vietnam . . . if Richard Nixon had asked it before many of his spectacular
Watergate blunders . . . if Jimmy Carter had asked Jody Powell before he
staggered into the Iranian desert . . . it might have avoided untold suffering.
So maybe it's useful to have a few old battered reporters wandering around the
corridors of power, if anybody listens to them. All good reporters ask innocent,
children's questions, even when they work in the White House: What are you
doing? And why did you do that? That's precisely the simple and useful service
Bernie Kalb and Pat Buchanan can deliver in their new jobs, and they don't have
to worry about coming home if it doesn't work.  Ed Murrow, John Chancellor, Jim
Hagerty, George Reedy, Pierre Salinger, Bob Manning, Andrew Berding and many
others ''crossed the line,'' representing the Government to the press and vice
versa, and then in later years went back and wrote with the utmost independence
and sincerity, having benefited from what they learned on both sides of the
fence.  After all, it's really a new idea that reporters and officials should be
separate. The pamphleteers had the idea of this Republic before the politicians,
and old scribblers like Tom Paine and Ben Franklin were down in the pit and on
the barricades fighting for it while writing their fiery editorials.  The only
difference is that if you read Paine on his 248th birthday on Jan. 29, he wrote
so much better than anybody does today.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI'S FORCES ATTACK KHMER ROUGE STRONGHOLDS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 12


Vietnamese forces mounted a powerful drive today in western Cambodia's mountain
jungles, crushing Khmer Rouge guerrilla positions in a two-pronged assault, Thai
military officers said.

Thousands of Cambodian civilians were reported to have fled into Thai territory.
The sound of Vietnamese artillery and mortar fire rumbled through this border
town.

Thai officers said hundreds of rounds landed across the frontier, killing three
villagers, and that Thai Army guns fired back.

International aid officials said at least 8,000 Cambodians sought haven in
Thailand, but Thai military officers put the number as high as 30,000. The Khao
Din civilian camp, controlled by the Communist Khmer Rouge rebel movement, was
reportedly seized and burned by the Vietnamese.

Thais Evacuated to Interior

Officials reported about 8,000 Thais were evacuated into the interior, and a
senior army officer said the entire area south of Aranyaprathet was placed on
full alert ''to make sure the war does not spill over into Thai territory.''

Thai military vehicles bearing recoilless guns and heavy machine guns were seen
moving from Aranyaprathet to points south. Reporters were stopped by Thai border
forces a few miles south of Aranyaprathet.

The fighting in western Battambang Province in Cambodia raged from dawn to
midafternoon, shaking houses in Aranyaprathet and sending residents to bunkers.

After winding up a damaging offensive against guerrillas of the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, Vietnamese forces in the last month have turned their
guns on the Khmer Rouge in the densely jungled, malaria- ridden mountains of
western Cambodia. The Vietnamese push began in mid-November.

The Khmer People's National Liberation Front is one of two non-Communist
guerrilla groups allied with the Khmer Rouge against the six-year-old Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia. The second is led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, former
Cambodian chief of state.

Thai officers say the Vietnamese, striking along a 40-mile stretch of
battlefield south of here, have been trying to pin the guerrillas against the
Thai border with simultaneous attacks from the east and south.

Col. Anusorn Krisanaranee, deputy army spokesman, said Vietnamese gunners rained
artillery, mortar and rocket fire for two hours on the Khao Din guerrilla base.
It has the same name as the civilian camp and is the object of the thrust from
the south.

A Thai source said the attack forced the guerrillas to disperse to nearby
hilltops, allowing the attackers to move tanks and troops into the area.

It was unclear how close the Vietnamese were to Khao Din, which is called Ang
Kobal by the Thai military. It is about 20 miles south of Aranyaprathet and
protected by guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge 320th Division.

Thai military sources said Vietnam's fire base at Nikhom Mark Hoeun bombarded
Khmer Rouge positions just south of Aranyaprathet, forcing guerrillas of the
474th Division to retreat up to 10 miles to their base in the Phnom Malai hills.

Phnom Malai is the most important guerrilla stronghold, a complex of bases that
the Khmer Rouge has held since 1981 and defended successfully against previous
Vietnamese drives.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge regime led
by Pol Pot.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND TRIAL CONTINUES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Gen. William C. Westmoreland, his wife, Katherine, and one of his
lawyers, George S. Leisure, leaving court in Manhattan. Col. Gains B.  Hawkins,
who was in charge of assessing the enemy in South Vietnam, testified in trial of
general's libel suit against CBS.  The New York Times/Marilynn K. Yee

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-COLONEL TESTIFIES FOR CBS AT TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words


A retired Army colonel who was in charge of estimating enemy strength in South
Vietnam in 1967 testified yesterday that Gen. William C. Westmoreland imposed a
''dishonest'' ceiling on reports of that strength because higher figures were
''politically unacceptable.''

Col. Gains B. Hawkins - who appeared in Federal District Court in Manhattan as
the 16th witness for CBS in General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit
against the network - said the ''command position'' was that the estimates of
enemy strength ''would not exceed'' 300,000, about 200,000 below the figure
supported by the colonel.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, denied in his own testimony last November that he placed a ceiling on
estimates of enemy strength. The general said he was concerned about the
''public relations'' impact of releasing new data without ''explanation'' but
was guided by his own views of enemy capabilities and what he believed to be the
best intelligence available to him.

1967 Briefing on Vietcong

Colonel Hawkins - a 65-year old avuncular Mississippian who asked Judge Pierre
N. Leval to tap him ''on the shoulder'' if he rambled - testified that he had
first briefed General Westmoreland in May 1967 on much increased figures for the
Vietcong's irregular forces and political cadre. His statistical methods, the
colonel told David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, were not questioned, but that his
figures were ''not accepted.''

Q. Colonel Hawkins, I want you to tell me in words to the extent you can, and in
substance to the extent that you recall, what General Westmoreland said to you
at that briefing.

A. I will have to tell you in substance because I cannot remember the precise
words. But the substance of General Westmoreland's statement was that these high
figures were politically unacceptable. The sum and substance of his statement
included statements like ''What will I tell the President? What will I tell the
Congress? What will be the reaction of the press to these high figures?

''We'd better take another look at these figures,'' Colonel Hawkins recalled the
general saying. Colonel Hawkins said that, in the following months, at least
partly on the orders of another colonel who was his immediate superior, he
proceeded to reduce the estimates. But the witness made no mention of a direct
order from General Westmoreland to cut the figures.

Colonel Hawkins, a portly man with a fringe of gray hair around a baldish pate,
testified that 14 years later he had discussed the May 1967 briefing with George
Crile, the producer of the 1982 CBS documentary that prompted General
Westmoreland's suit.

Q. Did you discuss with Mr. Crile in 1981 who was responsible for the dishonesty
of MACV (General Westmoreland's command) enemy strength figures?

Colonel Hawkins, who exchanged greetings with General Westmoreland before court
but seemed not to look at him during three hours of testimony, leaned toward the
microphone over the witness stand.

A. I told him it went back to General Westmoreland himself.

Q. Did you discuss with Mr. Crile why you believed it went back to General
Westmoreland himself?

A. Because General Westmoreland had established a ceiling, and no competent
intelligence analyst can function under the ceiling that had been established.

Colonel Hawkins completed his direct testimony yesterday and will be
cross-examined this morning. When court adjourned, Judge Leval advised the jury
that testimony in the trial, now in 18th week, may end next week, and that it
will be sequestered then.

The CBS documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - charged
that General Westmoreland's command in Saigon had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' in
1967 to show progress in the war by understating the size and nature of
Communist forces, mainly by deleting the Vietcong's self- defense units from the
official listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle. It specifically
accused the general of setting the ceiling of 300,000 on reports of enemy
strength.

Apart from CBS, the defendants in the case are Mr. Crile, Mike Wallace, the
broadcast's narrator, and Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency
analyst who was a paid consultant for the program and who, in 1967, shared
Colonel Hawkins's views about the larger strength of the enemy.

Colonel Hawkins, who served in the Army for 29 years before his retirement in
1970, now administers a nursing home for the aged in West Point, Miss. and is
chairman of the Clay County Republican Party. From February 1966 to September
1967, he was chief of the order of battle section for General Westmoreland's
command.

Asides in Testimony

Yesterday, the colonel interspersed his testimony with humorous asides, some of
which had even General Westmoreland smiling. He recalled that, after his
on-camera interview with CBS in New York in 1981, the network offered him
tickets to a Broadway show. He begged off, he said, because he was ''too tight -
not martini tight.'' But ''ironically,'' he said, ''the title of the play was:
'Ain't Misbehavin'.''

At another point, the colonel noted that one of the officers at a 1967 military
conference in Honolulu was a graduate of Princeton University. ''For the benefit
of all you Princeton graduates,'' he said to the spectators who filled the
courtroom, ''he was a real whiz on statistics.''

The colonel's testimony comported, in most respects, with what he had said
during his appearance on the documentary. But it was far richer in detail.

Colonel Hawkins said the higher figures he presented to General Westmoreland in
May 1967 were the result of months of study inititated by Maj. Gen. Joseph A.
McChristian, General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence between July 1965 and
June 1, 1967.

Decrease in Order of Battle

General Westmoreland testified that he decided after the briefing to drop the
Vietcong's part-time, hamlet-based self-defense forces from the military order
of battle - and place the political cadre in a separate listing - because it was
time to distinguish ''the fighters from the nonfighters'' among the enemy.
Instead of increasing, the order of battle then decreased from 295,000 to a
range of 223,000 to 248,000, plus 75,000 to 85,000 political cadre.

Witnesses for General Westmoreland - including Maj. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson
Jr., who succeeded General McChristian as intelligence chief, and Col. Charles
A. Morris, the director of intelligence production - have denied in testimony
that they were ordered to fake estimates on enemy strength.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked Colonel Hawkins whether he had heard General
Westmoreland ''indicate'' at the briefing ''that any of the enemy whose strength
you were estimating were not fighters or were not armed or should be separated
out.''

''There were no such remarks,'' the colonel said.

Q. Are you certain of that?

A. I am quite certain, sir.

Colonel Hawkins also testified that General Davidson told him ''in substance''
after the briefing that the higher figures were ''unacceptable'' and Colonel
Morris ordered him to lower them.

At first, Colonel Hawkins said, he explained that the higher figures were only
''book'' increases that represented, not a larger enemy than had existed, but a
previous undercounting. Then he reduced the figures by only a few thousand.

But after these figures were ''not accepted'' at a second briefing with General
Westmoreland in June, he testified, he made further ''improper'' cuts and
ordered other, more junior officers, to do so as well.

Colonel Hawkins said he told General Davidson and Colonel Morris: '' 'If you
want a different figure you need to change to the rules of the game. You just
give me what figure you think it ought to be and I'll carry it out for you.' And
this was the beginning of the reduction of our figures. I abdicated my position
as order of battle chief.''

The colonel said that when Mr. Adams and Mr. Crile asked him in 1981 to
participate in the documentary, he decided ''the war was over and it was time
for an after-action report.''

Q. Do you have any animus or ill- will towards General Westmoreland?

A. No, sir, none whatsoever.

Q. Do you have any animus or ill- will to the United States Army.

Colonel Hawkins drew himself up, and almost shouted the answer.

A. No, sir, I carried out these orders as a loyal officer in the United States
Army, sir.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1985 International

Plans to deploy nuclear arms in Canada, Iceland, Bermuda and Puerto Rico have
been charted by the United States on a contingency basis over the last decade,
according to Reagan Administration officials and a Government document outlining
the plans. Recent press reports abroad that the plans exist have caused
embarrassment in Washington because American officials have not informed the
governments involved. (Page A1, Columns 1-2.)

A Hussein-Arafat agreement on a framework for peace was called a ''significant
breakthrough'' in efforts to revive long-stalled Middle East talks by President
Hosni Mubarak's senior foreign policy adviser. The Egyptian adviser, Osama
el-Baz, who was in Amman, Jordan, to monitor the two days of talks between King
Hussein and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
declined to provide details of the accord. (A1:4.)

U.S.-Soviet talks on Middle East

 issues will be held next Tuesday in Vienna, State Department officials said.
They said the delegations would be headed by Richard W. Murphy, an Assistant
Secretary of State, and Vladimir P. Polyakov, his Soviet counterpart. (A1:3.)

A new South Korean party of anti- Government politicians gained unexpectedly
strong support and emerged from general elections as the leading opposition
group. The successful New Korea Democratic Party was formed three months ago by
opposition figures who were previously banned from political life. (A1:2.)

Gander international airport has become a key jumping-off point for people
seeking to flee to the West. Soviet- bloc airlines make 23 or so stops each week
at the Newfoundland facility to refuel on trips from Eastern Europe to Havana
and back. Immigration officials said that 96 people jumped plane there last
year. Of those, they said, 34 were Sri Lankan, 26 were Cuban, 20 were Iranian
and 16 were from Soviet-bloc countries. (A1:4-6.) National

Union Carbide hopes to reopen by April 1 its West Virginia plant that makes
methyl isocyanate, the pesticide ingredient that killed more than 2,000 people
in a leak at a similar plant in Bhopal, India. The company said the U.S.
facility, which has been closed since the Dec. 3 India leak, would reopen with
one major safety improvement - a computer system to track chemical leaks.
(A1:5.)

An inquiry into sexual abuse of children in Jordan, Minn., was improperly
conducted and ''a tragedy,'' according to state officials. After a four- month
review, they said the state would not refile criminal charges against 21 adults.
(A16:1-2.)

Medicaid is unnecessarily spending ''500 million to more than $1 billion'' a
year to pay medical bills that should be paid by private insurance companies,
according to the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress.
(A21:1.)

President Reagan seems more unshakable on pet ideas in face-to-face interviews
than he does on television or in print. (A24:4-6.) Metropolitan

The Shoreham plant may begin testing at up to 5 percent of full power, under a
4-to-1 decision of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. But the commission said
the order would not take effect until 5 P.M. today to give Suffolk County and
New York State officials time to sue to block the decision. (A1:6.)

Carol Bellamy formally announced

 her candidacy for mayor, saying that the Koch administration was ''tired'' and
that she could provide fresh leadership. The 43-year-old City Council President
said that New York City ''has been stalled.'' (B4:1-6.)

Gen. William C. Westmoreland imposed a ''dishonest'' ceiling on reports of enemy
strength in South Vietnam in 1967 because higher figures were ''politically
unacceptable,'' according to the testimony of a retired Army colonel at the CBS
libel trial. The colonel, Gains B. Hawkins, was in charge of estimating enemy
strength in 1967. (B28:1-3.)

New row houses in the South Bronx were sold to 83 families in 1982. But only the
two model houses built to entice those buyers have been completed. New York City
and bank officials say there is no guarantee that the houses will be finished
before a commitment of Federal financing expires next Sept. 30. (B1:1-5.)

All blood donations in New York State will soon be required to be tested for an
antibody to a virus suspected of causing AIDS, the State Department of Health
announced. (B3:4-6.)

Murder and robbery charges were lodged against two 20-year-old Long Island men
in the fatal stabbing of one guest and the wounding of two others at a Friday
dinner party in Great Neck. The authorities said the suspects ''apparently chose
their target at random.'' (B2:5-6.)

One man was burned seriously when an explosion and fire destroyed a paint
manufacturing plant in Middlesex Borough, N.J., the authorities said. A dozen
other employees escaped injury because they were on a coffee break outside the
building at a canteen truck. (B2:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CLAMOR OVER CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 13


The non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia took their strongest united stand
against Vietnam this week, condemning it for ignoring ''the established rules of
orderly and peaceful conduct of relations between states.'' The statement by
Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines came amid
growing regional alarm over Vietnamese attacks on rebels that have begun to
spill into Thailand and frustration over repeated failures to bring Hanoi to the
negotiating table.

35,000 Said to Flee Fighting

Today, 10,000 Vietnamese troops were reported to have surrounded rebel
strongholds in western Cambodia, and the guerrillas were said to be fighting
back with mortar and cannon fire. An estimated 35,000 civilians are believed to
have fled across the Thai border since the Vietnamese push began on Tuesday.
Regional officials and diplomats regard the statement by the six-member
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, which took the form of an
international plea for military aid for the Cambodian guerrillas, as significant
for several reasons.

The plea, made here at a foreign ministers' meeting, did not differentiate
between support for the non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas and backing for the
Chinese-supplied Communist Khmer Rouge, a distinction that has often been made
by governments unwilling to be associated with the forces of Pol Pot.

Furthermore, the Asean statement received the full support of Indonesia, the
largest and most powerful member of the group and the one that Vietnam and the
Heng Samrin regime in Cambodia had considered most receptive. A year ago,
Indonesia's armed forces chief, Gen. Benny Murdani, said after a visit to Hanoi
that Vietnam was a lesser threat to the region than China.  For much of Asia and
the Western Pacific, no regional issue is more important or more persistently
troublesome than the unresolved problem of Cambodia. Vietnam's invasion and the
prolonged combat that has followed have taken a toll in diplomatic and political
as well as human casualties.

The issue has sharply divided Southeast Asia, with the gap between the
Indochinese Communist nations of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos and the free-
market, nonaligned or pro-Western Asean countries growing wider by the year.

The latest movement in the rift is the change in attitude by Indonesia - or its
decision to adopt the point of view of Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja,
who was saying before the present Vietnamese offensive began that Hanoi's
''uncooperative'' attitude had been blocking all peace initiatives.

Malaysia, a country that long shared Indonesia's fear of China because of
Peking's support of insurrections in the 1950's and 60's, has since recognized
the Chinese-armed Cambodian rebel coalition as the Government of Cambodia.  Last
week Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, announced he would make an
official visit to Peking in the fall.

Mistrust of Vietnam is heightened in some Asean capitals by the belief that
Hanoi's military reliance on Moscow for its Cambodian campaign has opened the
area to greater Soviet influence.

Relations with the Soviet Union, which would like to increase trade in this
fast-growing region, have cooled. Soviet ambassadors were summoned to foreign
ministries throughout the region last week and asked to help control the
Vietnamese.

Relations between China and Vietnam, which soured after the end of the Vietnam
War, have deteriorated further. Hanoi has recently accused China, the main
supplier of Vietnam's enemies in Cambodia, of fomenting insurrection within
Vietnam itself.

Issue Isolates Vietnam

The Cambodian issue has isolated Vietnam, internationally as well as regionally,
at a time when it is in great need of economic aid. Asean, which expressed some
willingness to help rebuild Vietnam a decade ago, is reduced to ''correct'' and
minimal relations with Hanoi.

Foreign Minister Mochtar, who has served as Asean's go-between with Hanoi, said
in an interview in December that the Vietnamese had ''completely dissipated''
the good will they had gained in the third world during their struggle against
the United States.

Japan, which is thought to have millions of dollars to invest in Vietnam, has
withheld aid pending Vietnamese military withdrawal from Cambodia.

Most European nations represented in Hanoi give little or no assistance.
Sweden, Hanoi's largest Western aid donor, has announced it is cutting back.
Denmark has closed its embassy in Hanoi, citing costs and the inactivity of its
diplomatic staff. Other embassies are reported to be considering similar action.

The United Nations Security Council and General Assembly have called for
Vietnamese withdrawal and self- determination for Cambodians. Last year the
Assembly again denied, by a vote of 110 to 20, a seat to the Vietnamese-backed
Phmon Penh regime.

If Cambodia is now, as some believe, the battleground for the surrogate armies
of China and the Soviet Union, there is historical precedent. For 400 years
after the collapse of a Khmer kingdom in the 14th century, Siamese and
Vietnamese empires competed for control over this fertile land astride the
Mekong River.  During 90 years of French colonial rule, beginning in 1864, the
better educated Vietnamese were given bureaucratic posts in preference to native
Khmer people, heightening age-old animosities. Chinese-Vietnamese merchants
dominated the country's commerce.

When the Commmunist Khmer Rouge took over Cambodia in 1975, an anti-Vietnamese
faction was apparently in charge. Hanoi, however, was preoccupied at the time
with the final assault on Saigon, which fell a few weeks after the Khmer Rouge
entered Phnom Penh.

Once Hanoi was free to concentrate on Cambodia, relations between the two
Communist regimes deteriorated rapidly. Border clashes began. By mid- 1978,
Vietnamese troops had entered Cambodia; a full-scale invasion took place on
Christmas Day of that year.

In January 1979 the Pol Pot regime, under whose harsh rule over a million people
were killed in executions and enforced hardships, was overthrown and the Khmer
Rouge took up guerrilla warfare again. They have since been joined in a loose
rebel coalition by two non-Communist groups, one led by a former Prime Minister,
Son Sann, and the other by Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia's royal family.

The war now raging in Cambodia thus can be seen as a continuation of several old
struggles.

Several Problems in One

''Basically the Cambodian problem is at least four, maybe five problems rolled
into one,'' Foreign Minister Mochtar said in the interview in Jakarta in
December.

First, he said, it is a conflict between the Vietnamese and the Cambodians as
people. Then, it is a conflict between the Vietnamese Communists and the
Cambodian Communists, the Khmer Rouge. ''It is an attempt on the part of the
Vietnamese Communist Party to be the party of the whole of Indochina.

''Third,'' he went on, ''it is a problem between Vietnam and China for hegemony
in that part of Southeast Asia.

''And then you have the fourth problem. And this is how it is dealt with at the
United Nations: as the Socialist Republic of Vietnam attacking an independent
country.

''If you add a big-power dimension to it, you have five big problems,'' Mr.
Mochtar said. ''These problems will have to be solved one by one.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mochtar Kusumaatmadja (page A14)

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS TRIAL TESTIMONY CENTERS ON 1967 INTELLIGENCE BRIEFINGS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words


Lawyers for Gen. William C. Westmoreland renewed their efforts in Federal
District Court in Manhattan yesterday to show that the general had not concealed
higher estimates of enemy strength in South Vietnam in 1967.

The focus of their efforts, which will continue when the general's libel trial
against CBS resumes next Tuesday, is a series of two or three military
intelligence briefings in the spring of 1967. What happened at those briefings -
what was said or ordered by General Westmoreland - is an important question in
the trial but is still in dispute after 18 weeks of testimony.

Col. Gains Hawkins, who was a senior intelligence officer, testified for CBS on
Tuesday that at a briefing on May 28, 1967, the general refused for
''political'' reasons to accept new and much increased estimates for the
irregular forces and political cadre.



No Recollection of Briefing

But yesterday, under cross-examination, Colonel Hawkins said he did not recall
attending a briefing on May 19, 1967, when General Westmoreland's immediate
superior supposedly was advised of the higher figures and when the general asked
that the ''armed'' enemy be listed separately from the unarmed. The superior was
Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, commander of American forces in the Pacific.

David M. Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland, pointed out that on May 17,
1967, Colonel Hawkins wrote his wife from Saigon that Admiral Sharp was ''due in
next week.''

Q. You have no recollection of a briefing on or about May 19, 1967, to Admiral
Sharp?

A. No, sir, I have no recollection that I presented a briefing given to Admiral
Sharp on May 19.

Q. Would you have participated in the preparation of a briefing given to Admiral
Sharp under procedures in effect in mid-May 1967?

A. I may or may not have for one or more reasons. I do not recall the briefing,
sir. I have answered that over and over and over again, sir.

On Tuesday, Colonel Hawkins testified that General Westmoreland had imposed a
''dishonest'' ceiling on reports of enemy strength in 1967 after the May 28
briefing, which the colonel said was the first time he presented the higher
figures to the general.

But yesterday Mr. Dorsen read aloud a memorandum dated May 20 and prepared by
General Westmoreland's deputy chief of staff that ''confirms oral guidance''
from the general following the meeting May 19. It said ''the advisability of
releasing the information presented in a VC Irregular Forces strength in SV
briefing without further refinement was questioned.''

The memo also said the data on the irregular forces and political cadre would be
''analyzed in depth'' by May 27 by operations and public information officers
''to determine how this information should be presented both officially and
publicly.''

Another document dated May 28, which was introduced earlier in the trial, said
that intelligence officers had presented ''a revised version'' of the figures
and that General Westmoreland had ordered that they be ''coordinated'' with the
Central Intelligence Agency, the American Embassy and others ''before being
forwarded to higher headquarters and Washington.''



'Politically Unacceptable'

According to Colonel Hawkins, he gave only two briefings on the new estimates to
General Westmoreland - on May 28 and June 14. And because General Westmoreland
indicated that those figures were ''politically unacceptable,'' he testified, he
cut them and ordered junior officers to do so as well.

General Westmoreland, who testified last November, recalled briefings only on
May 19 and May 28, and was not asked about a session with Colonel Hawkins in
June 1967. And he denied fixing a limit on enemy strength.

Colonel Hawkins remembered General Westmoreland speculating at the May 28
briefing how President Johnson, Congress and the press would react to the higher
figures. And, according to an affidavit submitted by Kelly Robinson, an
intelligence officer who attended one of the briefings, the general
''specifically mentioned The New York Times and kept saying words to the effect
of 'What am I going to tell the press?' ''

General Westmoreland testified that at the briefing with Captain Robinson he
said ''in words or substance that there was a public relations problem.''

'The Party Line'

The basis for General Westmoreland's suit is a 1982 CBS documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that charged the general's command with
engaging in a ''conspiracy'' in 1967 to show progress in the war by understating
the size and nature of Communist military capabilities. The general led American
forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

In other testimony yesterday, Lieut. Col. Norman House said he was ''fired''
from an Army intelligence unit in Saigon in the autumn of 1967 because he
refused to support a ''predetermined conclusion'' that the enemy, rather than
becoming stronger, was ''reverting'' to an earlier phase of guerrilla activity.

Colonel House, who is retired, said he was told by a superior, Col. Leon Goche,
that ''if I wasn't ready to prepare reports that would support that party line,
then I didn't belong in that elite group.''

The official ''line,'' Colonel House told the jury, ''was that U.S. and allied
forces had won the war of attrition.'' That line, he said, was ''completely
dishonest, it was a falsehood of the greatest magnitude.''

Colonel House said the ''party line was so strong, so unbreakable, that it had
to be not only privy to General Westmoreland'' but also to his senior aides.

Lawyers for CBS plan to call only three more witnesses in the trial before Judge
Pierre N. Leval. They are Col. John Barrie Williams, a former intelligence
officer; Roger Colloff, who was vice president and director of public affairs at
CBS News when the documentary was made, and Mike Wallace, who narrated the
broadcast and is now a defendant.

Colonel Hawkins, who was a prime source for the documentary and appeared on it
as well, was chief of the or der-of-battle section of General Westmoreland's
command from February 1966 to September 1967.

Yesterday, the 65-year old Mississippian, who described himself as ''a country
boy,'' sparred with Mr. Dorsen over a number of subjects, from whether he had
suggested in 1967 that the military ''stonewall'' the C.I.A. until the new data
on Vietcong irregulars was solidified - he apparently had - to whether the enemy
tended to lie about the strength of its forces.

The Vietnamese Communists were ''just like Democrats and Republicans in that
way, they all do some lying now and then and you find some once in a while that
will tell you the truth,'' Colonel Hawkins said. But the documents the
Communists produced, he added, did not usually exaggerate their data.

At one stage, Mr. Dorsen had Colonel Hawkins read aloud portions of a 1980 draft
article he wrote about his Vietnam experiences. The colonel read one part, then
another, and looked up from the witness stand with satisfaction.

''God,'' he exclaimed, as courtroom spectators burst into laughter, ''this is
getting better all the time.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENT ACTIVISM ALIVE AT BROWN U.

BYLINE: By CORY DEAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I.


It has been a matter of pride to administrators who were at Brown University in
the 1960's that the campus survived the turmoil of that time without major
disruption.

''Brown was the only school in the Ivy League that did not call the cops in the
Vietnam era,'' says Robert A. Reichley, vice president for university relations,
who came to Brown in 1968.

But today, when much of the country is floating in what Mr. Reichley calls a ''a
sea of conservatism,'' students at Brown have attracted wide attention with
campus protests.

In October students voted to ask the university to stock suicide pills for use
in the event of nuclear war. Although the university said from the outset that
it would not consider stocking cyanide for students, the referendum was praised
by administrators, faculty members and students who endorsed its message - that
the arms race is suicidal - and applauded its success in making the point to the
public.

C.I.A. Recruiting Protested

In November, in an action that has divided opinion on campus, several dozen
students disrupted an appearance by recruiters from the Central Intelligence
Agency by attempting to put them under citizens' arrest. The students said that
the agency engaged in illegal activity, citing such things as the mining of
harbors in Nicaragua by C.I.A.-supported forces.  They said recruiting people to
commit crimes was a crime itself.

But the university administration took the position that the protest deprived
the recruiters of their right to speak. The university issued formal warnings to
all the undergraduate students who took part and made the warnings part of their
permanent records.

To some the university appears to be caught in a time warp. But although many of
the students involved in the demonstrations wear the long hair and armbands of
the 1960's, they reject the analogy and repudiate the methods and rhetoric of
the Vietnam era.

''People use that nostalgia line to discredit anything that goes against the
status quo,'' said Juliet M. Brodie, a senior who was among the leaders of the
C.I.A. protest.

'Citizen's Arrest' Defended

Although the university administration disagrees, she and others in the group
described the attempted arrest as a carefully thought-out effort to combat what
they believe to be criminal activity.

''This has been consistently seen as some form of street theater,'' Miss Brodie
said, angry that the protest has been compared to confrontations of 20 years
ago. ''This was not just a protest, it was a citizens' arrest!''

Jason Salzman, an organizer of the suicide referendum, said the tactics of the
60's carry a ''stigma'' of ineffectiveness. ''People have chanted, 'Up against
the wall!' and nothing happens,'' he said. ''Even people who sympathize realize
that approach was used and may not be effective.''

He said he believed asking students to vote on the suicide pill referendum would
compel them to ''confront the issue in a more personal way'' than did rallies
and protest marches in the 60's.

'Far From the 60's'

William G. McLoughlin, a professor of history who was active in the anti- war
movement of the 60's, said the students involved in protests at Brown today were
''far from the 'stop the world, I want to get off' people of the 60's, the
people who wanted to get out and march for Martin Luther King or picket for
grapes.'' He said most today planned professional careers.

At their disciplinary hearing, a nine- hour proceeding, the students charged
with disrupting the C.I.A. recruiters presented the results of their research on
citizens' arrests. They brought two lawyers to testify on the subject.

Sandor Katz, a senior who was one of the C.I.A. protesters, said the group
learned from the example of the 60's: ''They didn't do the kinds of things we
did in terms of research.''

Administrators, professors and students alike have no ready explanation for what
appears to be an unusual level of activism at Brown.

Howard R. Swearer, Brown's president, attributed much of this impression to the
fact that Brown gets ''more media attention.'' Mr. Reichley agreed. ''We have
extremely high visibility,'' he said.

Individual Experiences Cited

The students say their reasons are individual, based on their experiences before
getting to college. Mr. Katz said he first went to demonstrations as an infant,
carried by his parents.

Miss Brodie attributed some of her activism to her mother's involvement in the
peace movement. ''There are 67 different stories,'' said Lisa Krakow, a C.I.A.
protester, alluding to the number of students cited at the hearing.

Mr. Salzman cited a factor many on campus offered as a possible explanation, the
university's curriculum, which was adopted after months of student agitation in
the 60's. It allows students unusual freedom to design their own programs.

''I came to this school because of the curriculum,'' he said. ''The curriculum
attracts people who might be interested in taking responsibility for their own
education so they are taking responsibility for much larger things.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesting students at Brown University

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Franklin Ashley Is Dead at 69; Plastic Surgeon to Famous

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 214 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 14


Dr. Franklin Ashley, a plastic surgeon whose patients included Ann-Margret and
Phyllis Diller and who reconstructed the faces of deformed Vietnamese and
African children, died today in Florida, his biographer said. He was 69 years
old.

Dr. Ashley was found dead at his home 40 miles outside his native St.
Petersburg, Fla., said the biographer, May Mann, She said he had been battling
cancer and underwent surgery last year.

Among the doctor's famous patients, she said, John Wayne became a close friend
as well as a patient, and Dr. Ashley healed the crippled hands of Jimmy McHugh,
the composer. After Ann- Margret fell 22 feet to the stage of the Sahara Hotel
at Lake Tahoe in 1972 and was brought to a Los Angeles hospital, Dr. Ashley
reconstructed the face.

A pilot, he flew to Vietnam at his own expense and brought children back to the
United States for surgery, May Mann said. While hunting in Africa, he discovered
children deserted by their parents because of malformations. He founded a
village in East Africa and built shelters for the children.

In World War II, the biographer said, Dr. Ashley earned a reputation as a
surgeon aboard the carrier Hornet who repaired limbs rather than amputating
them. He is survived by his wife, Rosemary, and two children.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Q&A: PAUL G. KIRK JR.;
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY: A VIEW FROM THE TOP

BYLINE: By Howell Raines

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14


Paul G. Kirk Jr., newly elected chairman of the Democratic National Committee,
campaigned for the job on promises that he would infuse the party with fresh
ideas and repair the damage done to its electoral base by the 1984 Presidential
election.

Notwithstanding his ties to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, whom he served as a
principal strategist in the Senator's quest for the 1980 Presidential
nomination, and notwithstanding his ties to organized labor, Mr. Kirk also
pledged to assert the national committee's independence from constituency groups
and from potential Presidential candidates.

Mr. Kirk was interviewed today before leaving for Atlanta to meet with Southern
leaders about restoring Democratic strength in the region.


Q. How do you view the state of the party, both the good and bad news for
Democrats?

A. The good news side is where we are at the state and local levels, where we
have 34 out of the 50 governors, a really generous majority of mayors, twice as
many state legislative bodies that are Democratic majorities, and that, I think,
is the fundamental base strength.

One of the ironies is that a lot of the folks who are being elected at the state
level have had to run deliberately independent of the national party to survive,
particularly in the South and the West.

And I think that is one of the challenges - to get the national party a little
more in sync with progressive mainstream America.

Q. How much damage was done by the '84 Presidential defeat?

A. Well, the damage obviously, the number of states that went for Reagan, was
severe. I think what came from that loss is an understanding that we'll have to
do a lot better and work harder. We may have been brought to our knees, but I
hope we've been brought to our senses and realize the enormity of the job ahead.


Q. One of the points you made was that the Democrats had to reclaim their heroes
and reclaim the issue of traditional values. But how do the Democrats go about
really doing that against a master political performer like Reagan?

A. Well, it's going to take time and hard work. We have been portrayed, rightly
or wrongly, as sort of a status quo party, kind of trapped in the past and not
fighting to get up with the country as it goes through transition. Reagan comes
in after really 25 years of difficulties in the country. Whether it's
assassination, civil rights riots, social upheaval, Watergate, Vietnam, energy
crisis, hostages, the luck lines ran right for him. He got a lucky turn on the
economy after the recession and he plays it very well. And I think he hit the
mood on an upbeat and was able to say, ''Look, we are the party of
opportunity.'' I don't see that as something that's permanently lost to our
party. We can reclaim that and do it with justification.


Q. Was it more than just Reagan's skill? Was there also a period when the
Democrats were seen to have been drifting away from the ideas of church, family,
community?

A. I think that's true. We allowed him to take the buzzword ''traditional
American values'' and portray us as perhaps having abandoned them as a party.
Once one party looks like it's given them up, they deserve to lose.


Q. Do you see the party distancing itself from organized labor and from
minorities?

A. I think you can't distance yourself from the basic coalitions and elements
that make up the party. But we cannot be captives of those and totally beholden
to them if we're really going to try to reach out and get the response of
America.


Q. The Rev. Jesse Jackson made some rather harsh comments in recent days about
both the party leadership and your election as chairman. But now he is saying
that he thinks you and he should sit down and talk. Are you willing to do that?
A. Sure. One of the reasons I didn't respond to the public comments of Reverend
Jackson, I don't think that serves the party well.


Q. What kind of new role do you see for Jackson in the Democratic Party?

A. Well, I just hope that we can work together. Clearly, I think he made an
enormous difference in terms of energizing the black population and inspiring
kids to be involved in the process and so forth. I don't know what particular
goals or ambitions he may have for himself. Whatever it is, I have to make sure
that the committee and its apparatus and its commissions are free from candidate
influence. I think that was one of the problems last time.


Q. Would you favor seeing the New Hampshire primary and the Iowa caucuses lose
their heavily influential role as the first two events of the Presidential
campaign year?

A. They asked me about that during the course of the chairmanship and I said,
listen, we're being tabbed as a special interest party and 48 other states think
you folks are a special interest. And we've got to try to get that thing back in
order.


Q. Do you have any observations about what kind of ticket the party ought to be
trying to develop for '88?

A. We need a ticket that is responsive intellectually and politically to a
country in transition. By that I mean not only what we're doing economically and
technologically but also recognizing that the Northeast and the Midwest as a
political base has to be held if we're going to be viable. But the demographic
and economic growth of the country is going South and West. I think whatever
combination (of candidates) it may come with a ticket that recognizes that, that
growth and that trend.


Q. You've spoken of starting a policy institute to develop ideas for the party.
As you have gone around the country to all these regions, what ideas or concepts
do you hear Democrats talking about?

A. I think fundamentally our party has to demonstrate that it really is credible
on economic questions of the 1980's and going into the future. And it has to be
what it should be: not ashamed of saying that it needs and wants a sound, stable
defense policy.


Q. A majority of white Southerners voted for the Democratic ticket in 1976. In
1984 only 25 percent of the white people in the South voted Democratic. Do you
think that the discussions in Atlanta will get down to talking about ways of
holding the party's black constituency and reclaiming its share of the white
vote?

A. I think our party can never take for granted the support that it enjoyed from
a majority of the black population. The fact is that black people at this time
may have looked at the Reagan Administration and said, ''There's no no choice
there. They're probably an anti-black Administration.''

On the other hand, there were a lot of folks who said about the Democratic
Party, ''I don't relate to that.'' That's something we have to get back. When
Democratic governors and senators in the Southern region, they're getting
support from blacks and whites and so forth and it's the national party has to
try to work to get those same people saying, ''yeah.'' Not only in Georgia and
North Carolina or wherever, but in Washington, D.C., so the national party is
something we can salute again.


Q. Has Senator Kennedy called you to congratulate you on getting elected?

A. He did. So did a lot of others though.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Kirk

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BABES IN ARMS, REFUGEES ENTER THAILAND

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 14


They bring with them what they can carry: chickens, pigs, pots, pans. Men, women
and children, the very old and handicapped come down from their former
strongholds in the hills known as the Phnom Malai, seeking refuge in the rice
fields of Thailand.

These are the Khmer Rouge, who under the rule of Pol Pot in Cambodia from 1975
to 1979, are accused of killing or leaving to die of disease and starvation as
many as two million people.

Many of the refugees seemed to be men and boys of fighting age. They wore what
looked like new uniforms and caps. Many bore the scars of previous battles; some
hobbled down the road, under a scorching sun, on one leg; others were in crude
wheelchairs.

At the village of Khao Saraphi, 5,000 refugees were settling in a sunbaked
field, and hundreds more were arriving every hour. Men unfamiliar with relief
supplies were struggling to unfold and pitch blue plastic tents.

At a small Buddhist temple near Khao Saraphi, two women had stopped to give
birth. One was in labor, crying in pain. The other had just delivered a boy. The
father washed the baby as two other children sat nearby.

Suddenly a Vietnamese shell whistled in and exploded 300 yards from the little
temple. Thai troops waved frantically from a bunker across the road, motioning
the group to join them.

The new father turned toward the incoming shells and screamed in rage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KHMER ROUGE BASES REPORTED IN PERIL

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 14


Thai military officials said today that Khmer Rouge rebels, who have been
fighting the Vietnamese in Cambodia for six years, appeared to be on the verge
of being driven from their most important bases in western Cambodia along the
Thai border.

Backed by heavy artillery barrages, the Vietnamese were reported to be closing
in on guerrilla outposts in the western mountains and on the rebels' showcase
camp at Phum Thmei.

Earlier in the day, Vietnamese troops estimated to number 13,000 moved in from
the south and east in a coordinated drive on the Khmer Rouge stronghold of Khao
Din and the headquarters camp of Phnom Malai. Khao Din was said to have fallen,
along with part of Phnom Malai, from which the rebels had defended Phum Thmei.

(Thai military officials said Friday that Phnom Malai had been overrun by the
Vietnamese, but gave no details of casualties on either side, Reuters reported.
The Thai officials were quoted as saying most of the guerrillas from the camp
had escaped.)

As the Vietnamese drive intensified over the last three days, thousands of Khmer
Rouge guerrillas and their civilian supporters have been fleeing into Thailand.

40,000 Reported Evacuated

An official of the International Committee of the Red Cross said today that
about 40,000 inhabitants of Khmer Rouge camps had been evacuated to two
emergency sites in Thailand. Among the evacuees are guerrillas, whom the Thais
are reported to be disarming to avoid provoking Vietnamese attacks on the
refugee sites.

Red Cross medical teams have also been transporting wounded Khmer Rouge
civilians and soldiers to a refugee medical center at Khao I Dang, north of the
border town of Aranyaprathet. About 23 such cases have been recorded in the last
two days.

In the past, Red Cross officials say, the Khmer Rouge have often refused offers
of assistance from relief agencies. Even now, medical teams are not being
permitted to enter Khmer Rouge camps, officials say. Wounded guerrillas and
civilians are brought out to pickup points. Relief agencies say it is impossible
to calculate total casualties because other victims might have been left behind
by the guerrillas.

Phum Thmei is a model camp that the Khmer Rouge use for ceremonial occasions. It
was there last week that Prince Norodom Sihanouk, as head of a three-faction
anti-Vietnamese rebel front, received the credentials of ambassadors from North
Korea, Bangladesh, Senegal and Mauritania, the most recent nations to recognize
the rebels as the government of Cambodia.

The mass exodus from Khmer Rouge camps, where civilians have been kept under
close supervision and control, suggests that the guerrillas are preparing to
abandon their bases under the Vietnamese onslaught rather than risk heavy
losses. Livestock, including elephants, were brought out today.

The Vietnamese in previous years have not turned the full force of their
superior army on Khmer Rouge bases. There are thought to be 35,000 Khmer Rouge
guerrillas operating in Cambodia. Vietnamese troops are estimated at between
160,000 and 200,000.

Seeking to Secure Frontier

Vietnamese officials have said they intend to empty the border camps this year
and secure the frontier. Intelligence officials and diplomats here suggest that
with the border camps at least temporarily empty, Hanoi would be in a stronger
position to negotiate, whether to secure a recognition of an advantageous status
quo or to consider concessions on the Vietnamese-installed regime in Phnom Penh.

Nearly all experts agree, however, that it will be impossible to tell which
side, if any, won or lost this year's dry- season offensive until the rainy
season begins late in the spring. That has been the traditional signal for
renewed guerrilla warfare inside Cambodia.

Meanwhile, Thailand's Foreign Ministry has been taking a very tough line on
Vietnamese attacks into Thailand. At least three Thai villagers have been killed
this week and others have been wounded as Vietnamese shells fell in Thai
territory.

''We have been threatened and violated,'' Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila said
today. ''If we leave things as they are, Vietnam will do this again.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of refugee

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words


ANOTHER ''Treasure Island?'' Yes, but this one might actually make it to
Broadway, with Telly Savalas playing Long John Silver.

''I watched the success of 'Annie,' saw that there was nothing to follow it, and
decided that 'Treasure Island' would be the best story to make a family- type
show,'' said Gordon Crowe, an original co-producer of ''Oh! Calcutta!'' Mr.
Crowe, who has also been involved in putting on international ballet shows, will
be producing this one in association with Neil Weisman, a partner in a brokerage
firm. The budget is slightly more than $2 million.

Mr. Savalas has apparently signed on the dotted line, but negotiations for a
director are still going on. A.J. Antoon, who won a Tony award for his direction
of ''The Championship Season,'' is the man being sought.

The musical, with a book by Sherman Yellen and music and lyrics by Gary William
Friedman and Will Holt, is scheduled to go into rehearsal in the spring and tour
the country this summer. If all goes well, it will arrive on Broadway shortly
before Christmas.


Talk about revolving stage doors and you've got to talk about ''Hurlyburly,''
which seems to change a cast member every other week. The interesting news this
time is that as of March 5, Frank Langella will revolve into the theater to play
the role of Eddie, now being enacted by John Christopher Jones, the former
understudy. The role was originally played by William Hurt, and later by John
Rubinstein, who left to film more episodes of the CBS television series ''Crazy
Like a Fox'' on the West Coast. However, for the next few weeks, Mr. Rubinstein
will be commuting from the coast and will rejoin the cast for weekend
performances.


Another illusion shot into the dust! Performers' dressing rooms aren't always
filled with glorious fresh roses and orchids. Michael Loeb, who runs Selo, Inc.,
an artificial flower concern, says that he not only sends silk flowers to
theaters for lobby decors but also to brighten the backstage homes of many a
thespian. Mr. Loeb may get in on the theater act himself next month. He's
producing Joel Gross's drama ''Haven,'' which opens March 10 at the South Street
Theater, 424 West 42d Street.


Meet an actor who loves to audition.

''It fires me up,'' said Vincent Caristi, who is in ''Tracers'' at the Public
Theater. ''It's a challenge to win over the people on the other side of the
footlights, the director and the producers. It's like sports; the competition is
healthy, and I like proving that I can be a chameleon. I don't even mind if I
don't get the job.''

Mr. Caristi, who plays the role of Baby San, the youngest in a company of
Americans serving in Vietnam, said he particularly enjoyed the role because ''I
was just like that, naive and not too bright.'' But, he said, his naivete
disappeared quickly during his own Vietnam service. His army days became, in
fact, what he termed ''the catalyst''for his acting career.''

''I felt guilty for a while, but I got over it,'' he said.

Mr. Caristi, who supplements his stage income with guest appearances on
television series (he was nominated for an Emmy for one), said that nothing he
had experienced could compare with the thrill of performing in New York.

''This is a homecoming like out of the movies,'' said the 36-year-old native of
Brooklyn and graduate of Richmond College in Staten Island. ''It's a dream come
true.''

Although he has been most frequently cast as ''guys who are a little crazy,''
Mr. Caristi said he's gravitating to humor because ''it's more of a challenge to
make someone laugh - it's easy to make them cry.

''And I've hinted around about Shakespeare in the Park,'' he said. ''I'd kill to
do that.''


Ekkehard Schall will make his American debut here Feb. 25 at a one-man benefit
performance, and he'll stay on for a limited engagement. And who is Ekkehard
Schall? Many serious theatergoers recognize the name as that of a leading actor
with East Berlin's famed Berliner Ensemble, founded in 1949 by Mr. Schall's
father-in-law, Bertolt Brecht. There will be two programs, on alternate nights
from Feb. 26 through March 16, each featuring some of Brecht's writings. Some of
the performances at the Harold Clurman Theater, 412 West 42d Street, will take
place before ''A Kurt Weill Cabaret'' now at the theater, and some after.. The
benefit will be held at the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, with
proceeds earmarked for the Clurman Theater. If that sounds confusing, never
mind. Just figure it's a good cause. Information: 594-2370.


Karen Akers, who co-starred in ''Nine,'' and is featured in Woody Allen's new
movie, ''The Purple Rose of Cairo,'' says she is taking ''musical risks'' with
her new musical entertainment. What the risks are won't be revealed until the
show's opening, scheduled for the end of next month at a mid-sized Broadway
theater, but anyone in the vicinity of Lexington, Ky., next week can get a
preview. The tryouts will be held at the Opera House there Feb. 21-23. Written
and directed by David Lawson, the production will feature Kay Cole and Pamela
Blasetti, with music by such composers as Peter Allen, Stephen Sondheim and
Billy Joel.


Brooklyn may be off-off-off Broadway, but don't write it off. ''Pantomime,'' a
philosophical comedy by Derek Walcott, is opening at the New Theater of
Brooklyn, 800 Union Street, March 8. A subway or taxi will get you there, $7
will get you in, and a call to (718) 252-6470 will answer other questions.


Good news in a season that's notably short of it: The Playwrights Horizons
production of Wendy Wasserstein's ''Isn't It Romantic'' will mark its 500th
performance Tuesday. It's at the Lortel Theater.


It's an ambitious project, but after last fall's successful ''Garden of Earthly
Delights,'' Lyn Austin's Musi-Theater Group-Lenox Arts Center is ready for
anything. Coming up, as of March 5, will be Gertrude Stein's ''The Making of
Americans,'' with music by Al Carmines and libretto by Leon Katz. The
production, based on the novel, chronicles the story of three generations of the
Stein family. The place: St. Clements Church, 423 West 46th Street.


Another church, Heavenly Rest at 2 East 90th Street, will house the Stephen
Schwartz-Joseph Stein musical ''The Baker's Wife,'' beginning March 20. The
production, by the York Theater Company, which was responsible for the recent
revival of ''Pacific Overtures,'' will feature Jack Weston, Kevin Gray and Joyce
Leigh Bowden.


Admission is free, but nobody will turn down a donation when Joe Pintauro's
newest work, ''Short Plays For Small Stages,'' is presented Monday. It will be
part of the New Directions Theater's staged reading series. Guess where? Yet
another church - Little Church Around the Corner, 1 East 29th Street.
Reservations: 722-1200.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S TROOPS SAID TO TAKE BASES OF CAMBODIA FOES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 15


Vietnamese troops routed Khmer Rouge rebels from the last of their bases in
western Cambodia today, according to Thai military officers.

The Vietnamese were also reported to have set fire to the Khmer Rouge's showcase
camp at Phum Thmei, which had served as a capital for the Cambodian rebel
coalition led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. The coalition holds the country's
United Nations seat, and Phum Thmei was used to receive foreign ambassadors.

The Khmer Rouge base of Phnom Malai was also reported to have fallen.



Second Defeat in 6 Years

The Vietnamese action marked the second major defeat the Khmer Rouge have
suffered at Hanoi's hands in six years. Vietnamese troops had previously ousted
the Khmer Rouge regime under Pol Pot from Phnom Penh after fighting had broken
out between Cambodia and Vietnam along their common border.

This week, thousands of Khmer Rouge guerrillas, under siege by six Vietnamese
divisions, were reported by the Thai authorities to have slipped through
Vietnamese lines to new positions in Cambodia, taking arms and equipment with
them. Others have sought refuge in Thailand, where they are being disarmed by
Thai troops.

More than 40,000 Khmer Rouge civilians have also fled to safety in Thailand. It
is estimated that more than 200,000 of the 250,000 Cambodians who had lived in
territory controlled by rebel forces before this year's dry-season offensive
began in November have now crossed into Thailand.



Casualties Not Known

There were no clear indications of the number of casualties in the fighting
today. The Khmer Rouge, whose leaders are apparently still in Cambodia directing
operations, have no spokesmen in Thailand, as other rebel groups do.

Khmer Rouge guerrillas have rarely if ever reported casualty figures and have
often left dead or wounded behind in battle, according to military experts who
have been following the six-year- old Cambodia war. Almost all information on
the fighting comes from Thai officers monitoring the action from their border
bunkers.

There has been speculation about why the Vietnamese, who are now thought to have
from 160,000 to 200,000 troops in Cambodia, had not struck the Khmer Rouge hard
before.

Vietnamese officials, who in the past have said large attacks on the Khmer Rouge
would risk incursions into Thailand, apparently decided this year that all the
border camps would have to be cleared and the frontier closed as much as
possible. Cambodians fleeing the country in the last few months have reported
that the Vietnamese were using forced labor to build earthen barriers and
ditches near the frontier.

Rebel forces, who have been striking in almost every province of Cambodia, were
growing in number, and defecting Cambodians were arriving almost daily at
guerrilla camps.  The overrunning of Khmer Rouge bases follows Vietnamese
attacks that began in November on camps under the control of the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, the larger of two non-Communist factions in the
three-group rebel coalition.



Sihanouk Camps Untouched

Only the camps of Prince Sihanouk, whose followers have the smallest army, have
been left untouched by the Vietnamese. There is speculation that Hanoi may now
turn its attention to those bases, which are north of the border town of
Aranyaprathet.

Fighting is still going on at or around at least one of the Liberation Front
camps. On Thursday, an official of the International Committee of the Red Cross
said there had been a battle lasting several hours at Rithisen, which the
Vietnamese attacked on Dec. 25.

Diplomats in Bangkok cautioned that it would not be known until the rainy season
begins this spring whether the rebels have suffered a permanent setback. The
Thais have been actively seeking more military aid for the guerrilla coalition
so it can resume strikes against the Heng Samrin regime and its Vietnamese
backers.

According to Thai officers and diplomats, the monthlong campaign against the
mountain strongholds of the Khmer Rouge pitted about 20,000 troops against about
half that number of guerrillas. The Khmer Rouge are thought to have about 35,000
highly disciplined troops, well armed by the Chinese.



Had Avoided Concentrations

In the past, they had avoided concentrating troops and civilians in large,
exposed bases. Their mountain camps were small and thought to be hard to capture
because of the terrain.

The fall of Phnom Malai and Phum Thmei, however, put Vietnamese forces,
including tanks and artillery, into most major Khmer Rouge bases along a
40-mile-long stretch of the Thai- Cambodian border south of Aranyaprathet. Their
presence has caused some alarm in Thailand, where several people have been
killed and many have been evauated because of shelling.

The Thai military officers said that most of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas appeared
to have made their way through Vietnamese lines rather than fleeing into
Thailand.

Realizing the fall of their last major bases was imminent, Thai officers said,
the Khmer Rouge forces split into small groups to avoid heavy casualties and to
position themselves to harass Vietnamese lines.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Khmer Rouge guerrilla fleeing into Thailand from Cambodia
carrying his antitank rocket launcher

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BROOKLYN CHURCH HELPS HOMELESS HELP THEMSELVES...

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


Twelve homeless men, many of them on the rebound from total despair, have
started life anew in an improbable place - a residence in the playground of a
parochial school in a middle-class community in Brooklyn.

The program was begun two years ago in response to Mayor Koch's challenge to
churches and synagogues to feed and house the homeless.

At a time when the ''not on my block'' philosophy was thwarting efforts by the
city and private groups to set up shelters in middle-class neighborhoods
throughout the city, St. Finbar's Roman Catholic Church in Bensonhurst and its
St. Vincent de Paul Society decided to act.

''We decided that shelter alone was not enough,'' said the Rev. Anthony Failla,
the pastor of St. Finbar's. ''We decided we wanted them to stay here with us as
long as they needed, get on their feet and catch their breath.''

An Expendable Building

A building on the grounds of St. Finbar's School behind the church at 138 Bay
20th Street, which was used for meetings, was deemed expendable. Building
materials were donated. Heat and plumbing were installed with a gift from a
parishioner. And within a month, the one-story structure was turned into a
comfortable residence.

Joe Buccheri, a parishioner, was hired as manager of the shelter, and Alan
Hicks, a retired Sanitation Department crane operator, took on the job of
treasurer. The two went to the center for the homeless run by the Moravian
Church in Manhattan and began selecting candidates.

They told prospective residents there would be house rules at St. Finbar's: No
drinking whatsoever. No drugs. A 10 P.M. curfew every night. No mental patients.
(''We aren't equipped to handle them,'' said Mr. Buccheri.) And, most important,
residents must have the will to go out and look for a job.

Since the arrival of that first group in the spring of 1983, about 50 men have
come and gone. Residents generally are allowed to stay up to six months.

Not all have made it. Some have broken the rules and had to leave. Others have
left on their own - like the man who came the first day, pushed back his chair
at lunch and said, ''This is not for me.''

But others stayed, living in the big, bright room with 12 beds and 12 lockers,
watching television in the community room and eating home-cooked meals at the
long refectory table. They have found jobs, opened bank accounts (Mr. Buccheri
is in charge of all bank books) and rejoined society.

''There has to be discipline for it to work,'' said Mr. Hicks.

''Tough love,'' said Mr. Buccheri, ''that's what we call it,''

A Success Story

Richard, who is 52 years old, is one of those who lived at the shelter and now
has a job and his own apartment.

''Right after my mother passed away in 1970, I started hanging out with the
wrong people,'' he said. ''I was drinking. Jobs didn't last. I got locked up. My
brother threw me out of the house because I didn't get along with his wife, so I
slept in the subways for six or seven weeks, where a couple of times I almost
got stabbed.''

''My friend used to tell me, 'When you're broke, you're a joke,' '' he said.

For a while Richard had a job and a small room for $125 a month. But his
landlady threw him out and he resumed his life in the subways. Finally, a
Baptist minister steered him to St. Finbar's, where he arrived seven months ago,
filthy, he said, and suffering from pneumonia,

Now Richard works as a nightwatchman. ''God bless them a hundred times a day,''
he said of the people at St. Finbar's.

Looking for a Job

There are others. Churchill Eastment, now 40, had a middle-management job in the
food industry. But things went wrong and last year, he spent 130 days in the
hospital with no medical insurance whatsoever. Then he lived in the street.
Recently, one of his toes was amputated after he was injured on a job.

He once studied journalism and history and he is writing a book on Medal of
Honor winners in the Vietnam War. He is a diabetic, so he needs a place to cook
his own meals.  What he really wants to do is work.

''I'll wash dishes, if necessary,'' he said. ''I'll wind up with my degree. Some
people do become emotional and suicidal, but for me, now, it's just a matter of
getting back into the mainstream.''

He excused himself, explaining that he had to see some people who were trying to
buy a restaurant they wanted him to manage.

A Budget of $76,000

Paul Campo, a 42-year-old former alcoholic, had a catering job until he was hurt
in a car accident and spent four months in a coma. He walked the streets for 48
hours before he came to St. Finbar's and now he says he lives one day at a time.

''I put in to take that test for cleaning the subways,'' he said. ''And I hear
they're hiring at the Veterans Hospital. Somehow I've just got to get my foot in
the door, and the rest I have to leave to God.''

Mr. Hicks, the treasurer, said the center can operate on $76,000 a year. It has
received $34,000 in Federal funds in two years and the rest has been raised from
individuals and from the St. Vincent de Paul Society, a Catholic lay
organization. The city supplies linens but does not assist the residence
otherwise.

''We should be regarded as a prototype of what other organizations can do,''
said Father Failla. ''If the city, instead of throwing their money away in large
shelters, could give private groups a small place like this and a small
supplement of money, then they could make a go of it.''

Father Failla said he had an ''ulterior motive'' in wanting to have homeless
people as a part of the parish. He believes the program has benefited the
spiritual development of his parishioners. Eighty volunteers come regularly to
cook meals. Schoolchildren cooked Thanksgiving dinner and collected money for
Christmas presents for the men.

''Any neighborhood becomes involved with its own personal problems,'' he said.
''Having these homeless men here gets people in the parish to understand that
they don't live in an isolated environment. The parishioners become more
complete human beings.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Anthony Failia (page 27); photo of Frank Santora and Sal
Pino; photo of Paul Campo and Alan Hicks

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
NEW ZEALAND A-ARMS FOE: DAVID RUSSELL LANGE

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Feb. 16


Prime Minister David Lange, who rankled the Reagan Administration but won
worldwide acclaim from antinuclear groups last week after he refused a port call
by a United States destroyer, has been sympathetic to the nuclear disarmament
movement for at least two decades.  This is not the first time his outspoken
stands on issues have irritated American officials. In the mid-1960's, Mr.
Lange, then a liberal lawyer, was an outspoken critic of the United States
involvement in Vietnam. Later, apparently in response to his antiwar activities,
he was denied a visa to the United States.

Yet the Prime Minister's decision to ban a port call by an American warship
unless the New Zealand Government was assured it carried no nuclear weapons was
less a matter of long-held principle than political pragmatism. And it has been
Mr. Lange's astute reading of political trends and shifts in public opinion that
largely explain his rapid rise to power since entering Parliament in 1977.

Moreover, Mr. Lange (pronounced LAHNG-ee) has led the seven-month-old Labor
Party Government on a surprisingly conservative path in the key area of economic
policy. To the delight of the New Zealand business world, he has proved to be an
advocate of free enterprise and of less government in the marketplace.

An Upsurge of Nationalism

But the rejection of ships capable of carrying nuclear weapons is now part of
the political mainstream, certainly in the Labor Party, which won the general
election last July by a nearly 2-to-1 margin.

''The public response to this decision has been very positive for the
Government,'' Mr. Lange, 42 years old, said in an interview. ''It has set off an
upsurge of nationalism in New Zealand.''

Indeed, the Prime Minister's office says mail on the subject is running 95
percent in favor of the ship ban, and 15,000 people marched down Queen Street in
Auckland last week supporting the move. The Swedish Peace and Arbitration
Society, Sweden's largest antiwar organization, has nominated Mr. Lange for a
Nobel Prize.

Mr. Lange has been portrayed of late as an idealist willing to stand up to a
bullying nuclear superpower in support of long-held principles. But, in fact,
the Prime Minister tried to revise the Labor Party's hard-line ship ban policy
in March 1983, less than two months after he became the party leader. At the
time, he considered the rigid antinuclear stance understandable, even admirable,
but ''unrealistic.''

Faced with a near-revolt in his party, Mr. Lange pragmatically changed his
position. By election time last year, he espoused a ''nonnegotiable policy''
that neither nuclear-armed nor nuclear- powered ships would be permitted in New
Zealand ports. The United States, as a matter of policy, refuses to say whether
its warships are carrying nuclear arms.

Ancestors Came From England

Mr. Lange's ancestors came to New Zealand's North Island from England in the
1870's during the gold rush in the Coromandel fields.

Mr. Lange's father, Roy, was a doctor with a local practice, whose home and
clinic were under one roof. David Russell Lange, the family's first son, was
born on Aug. 4, 1942.

Mr. Lange was raised in a liberal Methodist household where the children were
drilled with the values of charity and duty. As a student, he is remembered by
teachers and friends as having been bright, a skilled speaker and an indifferent
student, usually bored by the school regimen. Even as a youngster, he took a
keen interest in politics.

After receiving a law degree from Auckland University, Mr. Lange went to work
for a law firm in Auckland that seemed to specialize in clients once described
as ''the real down-and-outs.'' He had an impressive appetite for casework,
routinely handling 10 to 12 court pleas a day.

Sought Career in Politics

By the mid-1970's, he had grown tired of dealing with social problems as a
lawyer. He wanted to enter the broader realm of public life.

Mr. Lange won a seat in the House of Representatives in 1977. In Parliament, his
skills as an orator gained him national recognition at a time when the Labor
Party was in need of fresh leadership.

It was on the issue of leadership and the economic policy failures of Sir Robert
Muldoon, the previous Prime Minister, that Mr. Lange's successful campaign last
year was based. Though the election was an easy victory for Mr. Lange, he had
spent much of the previous two years preparing intellectually and physically for
the leadership of the party in power.

In 1982, he underwent a stomach stapling operation to lose weight. Today, Mr.
Lange is still heavy, carrying 260 pounds on a 6-foot frame, but he has shed
more than 100 pounds. He lives with his wife, Naomi, and three children in
Auckland.

Mr. Lange's election marked the passing of power to a young generation of
leadership in New Zealand. He is 22 years younger than Sir Robert, and the
members of the Labor Cabinet are mostly in their 30's and 40's. Their views on
domestic issues are more liberal and, internationally, they are less
pro-American than their predecessors.

''The Lange generation's involvement with America is protesting the Vietnam
War,'' an American official said, ''not fighting side by side with us during
World War II.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECRET NIXON VIETNAM TRIP REPORTED

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 992 words


Richard M. Nixon, while on a private trip to Vietnam in 1964, met secretly with
the Vietcong and ransomed five American prisoners of war for bars of gold,
according to an account ascribed to one of his Army bodyguards on the top-secret
mission.

The account portrays Mr. Nixon, clad in Army fatigues with no identification,
being flown by helicopter to a jungle meeting with a Vietcong lieutenant to
''establish a price'' for the captives' freedom.

The incident is recounted in the catalogue of a Massachusetts autograph dealer
describing a note of thanks said to have been been written by Mr. Nixon to the
bodyguard after the mission, which was successful. Several other dealers said
the note appeared to be authentic.

An employee in Mr. Nixon's office in New York said Friday that the former
President was away and could not be reached to verify the account. There was no
answer at the office yesterday.  A spokesman for the former President, John
Taylor, was also said to be unavailable.

A Defense Department spokesman in Washington, William Caldwell, said yesterday
that the Army was not familiar with the story. War records are in the National
Archives, he said, adding that he had no immediate way of checking the account.

Vietnam Stop on Asia Tour

At the time of the reported events, which were said to have taken place in late
March and early April 1964, Mr. Nixon was touring Asia and had stopped in South
Vietnam for talks with officials, including Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge, who
ran for Vice President when he ran for President on the Republican ticket in
1960.

The officer identified as the bodyguard, Sgt. Hollis Kimmons, is listed in Army
personnel records. An Army spokesman said he could not be located without
extensive further research. Two autograph dealers who have sold the Nixon note
said they had spoken with Mr. Kimmons since last year, when the autograph was
first sold, but his current place of residence was not disclosed.

The prisoners who were reportedly freed in the exchange were not identified. Nor
was it made clear who may have put up the gold and on whose behalf Mr. Nixon may
have been acting. It was also not known at what level the mission may have been
approved and whether it was unique or one of several such rescue operations.

The account appeared first in a recent catalogue of Paul C. Richards, an
autograph dealer in Templeton, Mass. The catalogue offered for sale a note
handwritten on a small lined memo sheet. The undated note said, ''To Hollis
Kimmons with appreciation for his protection of my helicopter ride in Vietnam,
from Richard Nixon.''

The note and accompanying material were recently sold to a private collector for
a figure reported to be around $2,500.

Meeting With Go-Between

The catalogue contained this account, which Mr. Richards said he had obtained
from Mr. Kimmons, who has retired from the Army:

''When Nixon arrived at Ton Son Nhut Airport in Saigon, Sergeant Kimmons was
assigned to security detail and was accompanying Nixon on all excursions away
from the 145th Aviation Battalion where Nixon was staying. On the second day,
Nixon dressed in Army fatigues with no identification and climbed aboard a
helicopter with Sergeant Kimmons and a crew of four.

''They proceeded to Phuoc Binh, a village northwest of Saigon, where they met
with Father Wa, a go-between that arranged the exchange of the gold for U.S.
prisoners. The following day, Nixon and his party departed for An Loc, a village
south of Phuoc Binh, where in a clearing somewhere in this area Nixon met with a
Vietcong lieutenant who established a price for the return of five U.S.
prisoners.

''A location for the exchange was arranged and the crew departed for Saigon.
Later the same day, the crew, this time without Nixon because of the extreme
danger, departed for Phumi Kriek, a village across the border in Cambodia. A box
loaded with gold bars so heavy it took three men to lift it on the helicopter
accompanied the crew.

''At the exchange point, five U.S servicemen were rustled out of the jungle
accompanied by several armed soldiers. The box of gold was unloaded and checked
by the Vietcong lieutenant and the exchange was made without incident. The crew
and rescued prisoners immediately departed for Saigon, and they were sent to the
hospital upon their arrival.

''Sergeant Kimmons's mission was secret, and there were no written orders for
his duty during this period. His clothes were destroyed as well as the film in
his camera, and he signed an agreement not to reveal this incident for 20 years.
Nixon's note to him was hurriedly written at the conclusion of his assignment to
guard Nixon on the following day.''

Speculation on Mission

Mr. Richards speculated in the catalogue, without further explanation, that Mr.
Nixon may have taken part in the mission because one of the prisoners could have
been the son of a general. He also said the note was being offered along with
''copies of U.S. Army files of letters and orders pertaining to Kimmons's outfit
at the time of Nixon's mission.''

The catalogue's account was recently retold in a story in The Pen and Quill, a
publication of the Universal Autograph Collectors Club, edited by Herman
Darvick, a teacher in Rockville Center, N.Y.

Mr. Darvick said he had examined the note and other material of Mr. Richards and
found them authentic. He said Mr. Nixon's signature alone was worth about $50
and with the note about $100. But the circumstances, he said, would increase the
note's value.

Another autograph dealer, Mark Vardakis, of Coventry, R.I., said that he bought
the note early last year from Mr. Kimmons, who was then living in Oregon, for
about $600, and that he later sold it to Mr. Richards for about $1,000. Mr.
Vardakis said that he had reached Mr. Kimmons at a location he did not disclose
and that the former sergeant did not want to be interviewed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KHMER ROUGE IS REPORTED TO FIGHT BACK

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 16


Less than 24 hours after Vietnamese troops overran their major bases in western
Cambodia along the Thai border, Khmer Rouge guerrillas were clashing with
Hanoi's forces deeper inside Cambodia today, according to Thai military reports.

Although casualty figures are not known, most of the Khmer Rouge forces in the
Phnom Malai area were thought to have escaped the Vietnamese artillery
bombardment of the last few weeks by slipping into the surrounding countryside.

Fighting was also reported today in the Cardamom Mountains of southwest
Cambodia, where some Thai officers say they believe the Khmer Rouge leader Pol
Pot is operating a command post.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, president of the three-group coalition that includes
the Khmer Rouge, said Friday that Mr. Pol Pot was gravely ill.

Speaking in the Thai resort town of Pattaya to an international group of
business executives, Prince Sihanouk appeared to imply that the problem of Mr.
Pol Pot's presence in the coalition might not be a long-term one. He said: ''His
health is very poor. He is ill, very often ill. He has malaria crises. I know
that he not in good health.''

There have been recurring reports that Mr. Pot Pot, who ruled Cambodia in a
reign of terror from 1975 until 1979, was being treated for an unspecified
debilitating disease. He has not been seen publicly for several years.

Prince Sihanouk, answering questions from members of the Young President's
Organization, many of them Americans, said Chinese leaders had told him China
would not invade Vietnam this year as it did in 1979, when Hanoi was also
attacking Khmer Rouge forces in Cambodia.

The Prince, a former Cambodian chief of state, appealed for more international
aid for his coalition, which represents his own force of between 7,500 and
10,000 guerrillas as well as 15,000 fighters of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front and 35,000 well-armed Khmer Rouge.

Guerrilla leaders have said they do not intend to rebuild large and vulnerable
border bases, but will fight in smaller groups inside Cambodia.

Prince Sihanouk said he understood the reluctance of Washington to commit any
military aid to his cause, though he credited the United States with helping to
finance coalition missions abroad.

''I don't ask for the impossible,'' he said, adding: ''There is a trauma in the
minds, in the hearts of so many Americans. They do not want to hear once again
the name of Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of blindfolded Vietnamese soldier being taken by armed Thai
civilians for questioning by authorities at Aranyaparathet.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China Vows More Support

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 16


China reacted today to Vietnamese military successes in Cambodia by repeating
its support for the Cambodian guerrillas and belittling the importance of
Vietnam's capture of the guerrilla stronghold of Phnom Malai.

A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry was quoted by the official New China News
Agency as saying Peking would continue to offer ''varied support'' to the
guerrillas in concert with ''other justice-upholding countries.''

Since Vietnamese forces invaded Cambodia six years ago, China has been a major
supplier of arms and money to the Khmer Rouge and the two non-Communist
guerrilla groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COPING WITH VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 102, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 83 words


Edward Tick overlooks the one group that indeed does feel wholeness and pride at
its role in the Vietnam era. These are the men and women who took personal risks
and made sacrifices to oppose and to organize others into opposing the war.

Having spent the Vietnam era in military service, in the Peace Corps and in the
antiwar movement, I can vouch with certainty that far more significant rites of
passage are to be found in the latter two experiences. ANDREW S. BERMAN

Oak Park, Ill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COPING WITH VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 102, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 152 words


I, too, was one of millions of American men who did not go to Vietnam or serve
in the armed forces. I had no regrets then, and I have none today. I know that
America's Vietnam misadventure remains the moral and political calamity it
always was. I did what I could to oppose America's military involvement in
Vietnam, and I would do so again.

Like so many in our therapeutic society, psychotherapist Edward Tick trivializes
the entire meaning of Vietnam by translating politics into psychology. Mumbo
jumbo about ''rites of passage'' is neither a mature nor an analytically
adequate response to the suffering of Vietnam.

Indeed, the conception of manhood implicit in Dr. Tick's reflections bespeaks an
obsolete and dangerous machismo. Such lamentations will ultimately, if
unintentionally, serve the cause of militarism, bringing future debacles such as
Vietnam closer. PETER CONN 3d

Philadelphia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Coping With Vietnam

SECTION: Section 6; Page 102, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


Thank you for publishing Edward Tick's article, ''Apocalypse Continued'' (About
Men, Jan. 13). Dr. Tick has presented an insightful analysis of a continuing
problem. The question of how to cope with the pain and confusion that Vietnam
caused and continues to cause so many of us has been dealt with publicly by
avoidance and studied ignorance. Under the guise of ''healing the wounds'' and
''putting Vietnam behind us,'' our public figures have urged us to amnesia, but
many of us cannot, and will not, forget our experiences during that time.

Whether or not we identify with Edward Tick's appraisal of his response to the
legacy of Vietnam, we cannot continue to deny the reality of that inheritance.
The experience affected us all. EDWARD D. DEPEW 3d East Chatham, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


FAMILY PORTRAIT WITH FIDEL, by Carlos Franqui. (Vintage, $5.95.) A disillusioned
Cuban revolutionary, Carlos Franqui, recalls Fidel and Raul Castro, Che Guevara,
Camilo Cienfuegos and other revolutionary figures in their Sierra Maestra days
and during intrigues and factional struggles once in power. Jonathan Kandell
commented here last year that ''Family Portrait with Fidel,'' translated by
Alfred MacAdam, offers many memorable anecdotes. And, he said, ''rarely has the
Cuban Revolution undergone a critique from a left-wing perspective.''

THE BALLAD OF TYPHOID MARY, by J. F. Federspiel. (Ballantine, $3.50.) A typhoid
carrier working as an itinerant cook, the 19th-century Swiss immigrant Maria
Anna Caduff (also known as Mary Mallon) became an American legend. Last year,
John Calvin Batchelor noted here that the Swiss writer J. F.  Federspiel had
''chosen to retell Mary's life in the form of a novel.'' The extreme success of
this book, he wrote, turned on ''the author's appetite for history, his talents
as a fiction writer and his self-awareness as a modern European.'' Joel Agee
translated from the German.

A COLDER EYE: The Modern Irish Writers, by Hugh Kenner. (Penguin, $8.95.) An
account of the Irish literary revival and the writers who made it: W. B. Yeats,
J. M. Synge, James Joyce, Sean O'Casey, Patrick Kavanagh, Austin Clarke, Flann
O'Brien, Samuel Beckett and others. Our reviewer, Julian Moynahan, observed that
''Hugh Kenner has an excellent reputation as the foremost American critic and
chronicler of literary modernism in English, and it would be surprising if he
did not come up with some valuable perceptions.'' REFINER'S FIRE: The Life and
Adventures of Mar



shall Pearl, a Foundling, by Mark Helprin. (Laurel, $4.95.) Marshall Pearl, the
novel's hero, was born on a ship off the coast of Palestine, adopted by New
Yorkers, attended Harvard, traveled, married, fought in the Israeli army and was
wounded. In 1978, Joyce Carol Oates wrote in these pages that Mark Helprin's
first novel was ''a daring, even reckless, sprawling and expansive and endlessly
inventive 'picaresque' tale.'' LOCAL KNOWLEDGE: Further Essays in Interpretive

Anthropology, by Clifford Geertz. (Basic Books, $7.95.) The eight essays in this
collection focus on one of the chief issues of anthropology: can a member of one
society achieve objective understanding of another society? Are there
generalizations applicable to all societies? Clifford Geertz's essays deal with
such aspects of experience as the self, common sense, art, the law and sources
of political authority; our reviewer, Paul Robinson, observed that Mr. Geertz
''compares the distinctive configurations these phenomena have assumed in two or
more often three different cultures'' and found the comparisons ''shrewd and
often illuminating.''

THE SAMURAI, by Shusaku Endo. (Aventura, $7.95.) A Spanish missionary bent on
converting the Japanese to Christianity is the hero of this novel, translated by
Van C. Gessel and set in Japan some 400 years ago. In 1982, Julian Moynahan said
here that ''The Samurai'' is ''a great travel narrative'' and that the dialectic
of East and West between the samurai and the missionary ''gives us a truer
history than a hundred expert accounts from a single perspective only.'' WHAT IS
THEATRE? Incorporating ''The Dramatic

Event'' and Other Reviews, by Eric Bentley. (Limelight, $10.95.) The 104
journalistic articles in ''What is Theatre?'' were originally published from
1944 to 1967. In 1969, Ralph G. Allen called Eric Bentley's occasional pieces
''shrewd and incisive,'' and noted ''his shrewd ability to detect all that was
intellectually spurious in the experimental writing of the fifties.''

WINTER MUSIC, by Karen Rile.

 (Laurel, $4.50.) The central character in this 1983 novel is, like the author.
a flutist. Our reviewer, Frances Taliaferro, wrote that this ''excellent first
novel,'' revealed ''the small world of classical music in Philadelphia during
the late 70's. Like many other professional worlds, it is a complicated network
of ambitions and adjustments, past histories and present dramas, loves and
friendships.'' HOME FROM THE WAR: Vietnam Veterans: Neither

Victims Nor Executioners, by Robert Jay Lifton. (Basic Books, $9.95.) First
published in 1973, ''Home from the War'' examines the psychological effects of
the Vietnam war on a group of veterans. It is based on Robert Jay Lifton's
experiences in an informal discussion group that met regularly for two and a
half years in the New York office of Vietnam Veterans Against the War. Our
reviewer, Richard Locke, called Dr. Lifton ''an enormously gifted clinical
observer and interviewer.''

THE ARCH OF TRIUMPH, by Erich Maria Remarque. (Signet, $3.95.) In 1946, Charles
Poore said here that this story of refugees in Paris in the late 1930's was ''a
novel of Europeans between wars yet forced to be perpetually at war, a novel
that is animated by a spirit of savage disillusionment toward this last war
before it had even begun, foreseeing the war's caprices and disasters.'' The
translation from the German is by Walter Sorell and Denver Lindley.

INSIDE PRIME TIME, by Todd Gitlin. (Pantheon, $8.95.) The sociologist Todd
Gitlin analyzed the Hollywood television community to show how the nightly
programs on network television come to be. In 1983 our reviewer, Robert Sklar,
found ''Inside Prime Time'' ''most successful where it is most narrow and
descriptive, focusing on the details of individual productions.''

THE PHILOSOPHER'S PUPIL, by Iris Murdoch. (Penguin, $6.95.) When this novel came
out, in 1983, it was Iris Murdoch's 21st; our reviewer, Joyce Carol Oates,
called it ''representative'' of Miss Murdoch's novels - ''ambitious, unique and
ingeniously plotted. . . . Men and women are blinded by the dance of illusions.
They fall in love, often violently and senselessly, they fall under the spell of
individuals who appear to be extraordinary or powerful.'' ''The Philosopher's
Pupil,'' Miss Oates wrote, was ''a play of illusions,'' ''densely populated
(with) dazed characters kept in such frenetic motion that it is sometimes
difficult to remember what has happened to whom and why, which is perhaps the
author's intention.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of J. F. Federspiel

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS;
Feb. 17, 1985

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


Fiction

*1 ALMOST PARADISE, by Susan Isaacs.  (Ballantine, $4.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.

*2 ONE POLICE PLAZA, by William J. Caunitz.  (Bantam, $3.95.) A Manhattan cop
tracks down an intrigue involving an Israeli group, Moslem extremists, the Army
and the New York police.

*3 DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Pocket, $4.50.) A man who has
everything - power, money, women - seeks immortality.

*4 THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE ROSE, by David Morrell. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) Two
brothers set out to wreak revenge on a foster father who made them commit a
crime.

*5 THE TIGER LILY, by Shirlee Busbee. (Avon, $3.95.) The romantic ambivalence of
a young heiress in Texas at the turn of the 19th century.

*6 THE PRIDE OF HANNAH WADE, by Janet Dailey.  (Pocket, $6.95.) Freed from
captivity among the Apaches, Hannah finds new troubles await her with her old
lover.

*7 SAVAGE CONQUEST, by Janelle Taylor. (Zebra, $3.75.) A Virginia belle rejects
her Southern beaux for her Indian captor.

*8 CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.

*9 NIGHT SKY, by Clare Francis. (Warner Books, $4.50.) Three intertwined lives
in occupied France during World War II.

10 COME LOVE A STRANGER, by Kathleen E.  Woodiwiss. (Avon, $8.95.) A planter's
bride is haunted by what may be the return of an old love.

11 DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Berkley, $3.95.) First volume of an allegorical epic
set in a faraway world; basis of a new film.

12 BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Ballantine, $4.50.) Espionage on both sides of
the Iron Curtain.

*13 THE INTEGRAL TREES, by Larry Niven. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) The
colonization of an eerie smoke ring in outer space.

14 THE JEWEL IN THE CROWN, by Paul Scott.  (Avon, $4.50.) First volume in the
Raj Quartet, a series on which the television feature is based.

15 THE BERETS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $3.95.) The war in Vietnam: fifth
volume in a series called ''Brotherhood of War.''

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

Nonfiction

General

*1 WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Pocket Books, $4.50.) The troubled life of the
entertainer John Belushi.

*2 IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.

*3 LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh.  (Perigord/Bantam, $4.50.) A San Diego
police squad stalks bandits on the Mexican border.

*4 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

*5 THE FALCON AND THE SNOWMAN, by Robert Lindsey. (Pocket, $4.50.) Two
California youths penetrate a supersecret military installation.

*6 FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy
League graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.

*7 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspiration.

*8 MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Warner, $3.95.) New York's
mayor's opinions.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

*1 EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) A regimen for sports and
fitness activities.

*2 J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX.  (Simon & Schuster, $6.95.) 1985 edition of a
standard work.

*3 THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1985.  (Ballantine, $6.95.) Instructions prepared
by a leading accounting firm.

*4 THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1985.  (Newspaper Enterprise Association,
$4.95.) Latest edition of a standard reference work.

*5 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

*6 1985 H & R BLOCK INCOME TAX WORKBOOK.  (Collier/Macmillan, $6.95.) Latest
edition.

*7 AAA NORTH AMERICAN ROAD ATLAS 1985.  (American Automobile Association/Random,
$5.95.) Maps and traveling advice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM ATLANTA TO THE SOUTH CHINA SEA

BYLINE: By Stephen W. Sears; Stephen W. Sears is the author of ''Landscape
Turned Red: The Batle of Antietam.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


SHERMAN'S MARCH AND VIETNAM

By James Reston Jr.  323 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $14.95.

JAMES RESTON JR. has turned to the Civil War in

an ambitious effort both to understand and to resolve what was for many the
central dilemma of

the Vietnam War. A veteran, Jan Barry, explained the Catch-22 in 1971: ''Our
dilemma is that no matter what we do - go to Vietnam or refuse - either action
is criminal. . . . Going to Vietnam is a war crime, refusing to go is a domestic
crime and just sitting still, somewhere in exile or limbo, is a moral crime.''

In the first half of ''Sherman's March and Vietnam,'' Mr. Reston, the author of
''Our Father Who Art in Hell: The Life and Death of Jim Jones'' and other books,
searches for the roots of what he terms Vietnam's war crimes - free-fire zones,
search-and-destroy missions, the My Lai massacre, the political assassinations
of the C.I.A.'s Phoenix program, saturation bombing, Agent Orange defoliation.
This was warfare with few limits, a historical process that began, he contends,
with Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman's march from Atlanta to the sea, then
northward through the Carolinas, in 1864-65. Sherman's ''sins lay in the wanton
destruction of property, rather than the wanton destruction of life,'' Mr.
Reston admits. Yet he wonders if this is how barbarism begins, and asks, ''Is
the gulf between property and life so great?'' He traces Sherman's march,
seeking to find out what the man was like and to measure his impact on the
ethics of modern war.

It must be said of the Civil War that both sides broke the old rules well before
Sherman's campaign. South Carolinians never forgave him for burning Columbia in
1865, but Pennsylvanians never forgave Jubal Early for burning Chambersburg.
Sherman makes an easy target, however. He cared little for democracy, less for
blacks, nothing at all for critics. He was without remorse, proud of his march
and eminently quotable on the cruelty and destructiveness of war. Mr. Reston is
unsparing in his moral censure, speaking (the words are his) of Sherman's sins,
his crimes, his villainy, his uncontrolled brutality, his atrocities.

That would be a fair judgment if Sherman's army had left behind a trail of
civilian corpses and ravaged women. But it did not, and that fact imposes a
considerable strain on Mr. Reston's Vietnam analogy. He misleads by suggesting
that one-tenth of the Civil War dead were noncombatants. That comes to more than
60,000, a grossly inflated estimate. Further, most civilian deaths occurred
where the military was not in control - areas where guerrilla warfare and
lawlessness were endemic, such as along the Kansas-Missouri border. ''The
burning of Columbia and the slaughter of My Lai were exceptional only in their
dimensions,'' Mr. Reston writes. Perhaps, but that one is the inevitable
historical consequence of the other is, I think, to stretch the case beyond what
it will bear. Precedent for Vietnam's license is better found in past American
responses to unconventional warfare, such as Indian hit-and-run raids, guerrilla
bushwhacking or Japanese suicide tactics.

The second, and to me more persuasive, half of ''Sher-man's March and Vietnam''
examines why a dozen years after the Paris peace accords, the wounds of the
Vietnam era are still unhealed. Mr. Reston writes with passion and anger of the
unwillingness of the ''architects of the war'' to accept their share of the
blame. He chronicles the dismal record of Presidential amnesty and pardons for
deserters, draft resisters who left the country and the dishonorably discharged.
He feels this failure of the leaders to act, to atone, damages as well those
other millions who fought in or opposed the war. There is a conspiracy of
silence and forgetfulness while the grim statistics of drug addiction and
alcoholism and violence among veterans continue to mount, along with the
unmeasurable bitterness of guilt borne by veterans and dissenters alike.

Sherman serves here as a symbolic transitional figure between war and peace,
with his attempt at generous peacemaking with the Confederate Gen. Joseph
Johnston seen as atonement for his sins and a model for those who presided over
the Vietnam War. In my view, political na"ivete better explains Sherman's
action, but whatever the motive, his impulse for reconciliation would seem
worthy of imitation. Mr. Reston calls for a Lincolnesque effort to bind up
wounds that are, unlike the Civil War's, psychological and moral rather than
physical. President Andrew Johnson granted amnesty to a defeated South, whose
crime (in Northern eyes) was treason. Mr. Reston argues that, in dealing with
crimes far less serious, Presidents since Vietnam have failed to heed that
lesson. ''If we are to restore harmony to our society and unity to our nation,''
he quotes the historian Henry Steele Commager as saying, ''we should put aside
all vindictiveness, all inclination for punishment, all attempts to cast a
balance of patriotism or of sacrifice - as unworthy of a great nation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOMETIMES, IT SEEMS, THE CAMERA DOES LIE. HERE'S HOW



BYLINE:
By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS has given the
nation an unusual close-up of how the techniques of film-making and editing can
affect a documentary's substance.

In making their case that General Westmoreland was defamed in a CBS Reports
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' his lawyers have drawn
attention to how the videotaped interviews were conducted and how the many hours
of interviews were edited into a 90-minute program.

While documentary makers differ in their opinions of which techniques are
legitimate, they agree that any documentary is profoundly affected by the way
lights, cameras and editing are used.

''One is always resisting the temptation to make a documentary faster, slicker,
easier or more exciting, said Richard Ellison, executive producer of ''Vietnam:
A Television History,'' a 13-part documentary that appeared on the Public
Broadcasting System in 1983 and won six Emmy awards. ''You don't if you feel it
will result in something distorted.''

Among the more controversial techniques is placing an interviewee in partial
shadow in order to lend drama to what is being said. Also debated is the use of
extreme close-ups that tend to emphasize the tension felt by a person being
interviewed; viewers may associate the appearance of tension with lying or
guilt.

The extreme close-up can be especially damaging when an interview is carefully
scripted and a cameraman is instructed to focus tightly on the person's face at
the point when the toughest question is to be asked. Some documentary makers
will not use such closeups at all in interviews because they can be so
misleading.

The CBS documentary contained both a shadowed interview of a friendly witness
and ''tight shots'' of General Westmoreland. Such techniques have been used in
documentaries by other networks as well.

Even the wariest viewer is likely to find it difficult to detect some other
common techniques. ''I can't imagine a general viewer getting so sophisticated
with techniques they they could discount them,'' said Reuven Frank, a former
president at NBC News who has been making documentaries for about 30 years.

Among the techniques that offer potential for abuse is the frequently used
''reverse shot.'' Often only one camera is available for an interview, and of
course it is aimed at the person being interviewed. After the interview is
concluded, the camera is focused on the interviewer - the reverse shot - who
then asks the questions again; an editor splices the material together to
reflect what appears to be the give and take of an interview.

But an interviewer may use a different tone of voice or facial expression when
he asks the questions for the benefit of the camera or may even ask different
questions. As a result, what was a response to a polite or unthreatening
question in the actual interview can appear to be a response to a hostile or
skeptical question, and the nature of the exchange can be distorted. An
interview can even be conducted by a producer at the scene, and a correspondent
who was not present can be recorded later on tape asking the questions.

Recognizing the potential for distortion, many correspondents and producers
attempt to avoid abuses of reverse shots by making a point of asking the same
questions in the same tone of voice when their turn comes before the camera.
Some interviewers take the time to listen to a tape of their original questions
before the reverse shot is made to help them duplicate inflection and tone more
accurately.

According to Don Kowet, author of ''A Matter of Honor,'' a book critical of the
CBS documentary on General Westmoreland, the reverse shots used on the program
accurately reflected the questions that were asked in the interviews.

But it is the editing of documentaries that offers the most opportunities for
abuse. Editing includes paring a long interview into its most important moments
and ensuring that what goes on the air reflects the essence of the entire
interview. Much depends on the skill and the integrity of the editor.

According to CBS, in preparing the Westmoreland documentary, editors began with
26 hours of on-camera interviews with 13 people, 11 of whom were eventually
represented on the air.

''Even when you are trying not to distort it, if you film a 20-minute interview
with someone, in the last edit it may be boiled down to 30 seconds, and that 30
seconds may not include what the interviewee thinks is the most important
part,'' said Mr. Ellison.

Editing out a sentence or a phrase from an interview can change the meaning of
what comes before and after. For instance, General Westmoreland has charged that
CBS used such a technique to distort his response to a question by Mike Wallace.

Mr. Wallace asked the general, ''Was President Johnson a difficult man to feed
bad news about the war?''

In the documentary, General Westmoreland was shown responding that President
Johnson ''wanted bad news like a hole in the head.'' But his further comment -
that he gave him the bad news anyway - was dropped.

It is also possible during the editing process to couple a comment from one part
of an interview to a comment made in another to give the impression that the
words were linked when they were not, a practice Mr. Frank denounces as
''wrong.''

According to Mr. Kowet, there was no such splicing in the Westmoreland
documentary.

But he and General Westmoreland's lawyers have been critical of other techniques
used by the program's producer, such as rehearsing a friendly witness before his
interview, interviewing a friendly witness twice without giving hostile
witnesses an opportunity for a second interview and editing in such a way that
witnesses who seem to be describing one incident are actually refering to
different incidents.

And, of course, the message of a documentary can be powerfully influenced by the
images that are spliced into the narrative.

As Mr. Ellison observed, ''If you show someone saying, 'Asians don't value life
the way Westerners do,' and then cut to a scene of Asians mourning at a funeral,
it might reflect unfairly on the person's remarks and seem to contradict them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FORECLOSURES ON HOMES RISE AS INFLATION FALLS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


The rate of home mortgage foreclosures has increased to a level close to the
record set in the 1973 recession, causing anguish for tens of thousands of
Americans evicted from homes for which they can no longer afford monthly
payments.

Many housing economists cast an unexpected player as a main villain in the rise:
the rollback of inflation, particularly in housing prices. It has removed one
safety net for homeowners at the same time that the customary causes of
foreclosure continue: loss of a breadwinner's job, or of a spouse's second
income, or exhaustion of unemployment benefits or cuts in pay.

In earlier recessions home owners could often avoid foreclosure by selling a
house for more than they had bought it for, paying off the mortgage and moving
into a cheaper house.

Today, with the abrupt slowing of a decade of inflation and with outright
declines in house prices in some places, housing officials say many young
families are moving at a loss.

From abandonments of Texas condominium units by unemployed oilfield workers to
foreclosure auctions that have uprooted families in many communities in the
industrial East and Middle West, officials here sketch a picture of distress
that has been little noticed outside the housing and home finance industries.

The inventory of foreclosed homes held by the Federal Housing Administration,
which guarantees about 13 percent of all home mortgages, has risen to 40,000, up
from 28,000 18 months ago. These houses must now be sold, sometimes in a soft
market.

Alan J. Kappeler, director of single- family housing at the F.H.A., called the
high foreclosure numbers ''alarming, from the standpoint that so many people are
losing their houses.''

''You cannot say that the change in housing inflation is entirely the cause of
this,'' he said. ''But had home inflation not halted, it might have bailed out
most of those who got in trouble.''

The Veterans Administration, which guarantees 11 percent of all new mortgages,
took over 29,000 foreclosed houses last year, 10 percent more than in 1983. The
agency's foreclosure rate in the third quarter of last year reached a record,
according to the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.

According to the most recent nationwide figures, 25 foreclosures were begun in
the third quarter of 1984 for every 10,000 mortgages, the same rate as in 1973.
The rate surpassed 20 in 1982, for the first time since 1975, at the same time
that inflation was dramatically slowing.

In recent months, says Robert M. O'Toole, director of the V.A.'s loan guarantee
service, the six states with the highest and most static inventory of houses
foreclosed by the agency have been Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Texas and
California. The F.H.A,'s 10 highest foreclosure cities as of Nov. 1 were, in
descending order, Cleveland; Camden, N.J.; Las Vegas, Nev.; Milwaukee; Chicago;
Newark; Philadelphia; Indianapolis; Columbus, Ohio, and Tulsa, Okla.

The homeowner who paid, say, $80,000 for a house in 1980, when interest rates
were high, may find himself among the thousands who have overextended their
budgets. Selling the house now for the purchase price, without the added lift of
inflation, would not net enough for a down payment on a more manageable home. In
some places, the house would go for less than $80,000, if at all, which would
leave the owner still in debt to the lender and certain of foreclosure.

The new surge of foreclosures has hurt mortgage lenders and insurers. It has
also heavily burdened the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans
Administration, the two Federal agencies that guarantee home financing. The
agencies, most of whose clients have low or middle incomes, have record
inventories of foreclosed homes.

The Reagan Administration is proposing steep increases in fees to be paid by
those who receive home loans guaranteed by the two agencies. Furthermore,
housing officials say the loss experience of the home mortgage industry is
likely to add to pressures for stiffer credit standards for qualifying for
loans. That could put loans out of reach for many.

Insurers Are Hit Hard

''No doubt about it, we've taken a tremendous hit,'' said Steven P. Doehler,
executive vice president of the Mortgage Insurance Companies of America, the
Washington-based trade association of underwriters of home mortgages not covered
by the two Federal agencies. These conventional loans constitute about
three-fourths of the 30 million home mortgages in force. Mr. Doehler projects
his industry's payments on lenders' insurance claims for home foreclosures at
$425 million this year, ''three times what they were in 1982.''

Within the national trend of rapidly rising foreclosure rates, there were wide
regional variations. In fact, on Long Island the number of foreclosures has
declined in recent years.

''That was generally true for most of the New England area and the entire
Northeast,'' Mr. Doehler said. ''Most of the northeastern part of the country
has not been experiencing the same kind of jump in foreclosure rates. He
estimated that the Northeast, including the New York metropolitan area, did ''as
much as 50 percent better than the national picture.''

But in Tulsa, hit hard by the oil slump, the F.H.A. is now foreclosing on
mortgages at a rate of more than 100 for each 10,000. Houston and Denver, also
hit by declines in oil or oil shale development, are not far behind. ''Texas in
the late 1970's was the garden spot,'' Mr. Doehler said. ''Now, because of
unemployment and overbuilding, it's a swamp.''

''Take a typical Houston condominium,'' he said. ''The builder can't sell the
units, so he starts offering buy- downs - lowering his prices. Of course, prices
of units bought earlier for much more money and at higher interest rates fall,
too. And the people say, 'Why should I do this - go on making these high
mortgage payments?' And they stop paying and just walk away and move into the
rental building across the street. That's a foreclosure. We pay the claim on
it.''

A Typical Foreclosure

Most foreclosures, however, are not so casual.

''Your typical guy in a V.A. foreclosure is a Vietnam veteran, blue collar, in a
home with an average price of $43,000,'' Mr. O'Toole said. ''The home loan was
originally qualified based on two incomes, his and his wife's, and that's where
most of the problems start. When the hard times come, the first people laid off
are the part-timers, and that is often the wife. Then, even where we see these
people returned to work, it is at severly reduced incomes. The jobs that put
them back in the 'employed' column are just not as good.

''Then these people in difficulty are not able to sell the house at an advantage
because the prices have stopped escalating. That is a contributing factor in the
foreclosures.''

Thomas R. Harter, chief economist of the Mortgage Bankers Association, noted
that unemployment has always been a cause for mortgage delinquencies, ''a
problem of a month or two in arrears, but short of foreclosure.''

''With continued inflation,'' Mr. Harter said, ''you could have sold that house
off and paid back the lender and it would never show up as a foreclosure.''

In part, Mr. Harter blames the home finance industry for its own problems.
''When home inflation disappeared they just didn't believe it,'' he said. ''They
didn't adjust. They thought it would all come back. They didn't tighten up the
standards on which they had made a lot of these risky loans. They took risks
because they thought, no matter what happened, they would be covered by
home-price inflation. Delinquency and foreclosure is the result of that process,
and now they are writing off a lot of those loans.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of percentage of mortgages foreclosed from '72 to '84 (page A15)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SUIT AGAINST CBS IS BEING DROPPED BY WESTMORELAND

BYLINE: By M.A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1953 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland dropped his $120 million libel suit against CBS
last night, the network announced.

Under the terms of the settlement, CBS will not disavow the 1982 documentary on
the Vietnam War that is the basis of the suit, and will not pay any money to
General Westmoreland.

The parties, according to legal sources on both sides of the case, will issue a
joint statement today saying they now agree that ''the court of public
opinion,'' rather than a court of law, is the appropriate forum for deciding who
was right in the case. And CBS will not demand payment of any court costs by the
general.

Stipulation Is Signed

''The stipulation of dismissal has been signed,'' a lawyer familiar with the
agreement, who asked not to be identified, said last night.

''The question,'' said another lawyer in the case who also asked not to be
identified, ''was whether either party, and whether the country, would be better
off with a verdict against CBS or a verdict against General Westmoreland. Some
things, once aired and explained, are better left to the judgment of history.''

The settlement came after 18 weeks of testimony by 36 witnesses in Federal
District Court in Manhattan and only a week before the case - which is believed
to have cost at least $7 million to $9 million - was scheduled to go to the
jury. The clerk for Judge Pierre N. Leval, who has presided over the case, was
informed last night of the accord and Judge Leval was to meet the lawyers at 11
this morning.

Started Last Week

The settlement discussion was apparently initiated last week by Dan M. Burt,
General Westmoreland's principal lawyer. Mr. Burt - who has decribed the
documentary as ''a powerful work of fiction'' - declined to comment yesterday,
as did David Boies, the chief lawyer for CBS. Mr. Boies had defended the
broadcast as being true.

Senior CBS executives, including Edward M. Joyce, the president of CBS News, and
Van Gordon Sauter, the executive vice president of the CBS broadcast group,
could not be reached last night. General Westmoreland, who commanded United
States forces in Vietnam from January 1964 to June 1968, was also unavailable.

Mr. Burt, according to legal sources, approached Mr. Boies several weeks ago and
asked whether, if General Westmoreland abandoned his suit, CBS would insist that
he pay the network's court costs for depositions, trial transcripts and other
items, which could amount to $200,000 or more. Mr. Boies, the sources said, was
noncommittal.

The costs of pursuing the case for General Westmoreland - about $3.25 million
since the suit was filed in September 1982 - have been borne by the
Washington-based Capitol Legal Foundation, of which Mr. Burt is president. Mr.
Burt said recently that the foundation, which is supported by a number of
conservative foundations and businessmen, was ''$500,000 in the hole.''

On Friday morning, the sources said, Mr. Burt had breakfast with George
Vradenburg 3d, the general counsel for CBS. Mr. Vradenburg indicated that CBS
would not seek court costs from General Westmoreland - who could be held
personally liable for them. And on Saturday, wider-ranging talks designed to
settle the case were undertaken. The negotiations were concluded last night.

The highly publicized case, which CBS did not succeed in having dismissed before
trial began last Oct. 9, raised a number of issues relating to press freedom and
to the conduct of the war, particularly in the year before the enemy's Tet
offensive of January 1968.

The suit stemmed from a CBS Reports documentary titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception,'' produced by George Crile and narrated by Mike Wallace.



Wallace Was Due to Testify

Both men were individual defendants in the case, as was Samuel A. Adams, a
former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who was a paid consultant for the
broadcast. Mr. Crile and Mr. Adams have already testified; Mr. Wallace was
scheduled to take the stand tomorrow or Wednesday.

The documentary charged that General Westmoreland's command had engaged in a
''conspiracy'' in 1967 to show progress in the war by understating the size and
nature of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong enemy. As a result of this
''conscious effort,'' it said, President Johnson and American troops, as well as
the public, were left ''totally unprepared'' for the Tet offensive.

The broadcast said that, for political and public relations reasons, General
Westmoreland imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy
strength, mainly by removing the part- time self-defense forces from the
official listing of enemy troops and refusing to allow inclusion of their
current number in a special intelligence estimate for the President in November
1967.

The documentary also asserted that the command had ''systematically blocked''
reports from its officers of high infiltration in the five months before the Tet
attack, and had attempted to ''cover up'' after the offensive by altering
historical data on enemy strength.

'Insignificant Militarily'

In nine days of testimony last fall, General Westmoreland denied he had acted
improperly and defended his stewardship of American troops. He said he had
deleted the self-defense forces - newly estimated in 1967 at 120,000, a 50,000
increase - because he had come to believe that they were insignificant
militarily and that their inclusion in the order of battle at a high number
would only mislead Washington and the press.

The 70-year-old general, who retired in 1972 after serving as Army Chief of
Staff, also said he was unaware of infiltration of a greater magnitude than was
reported by his command or of any attempt to tamper with figures on enemy
strength after the Tet offensive.

General Westmoreland contended that the program - whose thesis of military
deception had been advanced publicly by Mr. Adams for more than a decade - had
defamed him by saying he had lied to President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. He did not sue over the question of whether he or his command had
deceived Congress, the public or the press, which CBS said was basically ''the
message'' of the broadcast.

To prevail in his suit - General Westmoreland said he would give any award he
received to charity - the plaintiff had to prove not only that the documentary
was false but that CBS knew it was false or acted with ''reckless disregard''
for the truth.

Just after ''The Uncounted Enemy'' was broadcast on Jan. 23, 1982, General
Westmoreland accused CBS of trying to ''execute me on the guillotine of public
opinion.'' The network proposed a follow-up program, including 15 minutes of
unedited air time for the general. General Westmoreland, however, demanded an
apology from CBS, which the network refused to make.

Shortly after the trial began two years later, Judge Leval said the issue in the
case was not whether General Westmoreland's command was ''right or wrong'' in
its reports of enemy strength but whether the general had ''attempted to
deceive'' his superiors.

Twice last month the judge reminded the jury that the broadcast ''made
accusations of dishonesty. Dishonesty,'' he said, ''is what the case is about,
not inaccuracy.''



Dispute, But Not Deception

On Jan. 31, in ''interim summations'' that were previews of the summations the
lawyers were expected to give next Monday, Mr. Burt said a 1967 disagreement
over enemy strength involving the C.I.A. and the military had ''all the earmarks
of a very bitter dispute but not evidence of any conspiracy to deceive.''

Mr. Boies told the jury that it was ''not an honest disagreement.'' The actions
by the military, he insisted, were rightly characterized by the broadcast ''as a
conspiracy.''

General Westmoreland called to the stand 19 witnesses, including a number of his
senior military aides in Vietnam and a battery of ranking Government officials
from the Johnson Administration: Walt W. Rostow, national security adviser to
the President; Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of Defense; Paul H. Nitze, Deputy
Secretary of Defense; Robert W. Komer, chief of the Vietnam pacification
program; and George A. Carver Jr., chief of Vietnamese affairs for the C.I.A.

Virtually all of these witnesses testified that the general did not, would not -
and even could not - deceive his superiors.

CBS began presenting its case on Jan. 8. Besides Mr. Adams and Mr. Crile, its 17
witnesses included George W. Allen, a former deputy to Mr. Carver; a number of
other C.I.A. and military intelligence analysts from 1967, and, in recent days,
two key aides to General Westmoreland.

A 'Political Bombshell'

One of those aides - Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian - testified that, in May
1967, General Westmoreland delayed sending a cable to Washington reporting
increased strength of enemy irregulars because it would have been a ''political
bombshell.'' General McChristian, who was General Westmoreland's chief of
intelligence from July 1965 to June 1967, said ''it was improper not to send a
strength report forward based on political considerations.''

General Westmoreland had testified that he wanted the new figures fully
explained to him and that, after they were briefed later that month, he notified
his superiors of them.

The other aide - Col. Gains Hawkins, former chief of General McChristian's
order-of-battle section - said that General Westmoreland had fixed a
''dishonest'' ceiling on total enemy- strength figures because higher figures
were ''politically unacceptable.'' Colonel Hawkins's cross-examination began
last Wednesday and was scheduled to continue tomorrow.

Apart from the testimony of General McChristian and Colonel Hawkins, Mr. Burt
had other problems in the last few weeks. He - like Mr. Boies - had been given
150 hours by Judge Leval to present his evidence, and with only 6 hours
remaining as of last Wednesday, he had no opportunity to call rebuttal
witnesses.

Although Mr. Burt favored a single verdict by the jury, Judge Leval was said to
have indicated that he would instruct the jury to answer several questions -
relating, individually, to defamation, to truth or falsity, and to recklessness.
The judge also seemed disposed to allow Mr. Boies a chance to respond to the
jury after Mr. Burt's closing argument, assuming Mr. Boies went first.

For their part, some CBS officials have been concerned that General Westmoreland
was a ''very sympathetic'' plaintiff. They wondered, too, whether Mr. Wallace
would be portrayed on the stand as merely a ''figurehead'' for the documentary.

Largely through his appearances on ''60 Minutes,'' consistently a top-rated
program, Mr. Wallace has a reputation of being one of the toughest newsmen in
his field, one who seems to be thoroughly versed in his subject. But his
contribution to the research for ''The Uncounted Enemy'' - described as a
''general senior role'' - was limited. He conducted five of the 13 on-camera
interviews, often with the aid of questions that were written by Mr. Crile, and
a smaller percentage of the off- camera interviews.

Mr. Crile himself depended heavily on the years of research Mr. Adams has been
doing for a book.

Despite the accusations leveled against General Westmoreland on the broadcast
and in court, some CBS executives have depicted the general in recent months in
a somewhat favorable light.

Last November, at a Rotary Club gathering in Maine, Mr. Joyce, the president of
CBS News, described General Westmoreland as ''an honorable man who fought a long
and unpopular war.'' Mr. Joyce said CBS had gone into the trial ''with respect
for the general and with some sadness about all this.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


MONDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1985 International

Aid to the Sudan is being reduced by countries in an effort to persuade
President Gaafar al-Nimeiry to change his country's ailing economy. American
officials said the United States had frozen its economic assistance, and that
other countries, including Saudi Arabia, were curtailing their aid. (Page A1,
Column 1.)

Thousands of homeless squatters have contributed to the large population
increase in Managua, Nicaragua's capital. Managua's population has grown from
600,000 to nearly 900,000 since the Sandinista Government came to power in 1979.
Thousands of the new residents are living in ''spontaneous settlements''
indistinquishable from similar slums in Brazil and Peru. (A1:5.)

Kibbutz residents and villagers on Israel's northern border are happy to see the
Israeli Army getting out of southern Lebanon and many are ready to pay the price
in terms of their security, they said. (A1:5.)

Israeli ''collaborators'' in Sidon are increasingly vulnerable to attack with
the withdrawal of Israeli troops in that region of southern Lebanon on Saturday.
A day after the pullout, a local militia leader said to have been an
''enforcer'' for the Israelis was seized by an armed gang. (A4:1.)

Unesco will keep close U.S. ties.  This was decided in Paris at the first high-
level meeting of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization since the Reagan Administration withdrew from it in December. After
an all-night negotiating session, delegates to the agency's 50-nation executive
board agreed to let the United States set up an observer mission that will keep
in touch with the organization's future activities. The United States, in
announcing its decision to withdraw, charged that the agency had become
politicized and anti-Western. (A3:1.)

A British Defense Ministry official in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's
Government who was acquitted last week of charges of violating Britain's
Official Secrets Act has quit the civil service. Clive Ponting resigned to
protest what he called the Government's ''inability to accept the implications''
of the verdict at his much- publicized trial. He was accused of leaking a
document concerning the sinking of the Argentine cruiser Belgrano during the
Falkland war to a Labor Member of Parliament. He lost his security clearance
even though the leaked document had no security classification. (A3:1.) National


An artificial heart implantation was ''perfect,'' Dr. William C. DeVries, the
chief surgeon said. In a three and half hour operation at Humana Hospital
Audubon in Louisville, Ky., a 58- year-old man who was dying of a heart disease
became the third person to receive a permanent artificial heart. The patient's
condition was described as ''stable.'' (A1:2.)

New York, New Jersey and Illinois are among the many states pursuing what
economic development officials consider the catch of the 1980's: General Motors'
$5 billion factory to build its Saturn cars and the 6,000 to 15,000 jobs it will
create. Officials from many states and cities have rushed to Detroit to deliver
a sales pitch for their area.. (A1:3.)

Home loan foreclosures have risen to a level near the record of the 1973
recession. Many housing economists say that the rollback of inflation is
responsible. (A1:2.)

Whooping cough vaccine is not being conserved by up to half of the nation's
private physicians, despite Federal recommendations that they do so, Federal
officials said. The vaccine is scarce, and the officials say the shortage has
worsened and may continue into most of this year. (A10:2.)

Many women are cocaine addicts.  The addiction appears to have caught women at
all socioeconomic levels, ranging from those who use the drug regularly to those
who use it only occasionally. The motivations for using cocaine and the
repercussions of its use appear in some ways to be dramatically different for
women than for men. (C18:2) Metropolitan

Gen. William C. Westmoreland's suit against CBS has been settled out of court.
Lawyers for both sides had been holding talks to settle the $120 million libel
suit. Under terms of the settlement, CBS will not disavow the 1982 television
documentary on the Vietnam War that was the basis of the suit and will not pay
any money to General Westmoreland. ''The court of public opinion'' was the
appropriate forum for deciding who was right in the case, both sides in the case
will say in a joint statement, legal sources said. (A1:6.)

Updated fingerprint checks of nearly 7,000 current or prospective employees at
government-financed child- care centers in New York City show that 253 have
criminal records, mostly for misdemeanors. (B3:5.)

The indictment of reputed leaders of New York City's five major organized-crime
families might result from conversations recorded by a transmitter hidden in an
automobile nearly two years ago by technicians of the state's Organized Crime
Task Force. Law-enforcement officials said the conversations in the car
belonging to a suspected leader of one of the crime groups have provided a rare
look at how the highest criminal echelons operate. (B5:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A JOINT STATEMENT ENDS LIBEL ACTION BY WESTMORELAND

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1908 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland and CBS ended their libel suit yesterday with a
joint statement that expressed the network's respect for the general's ''long
and faithful service to his country'' and the general's esteem for CBS's
''distinguished journalistic tradition.''

In the two-page statement, the network said it ''never intended to assert, and
does not believe, that General Westmoreland was unpatriotic or disloyal in
performing his duties as he saw them'' as commander of United States forces in
Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

In its own separate statement, CBS said it stood by the fairness and accuracy of
the 1982 documentary that prompted the general's $120 million libel action.

CBS officials said the program had not accused the general of being disloyal or
unpatriotic. Rather, it said, the broadcast presented ''charges that General
Westmoreland and his command misled the public, the Congress and the President
about enemy troop strength to advance the political argument that the war was
being won.''



General Claims Victory

The general immediately claimed victory in the three-year-old legal battle over
the CBS Reports documentary that accused his command of engaging in a
''conspiracy'' to understate enemy capability in 1967.

''I got all I wanted,'' he declared at a news conference, saying the statement
amounted to an ''apology'' by CBS. The 70-year-old retired general said he had
brought the suit ''to defend my honor'' and could now go home to South Carolina
and ''try to fade away.''

Minutes later, at their own news conference, CBS officials denied that the
statement constituted an apology.



No Monetary Award

''Our purpose here,'' said Van Gordon Sauter, the executive vice president of
the CBS broadcast group, ''is not to calibrate who won and who lost.''

What was important, he said, was that General Westmoreland had dropped his libel
action ''without any monetary award or retraction'' and that CBS retained
complete faith in the broadcast. ''I personally do not view that statement as an
apology,'' Mr. Sauter said.

Mr. Sauter said the documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' -
had been ''subjected to perhaps the most intensive scrutiny ever brought to bear
on a journalistic effort'' and had been ''vindicated.'' He called the suit the
most serious of its kind in the history of television.

The suit brought by General Westmoreland attracted national attention by raising
questions about the ethics and practices of television journalism, by casting
doubt on the integrity and credibility of military intelligence in wartime, and
by challenging the First Amendment rights of the press.

The accord that signaled a conclusion to the suit after 18 weeks of testimony in
Federal District Court in Manhattan was announced late Sunday. It was filed
yesterday with Judge Pierre N. Leval, who was expected to ratify it this morning
and dismiss the jury.

Richard Benveniste, the foreman of the jury, said yesterday he was ''still
stunned'' by the settlement. ''We went so long to come to an end like this. I'd
have liked to have gone the whole route.''

Jurors Told Not to Discuss Case

Mr. Benveniste, a 34-year-old commercial casualty underwriter, said, ''A lot of
people will think we spent five months for nothing. But I don't look at it that
way. The two sides decided what was best, and our decisions at this moment are
really insignificant.''

Mr. Benveniste declined to discuss his opinions of the case, saying Judge
Leval's office had told jurors to withhold comment until tomorrow.

But one juror, who asked not to be identified, said his ''gut opinion'' - formed
on the basis of ''little comments I heard around the jury room'' - was that the
jury was ''leaning toward CBS more than 50 percent.''

''Not everyone in there was sold on either side,'' he said. ''It would have been
a long deliberation. We would have had to really dig into it.''

The juror's remarks indicated that, in a case where the outlines of much of the
testimony had been known for months if not years, the aplomb of the lawyers and
the manner of their witnesses - the ''chemistry'' in the courtroom - were
important determinants of jury reaction.

CBS Lawyer Impressed Juror

David Boies, the chief lawyer for CBS, ''was an excellent lawyer,'' the juror
said. ''You could see the difference between him and the plaintiff's side. He
had more professionalism, more experience. That might have had an effect on some
of the jurors. Boies's charm was a selling point.''

But the juror said that several of the witnesses for General Westmoreland were
''too cocky.''

In this regard, he particularly singled out Robert W. Komer, the former chief of
the pacification program in Vietnam, whom both Dan M. Burt, General
Westmoreland's principal lawyer, and Mr. Boies had considered one of the
strongest witnesses for General Westmoreland.

Particularly impressive, the juror said, was Robert S. McNamara, the former
Secretary of Defense, who testified for General Westmoreland.

The juror said that Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian and Col. Gains Hawkins, both
of whom were key witnesses for CBS in recent weeks, were ''maybe more
convincingly believable'' than many others who took the stand.

Positions 'Placed Before Public'

In their joint statement, CBS and General Westmoreland said they believed their
positions had ''been effectively placed before the public for its consideration
and that continuing the legal process at this stage would serve no further
purpose.''

Historians, they said, ''will long consider this and other matters related to
the war in Vietnam. Both parties trust their actions have broadened the public
record.''

The documentary charged that, for political and public relations reasons,
General Westmoreland's command had deliberately distorted the true size and
nature of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in South Vietnam in the
months before the Tet offensive of January 1968. As a result of this ''conscious
effort,'' it said, President Johnson and American troops, as well as the public,
were left ''totally unprepared'' for the offensive.

The broadcast specifically accused General Westmoreland of imposing an
''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 troops on reports of enemy strength, and said
his senior aides had ''systematically blocked'' reports by junior officers of a
substantially greater North Vietnamese infiltration than was made known.

A Claim of Libel

General Westmoreland denied that he had acted improperly, and claimed that the
program libeled him by saying he had deceived the President.

The defendants, in addition to CBS, were George Crile, the producer of the
documentary; Mike Wallace, its narrator; and Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A.
analyst who served as a paid consultant for the program.

Mr. Sauter, who said that CBS could not allow itself to be ''intimidated by
those seeking to constrain free inquiry,'' said the network regretted that
General Westmoreland ''and his supporters felt compelled to bring this suit. We
feel now, as we did three years ago, that this issue should never have been
brought to court.''

In reply to questions, Mr. Sauter said CBS felt ''no chilling effect'' from the
suit and that the public had ''an unnecessary apprehension of the media.''

At General Westmoreland's news conference at the Harley Hotel, the general and
Mr. Burt read aloud three times the passage of the joint statement about the
general's loyalty.

Foundation Financed Lawsuit

''If that statement had been made after the CBS program was aired,'' the general
said, ''it would have satisfied me.'' Indeed, he said, had that statement been
issued at any time since the broadcast on January 23, 1982, ''it would have
ended the episode''

Mr. Burt - whose conservative Capital Legal Foundation has financed the suit at
a cost of more than $3 million - said that General Westmoreland brought the
action only ''to clear his name and that, in my heart, is what I believe has
been done.

''Many said the dispute didn't belong in court,'' Mr. Burt added. ''But there
was no alternative. And now this case has ended, as it began, in an unexpected
fashion.''

Mr. Burt said that he had discussed possible settlements with CBS lawyers ever
since the suit was filed in September 1982. Some of the approaches - such as
those last week - were made by him, he said; others by lawyers for the network.
But only now, he said, was CBS prepared to join in a statement affirming the
patriotism of his client.

Prior Settlement Bid Failed

''All I can tell you,'' he said, ''is that what I never could get, I got. It was
the equivalent of an apology. That's how I see it; others may see it
differently.''

Until last week, the only confirmed efforts to settle the dispute had occurred
in 1982, nearly a half-year after the 90-minute broadcast.

In July 1982, soon after a CBS internal investigation of the documentary, Mr.
Sauter, then president of CBS News, proposed a 45-minute follow-up program, with
another 15 minutes for the general to state his views.

General Westmoreland, however, demanded a published apology, a ''full
retraction'' on the air that met his approval and ''was not less than 45 minutes
in duration,'' and some payment. The general also sought access to the CBS
internal investigation.

The talks collapsed, and four days later General Westmoreland filed suit.

No Loss of Confidence

Yesterday, Mr. Burt denied that his recent overtures to CBS were based on the
continued high costs of the litigation, pressures from financial backers, a loss
of confidence by General Westmoreland or a belief that he was losing the case.

''We felt just as good as in the beginning and all along,'' he said. ''We felt
our cross-examinations were going nicely. But you have to keep an eye on what
you came for. Many civil suits are settled out of court.''

General Westmoreland said he had ''not lost faith'' in Mr. Burt over the course
of the trial, which was scheduled to go the jury next week.

At the CBS news conference, Mr. Boies insisted that until last week Mr. Burt had
demanded ''money or an apology or both'' and that was what had blocked a
settlement.

''When a plaintiff wants to drop a lawsuit without any money or apology,'' he
said with a smile, ''I think you ought to let him.''

'I'll Let It Speak for Itself'

Just as Mr. Burt had declined to speculate on CBS's willingness to settle at
this time, Mr. Boies refused to speak for Mr. Burt. ''You'll have to ask him,''
he said.

Mr. Boies refused to accept a characterization of the accord as a ''total
victory'' for CBS. ''I'll let it speak for itself,'' he said.

Mr. Boies said that CBS had never questioned General Westmoreland's good motives
for the actions portrayed on the broadcast.

''That's something I've been saying for a long time, and it is undoubtedly
true,'' he said. ''I said it in my opening statement to the jury, so if that's
all Mr. Burt wanted, he had it then.''

In his opening statement last October, Mr. Boies said, ''One can conceive of a
situation in which one genuinely believes we ought to be in that war, we ought
to continue to escalate and continue to add more troops and the only way to do
this is to convince people we are winning, convince people there is light at the
end of the tunnel.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David and Mary Boies (page B6) ; photo of Gen. and Mrs.
Westmoreland; photo of Van Gordon Sauter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'BEST I COULD GET,' GENERAL ASSERTS

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


I figured it was the best I could get,'' Gen. William C. Westmoreland said
yesterday in a private assessment that contrasted with his public proclamation
of victory in the settlement of his libel suit against CBS. ''It was in essence
an apology. One does not have to use the word. One apologizes in other ways.''

''If CBS had apologized in the first place,'' General Westmoreland said, ''none
of this would have happened.''

Although CBS denied that the statement amounted to an apology, the general said
it gave him the satisfaction he had been seeking since the 1982 broadcast of the
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Joint Statement Issued

Though the dispute culminated with the joint statement yesterday of CBS's
respect for the general's ''long and faithful service to his country,'' General
Westmoreland said he did not believe it ended the dispute between himself and
CBS.

''Is this my last battle?'' he asked rhetorically yesterday as the late
afternoon sun filled his room at the Madison Hotel, on 77 Street west of Madison
Avenue, where he has lived since the trial began in October. ''It may be wishful
thinking, but I hope so. But I know full well CBS may strike back.''

The general's conversation ranged from assertions of betrayal by his former
subordinates, to perceptions of himself as a victim of television, to a parallel
with Mike Wallace, the CBS correspondent, whom General Westmoreland portrayed -
like himself - as a man who paid insufficient attention to all his professional
duties.

Sitting in shirtsleeves, his red tie loosened, General Westmoreland seemed
relaxed but not exultant, satisfied but not glorying in victory, and still eager
to campaign for the cause of his honor and that of the American participation in
the war in Vietnam.

He spoke of himself as a man who had been placed ''center stage in one of the
most unpopular conflicts in the history of the country.''

''I admit that some of my judgments were not the best, based on some of the
decisions I made,'' he said, running his hands through his white hair, ''but I
was making decisions constantly. People were going in and out of my office. I
was constantly on the rope and working seven days a week.''

'Just an Old Soldier'

But he said he was ''truly shocked'' by the documentary. ''Maybe it was my
na"ivete,'' he said, ''but it never occurred to me that they'd do that. I
figured I was just an old soldier.''

''The fact that we as a nation didn't win the war,'' he went on, ''made a lot of
people look for scapegoats. And some of the military did the same.''

He pointed to the testimony against him by some of his former intelligence
officers, and called the appearance of Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who testified
against him, ''inexplicable to me.''

''McChristian was a very proud man,'' General Westmoreland said, ''and a very
ambitious person. He was awarded two Distinguished Service Medals, and I gave
both of them to him. I promoted him to major general. I gave him very good
efficiency reports, I got him his own command. For some strange and fascinating
reason, along the line he developed a vendetta.''

''Loyalty is an essential in the military fraternity,'' General Westmoreland
called the testimony against him by former subordinates ''actually unbelievable
to me'' and ''disillusioning.''

Reached last night, Gen. McChristian said, ''I don't have a vendetta. My heart
hurts for the trouble he and his family have gone through.''

General Westmoreland said empathized with Mike Wallace, the CBS correspondent
and co-defendant in the libel trial.

''I knew Mike Wallace and I thought well of him,'' he said. ''I think Mike was a
busy man. By his own admission he was working on a number of things. I guess, I
think Mike was victim of circumstances as I was.''

General Westmoreland said he would probably not have been interviewed for the
documentary if it had not been for a personal trust in Mr. Wallace.

General Westmoreland said that when he saw the CBS documentary, produced by Mr.
Crile, he felt he had no choice but to take legal action.

'Sense of Duty'

''Maybe it was my sense of 'duty, honor, country' that made me pursue it,'' he
said, citing the motto of the United States Military Academy, from which he
graduated and whose Superintendent he was.

''It looked,'' he said, ''like they were trying to make me out to be the second
Benedict Arnold, and I felt I had to defend myself.''

He said that he had received some first-hand evidence that the suit, he said,
had already had had an effect on television itself.

''Senior officials at CBS, and at other networks,'' he said, ''have approached
me and said: 'You have contributed a service. We have been more truthful, more
careful because of what you have done.' '' General Westmoreland declined to give
the names of the network officials who had congratulated him, saying the
conversations had occurred in private.

Yesterday, sitting with a glass of Coca-Cola in his hotel room, General
Westmoreland said, ''At the age of 71, maybe I can start living and close the
door on this thing. I am going to enjoy what may be the last few years I have,''
he said, standing up. ''unless CBS decides to be my perpetual tormentor.''

CBS spokesmen could not be reached last night for response.

Time for a Bath

His wife, Kitsy, walked into the room and told the general that it was time he
take a bath.

''You have to take a bath,'' she said, ''and a nap. You're going on
television.''

''Well, I'm not taking a bath until tonight,'' he said.

''You'll want to take a bath so you can think clearly,'' Mrs. Westmoreland.

''A bath,'' General Westmoreland said, ''is not going to help me to think
clearly.''

''You're going on television, Westy,'' Mrs. Westmoreland said. ''You'll want to
think clearly.''

General Westmoreland laughed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. William Westmoreland and Dan Burt (page B6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA BELITTLING VIETNAM'S ADVANCES IN CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 18


The Chinese Government today dismissed recent Vietnamese advances against
Cambodian guerrillas as militarily insignificant and said Vietnam would never
fulfill its ''vicious aim of perpetual occupation'' of Cambodia.

A Chinese Foreign Ministry statement three days after Vietnamese troops overran
a stronghold of the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge guerrillas said the offensive had
yielded little because the insurgents had made a strategic retreat beforehand.

The Chinese assessment was seen by Western diplomats as an attempt to place a
positive interpretation on a setback to Chinese hopes that the Khmer Rouge would
eventually exhaust the Vietnamese. The diplomats noted that, only three weeks
ago, China had regarded the Vietnamese offensive as sufficiently threatening to
justify an oblique warning of a new war between China and Vietnam.

First Official Reaction

The Foreign Ministry statement was the first official Chinese reaction to the
Vietnamese seizure of the Khmer Rouge headquarters in the hill range known as
the Phnom Malai along the Thai-Cambodian border.

China has been the principal source of finance and arms to the Khmer Rouge, and
has also supported two smaller guerrilla groups that belong to the political
alliance opposed to the Vietnamese and to the Cambodian Communist Government
that they installed in Phnom Penh in 1978 after ousting the Khmer Rouge, another
Communist group, from power.

Today's Chinese statement said:

''Powerful and truculent in appearance, the Vietnamese aggressors attempt to
wipe out the patriotic forces at one stroke, yet have got no more than a few
deserted camps and mountain strongholds by mobilizing so many troops.''

The statement concluded with a demand for the withdrawal of the estimated
160,000 soldiers that Vietnam has in Cambodia in support of the Phnom Penh
Government.

''The Vietnamese authorities can never realize their vicious aim of perpetual
occupation and annexation of Cambodia by military attack or political tricks,''
the statement said.

Chinese press commentaries over the weekend said the Khmer Rouge had taken their
arms and ammunition with them when they fled the Phnom Malai and that the
Vietnamese would now be exposed to harassment from the rear. The commentaries
said the Vietnamese troops, in occupying the Thai border region, would find
their extended lines of communication an ''unbearable strain.''

The conclusions contrasted with those reached by Thai military officers, who
were quoted by Western news agencies as having said that the capture of the
Phnom Malai was the most important Vietnamese success against the Khmer Rouge
guerrillas since 1978.

China's warning of a new war with Vietnam occurred when the Chinese Foreign
Minister, Wu Xueqian, visited Bangkok on a tour of Southeast Asia that was aimed
at stiffening support for the Cambodian guerrillas.

Mr. Wu said China would teach Vietnam ''a second lesson'' if the drive on the
Thai-Cambodian border continued. The allusion was to the 1979 war between China
and Vietnam, which was described by Chinese leaders at the time as ''a lesson''
for Vietnam after its takeover of Cambodia.

More Activity on the Border

The Chinese warnings have been accompanied by renewed infantry and artillery
skirmishes on the Chinese-Vietnamese border. As the Vietnamese were seizing the
Phnom Malai on the Thai-Cambodian border, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said that
Chinese troops, ''driven beyond forebearance'' by Vietnamese incursions across
the Chinese border, had counterattacked and given Vietnam ''a due lesson.''

Diplomats believe that the threats of a wider conflict are probably a bluff,
partly because of the heavy casualties sustained by China in 1979 and partly
because the Chinese leadership would be reluctant to prejudice its domestic
economic progress by the costs of a new conflict. However, the diplomats say
that an intensification of the border fighting was possible.

The New China News Agency said today that Hu Yaobang, the Chinese party leader,
visited frontier units in Yunnan Province last week. The agency quoted him as
having said that ''at no time shall we waver'' on the policy of removing what he
called the Vietnamese threat on the border.

Diplomacy Is Being Stressed

The Foreign Ministry statement today offered other indications that China's
policy for the time being would stress diplomatic moves and increased aid to the
Cambodian guerrillas, rather than a direct attack on Vietnam. It said that six
nations - Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Brunei -
had agreed to step up military aid to the anti-Vietnamese guerrillas in
Cambodia.

In addition, the statement alluded to moves to tighten the loose alliance
between the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist guerilla groups, which has as its
nominal leader the former Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk.
Diplomats believe that shoring up Prince Sihanouk's confidence will be a major
objective for China after his weekend statement that it was time to ask, ''Is
China willing to save us or not?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A General Surrenders

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


General Westmoreland's quest for respect should never have been brought to court
and his libel suit against CBS is wisely abandoned. Just a week from a jury
judgment, the general surrendered to the evidence that whether or not his
superiors in Washington were in fact deceived, he and some of his aides in
Vietnam in 1967 manipulated the estimates of enemy strength, apparently for
political effect.

That CBS, 15 years later, found this already documented ''conspiracy'' worthy of
a major expose was, professionally, an odd bit of news judgment. But it's one
for CBS to make.

That the program strayed from the network's own standards of fair play had
already been exposed by a TV Guide article and confirmed by CBS. Yet when
General Westmoreland made his unhappiness clear, CBS this special time offered a
follow-up program with 15 minutes for his unedited comments. Hearing no apology,
he declined.

By no stretch of law or logic, therefore, did CBS's conduct or the general's
hurt merit a $120 million libel action, costing the parties up to $10 million.

General Westmoreland has been called worse things than a poor judge of the enemy
or a bureaucratic maneuverer. Such judgments, in journalism and history, come
with the territory of high rank in American life. They are also, mercifully,
protected in law, which requires public figures claiming libel to prove not only
the falsehood of a damaging defamation but a reckless disregard of knowable
truth.

Unlike Israel's General Sharon, who caught Time magazine in a costly error,
General Westmoreland had trouble proving any falsehood. At the end, he stood in
imminent danger of having a jury confirm the essential truth of the CBS report.
For in court, as on the original program, the general could not get past the
testimony of high-ranking former subordinates who confirmed his having colored
some intelligence information.



The more interesting historical question is why the general should have recoiled
from higher estimates of enemy strength, which might have buttressed appeals for
more American troops. Most likely, he thought he was protecting President
Johnson and the war effort from the growing public resistance to its cost.
Perhaps he was also protecting his own past estimates of the number of American
troops he needed to win.

Merely to ask such questions shows why they don't belong in court. No jury can
decide which Vietcong guerrillas a generation ago were properly counted as enemy
''soldiers.'' No jury can prescribe the conduct of a field general toward his
Commander in Chief. No jury should have to plumb the meaning of the Vietnam
experience.

As the general may have finally recognized, history is no less fickle than
journalism. His reputation remains a totem in a wider conflict, both for
opponents of the Vietnam War and the defenders who put up the millions that
financed his suit. His duty done, there is only one way for him to achieve the
dignity he asks: Keep answering the questions of those who may try honestly to
understand a painful memory, but otherwise stand aside.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RISKS IN LITIGATION

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


In some ways, the course of General William C. Westmoreland's battle against
CBS, which concluded Sunday when his $120-million libel suit against the network
was withdrawn, paralleled the tortured path of the war with which he is so
closely identified.  At the Federal District Courthouse in Manhattan as in
Southeast Asia, General Westmoreland waged an expensive, time-consuming battle
against a powerful adversary, whose strength he may have underestimated.

Coming so soon after the very different outcome in Ariel Sharon's libel suit
against Time magazine, Westmoreland's withdrawal from the CBS libel suit -
without a monetary award or a retraction - was seen by legal experts as a gain
for the media, although not without a price.

''CBS has won a great victory, but it sustained two years of intense public
criticism as well as enormous financial costs,'' said Floyd Abrams, a specialist
on press law. ''Large libel suits are really death grips in which parties clutch
each other for months if not years, at enormous pain and expense to both of
them.''

'Shattering Loss of Reputation'

''Libel plaintiffs will be reminded of something they may have forgotten: that
someone who brings a libel suit may suffer a shattering loss of reputation
arising out of the litigation itself,'' said Mr. Abrams. ''We haven't heard so
much about that recently.''

Professor Vincent Blasi, a Columbia Law School specialist in constitutional law,
noted another consideration. ''This case resurrects the most important deterrent
to libel actions: the fear that the defendant will make his case more
effectively, more hurtfully, more credibly at trial than in print or on the
air.''

''Recently,'' he continued, ''there's been a kind of promiscuity in bringing
libel suits, based on a feeling that even if the evidence was fairly flimsy or
if the verdict were eventually overturned, the lawsuit had a certain publicity
value. This case ought to be terribly sobering in that regard.''

Still, for CBS the experience was not without its costs. The network paid
millions of dollars to vindicate itself, a process in which its news-gathering
procedures and the news-gatherers themselves were bared and scrutinized as never
before.

As the Westmoreland case came to its abrupt end, two and a half years after it
was first filed and 18 weeks after it went to trial, it left many questions
hanging.

Seeking Ways to Reduce Costs

Among them: Given its politically charged nature, should the case have gone to
court in the first place? Why did the parties opt out now rather than await the
jury's verdict? And what, if anything, should be done to make libel actions less
costly, so that newspapers and broadcasters with fewer resources than Time or
CBS can defend themselves?

At first blush, the Sharon and Westmoreland cases, which were heard
simultaneously six floors apart at the Federal courthouse on Foley Square, had
much in common. Each pitted a military man against a media giant; each focused
on purported misconduct during a far-off, unpopular war.

The similarities stop, however, when one considers the charges the two men
attempted to refute. For Mr. Sharon, it consisted of one specific statement:
that an Israeli commission had found he played a role in the 1982 massacre of
Palestinian civilians in Lebanon.

This he managed to do. And although he ultimately failed to prove that Time had
lied or acted recklessly - a showing required under the United States Supreme
Court's landmark libel ruling in New York Times v. Sullivan - a public
unconcerned with legal niceties deemed him the victor in the case. General
Westmoreland, however, was faced with the far more difficult task of refuting an
entire historical thesis: that he conspired to mislead American leaders on enemy
troop strength in Vietnam. It was an area where evidence was contradictory,
where fact and opinion were intermingled.

In the end, he not only failed to conclude his case, but publicized even more
widely the accusations of which he had complained.

Puzzlement Over Timing

There was genuine puzzlement yesterday over the timing of General Westmoreland's
decision, particularly since the recent, damaging testimony against him - by
General Joseph A. McChristian and Col. Gains Hawkins - could not have been much
of a surprise. Both had made similar statements on the original CBS broadcast.

General Westmoreland's lawyer, Dan Burt of the conservative Capitol Legal
Foundation, denied that the fact that the foundation is now $500,000 in debt
played a part in the decision to settle.

Mr. Blasi speculated that the decision may have been a belated reaction to the
prospect that Judge Leval - like Judge Abraham D. Sofaer, who presided over the
Sharon case - may have asked the jury to rule separately on the questions of
truthfulness, defamation and malice.

General Westmoreland, he said, may simply have been unwilling to let a panel of
his peers ratify CBS's thesis.

''He may have felt he'd really have egg on his face if a jury ruled against him
on falsity,'' Mr. Blasi said.

In the end, General Westmoreland agreed to something that CBS and its lawyers,
Cravath, Swaine & Moore, maintained all along: that, as the joint statement
issued by the parties stated, the ''court of public opinion,'' and not a court
of law, was the appropriate forum for the dispute.

Easy to Sue; Difficult to Win

One of the ironies of current libel law is that while it is extremely difficult
under the Sullivan rule for a public figure to win a libel action, it is
relatively easy to get a case to the jury. This, both Mr. Blasi and Mr. Abrams
said, was a formula for inefficiency - one that could be corrected were the
courts freer to dismiss libel cases prior to trial.

Five years ago, however, in the famous ''Footnote 9'' of Hutchinson v. Proxmire,
Chief Justice Warren Burger wrote that given the complex question of state of
mind involved in such libel actions, the cases were best tried.

A Stanford Law School professor, Marc Franklin, suggested that news
organizations could fend off libel actions altogether by granting aggrieved
persons a chance to reply - albeit earlier and less begrudingly, he said, than
CBS did with General Westmoreland.

''Not everyone who comes in off the street should be given equal time, but the
proper treatment in cases where truth and falsity are murky and there is a
morass of contradictory testimony is to let the plaintiff state his
perceptions,'' he said. ''This was a case for more free speech, not for a
lawsuit.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXTS OF STATEMENTS ON THE END OF WESTMORELAND'S LIBEL SUIT AGAINST CBS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


Following are the texts of a joint statement by Gen.  William C. Westmoreland
and CBS, a CBS statement after General Westmoreland announced that he was ending
his libel suit and a statement by General Westmoreland that were made public
yesterday. The joint statement, dated Feb. 17, was signed by General
Westmoreland; George Vradenburg 3d, the CBS general counsel; Mike Wallace, a CBS
correspondent, and George Crile 3d, a CBS producer.



Joint Statement

General William C. Westmoreland and CBS today jointly announced the
discontinuance of the Westmoreland suit against CBS, Mike Wallace, George Crile
and Sam Adams.

The suit pertained to a CBS News broadcast ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' broadcast on January 23, 1982.

The matters treated in that broadcast - and the broadcast itself - have been
extensively examined over the past two and a half years both in discovery and
then through documents and witnesses presented by both sides in Federal Court.

Historians will long consider this and other matters related to the war in
Vietnam. Both parties trust their actions have broadened the public record on
this matter.

Presenting Positions

Now both General Westmoreland and CBS believe that their respective positions
have been effectively placed before the public for its consideration and that
continuing the legal process at this stage would serve no further purpose.

CBS respects General Westmoreland's long and faithful service to his country and
never intended to assert, and does not believe, that General Westmoreland was
unpatriotic or disloyal in performing his duties as he saw them.

General Westmoreland respects the long and distinguished journalistic tradition
of CBS and the rights of journalists to examine the complex issues of Vietnam
and to present perspectives contrary to his own.

CBS Statement

First of all, CBS would like to express its appreciation to the jury for its
unstinting attention over the past several months, and to Judge Pierre Leval,
for the authority and impartiality that characterized his handling of this case.

We also want to express our admiration and respect for the many current and
former military and civilian Government officials who came forward at great
personal and professional cost to support the broadcast.

We regret that General Westmoreland and his supporters felt compelled to bring
the suit. We feel now, as we did three years ago, that this issue should never
have been brought to the court.

The complex and controversial issues of the Vietnam War are more appropriate to
ongoing public inquiry and debate than to judicial determination.

Three years ago, CBS News broadcast ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' which reported charges that General Westmoreland and his command
misled the public, the Congress and the President, about enemy troop strength to
advance the political argument that the war was being won.

Stands Behind Broadcast

Since then, the CBS News documentary has been subjected to perhaps the most
intensive scrutiny ever brought to bear on a journalistic effort. CBS News
conducted its own internal examination of the broadcast two and a half years
ago. It concluded that the broadcast was accurate and that minor procedural
violations of CBS News standards in no way compromised the editorial integrity
of the broadcast.

Nothing has surfaced in the discovery and trial process now concluded that in
any way diminishes our conviction that the broadcast was fair and accurate, and
that it was a valuable contribution to the ongoing study of the Vietnam era.

We continue to stand by the broadcast and are pleased that General Westmoreland
has withdrawn his legal challenge to it.

With this legal matter concluded, Mike Wallace will return to ''60 Minutes.''
George Crile will rejoin the documentary unit as a producer.

We have enjoyed our relationship with defense counsel David Boies and his
colleagues. One could not ask for better representation.

We also appreciate the contributions of Sam Adams to the broadcast and its
defense.

In conclusion, this experience has further strengthened the CBS News commitment
to vigorous, fair and impartial journalism. It is a fundamenatal principle of
CBS that the journalistic process not be limited or intimidated by those seeking
to constrain free inquiry and debate and the dissemination of information.

We believe this experience has advanced that principle.


Westmoreland Statement

From the joint statement issued by General Westmoreland and CBS, I quote, ''CBS
respects General Westmoreland's long and faithful service to his country and
never intended to assert, and does not believe, that General Westmoreland was
unpatriotic or disloyal in performing his duties as he saw them.''

If that statement had been made after the CBS program was aired, it would have
satisfied me.

After my press conference in Washington three days after the broadcast, it would
have satisfied me.

After the publication of the TV Guide article, it would have satisfied me.

If made after the publication of the book ''A Matter of Honor,'' it would have
satisfied me.

If made during the first days in Federal Court, it would have ended the episode.


Counting the Enemy

The court action has certainly exposed some of the problems and complexities of
producing intelligence on an elusive enemy.

The court action has certainly exposed some of the problems and complexities of
producing a television documentary.

Indeed, the court action has emphasized:

1. The enemy's Tet offensive was a severe defeat.

2. The scope of the enemy's offensive did exceed expectation.

3. The size of the enemy troops committed was in line with the estimates of my
intelligence chief, General Davidson.

4. Our American troops did an impressive job in fighting the enemy forces in
South Vietnam, and did not lose a battle of significance.

I hope and trust that the conclusion of my action against CBS will be a
benchmark in putting our Vietnam experience behind us and allow historians and
scholars to assess the facts of that war in accurate and nonsensational terms.

I brought this suit against CBS to defend my honor and to affirm constitutional
principles, which include the rights provided by the First Amendment.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESS CAUTIOUSLY HAILS WESTMORELAND'S WITHDRAWAL OF LIBEL SUIT

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words


Television, newspaper and magazine executives yesterday applauded Gen. William
C. Westmoreland's decision to drop his libel suit against CBS and said the
outcome affirmed that journalists should examine public issues without having to
fear legal action.

Many were cautious, however, about claiming the result as a clear-cut victory
for CBS or the press in general.

''Some legitimate questions were raised about the fairness of that particular
editing process,'' noted Dave Lawrence, chairman and publisher of The Detroit
Free Press, who is directing a study of press credibility for the American
Society of Newspaper Editors. ''The questions still stand in the public mind
about our devotion to accuracy and fairness.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded American troops in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, had sued CBS for $120 million, saying he was libeled by its assertion in a
1982 documentary that his command had underreported enemy strength in a
conspiracy to withhold information that might lessen public support for the war.

On Sunday, after 18 weeks of trial in Federal Court in Manhattan, the general
dropped the suit in exchange for a CBS statement that it ''never intended to
assert, and does not believe, that General Westmoreland was unpatriotic or
disloyal in performing his duties as he saw them.''

Attention on Journalistic Methods

The trial, along with a simultaneous but unrelated libel suit by Ariel Sharon
against Time magazine, had focused public attention on how journalists report
and edit stories. The jury in the Sharon case said Time had been careless in
reporting that the Israeli general had encouraged Christian Phalangists in
Lebanon to massacre civilian refugees, but it acquitted the magazine of
libelling him.

The Westmoreland case also raised questions about how news organizations
investigate complaints about their own reporting, and many journalists and
lawyers thought it might become a vehicle for redefinition by higher courts of
the limits of press criticism of public officials. The settlement left the legal
standards unchanged, and journalists said the result allayed their worst fears.

''I'm delighted,'' said Lawrence Grossman, the president of NBC News. ''It is
important to all of us that our chief competitor do well when its integrity is
challenged.''

''It seems obvious to me that the general and his lawyers realized that they
could not win the libel case against CBS and decided it was best to drop the
suit,'' said A. M. Rosenthal, executive editor of The New York Times. ''If he
felt wronged, the general had the right to bring the case, even though he was
forced to drop it in the end. And in fighting the suit, CBS deserves the
congratulations and thanks of those who believe the press has not only the right
to examine the record of public figures, but the duty to defend that right.''

Supporters Disappointed

Ray Cave, the managing editor of Time, said the results of the Sharon and
Westmoreland cases ''will discourage others from bringing suit.'' He said the
recent increase in the number of public officials bringing libel actions against
news organizations has been ''a hazard to the operation of the free press, if
not to freedom of the press.''

Reed Irvine, president of Accuracy in Media, a politically conservative
Washington-based organization that frequently criticizes the networks and
newspapers, said the outcome was ''disappointing'' to people who had supported
Westmoreland.

''It is going to be interpreted as a clear-cut victory for CBS,'' he said,
because people will forget all the testimony showing the documentary's producers
left out material supportive of the general and broke a number of network ground
rules to favor the people who believed there had been an intelligence conspiracy
in Saigon.

Accuracy in Media raised $40,000 on behalf of General Westmoreland but kept the
money after feuding with the general's lawyer. Mr. Irvine said the money would
be used to help other libel plaintiffs.

He said, however, that the high cost of the Westmoreland suit - both sides spent
more than $2 million - showed that such suits were ''an inefficient way of
getting the record set straight.'' He said libel plaintiffs ''have been losing
hand over fist,'' adding that those losses would discourage other suits.

Winant Sidle, a retired Army general who served as chief military spokesman in
Vietnam, said he had believed General Westmoreland's own testimony helped
exonerate him of the CBS charges, but after the settlement was announced said,
''I don't know.'' He said the fact that the general had to sue underlined the
paucity of choices available to a public figure to rebut an attack he considered
unfair.

Last year General Sidle directed a panel of military officers and retired
journalists to suggest ways of improving relations between the Pentagon and the
press following the military's barring of reporters from covering the United
States-led invasion of Grenada. He said the Westmoreland case was unlikely to
alter public beliefs in the credibility of the press or the military.

Internal Investigation

Before the case came to trial, CBS asked one of its senior producers, Burton
Benjamin, to make an internal investigation of charges raised against the
documentary by an article in TV Guide accusing the network of poor journalistic
methods in making the documentary. Mr. Benjamin's report upheld the fairness of
the documentary, but agreed with TV Guide that the program's producer, George
Crile, had broken a number of the network's rules.

When the court later ordered CBS to give General Westmoreland a copy of Mr.
Benjamin's report and notes he had made in interviews with CBS staff members,
many journalists said they feared other news organizations would be reluctant to
make such a candid internal inquiry or of admitting errors found in such
inquiries.

At a news conference yesterday, Van Gordon Sauter, the executive vice president
of the broadcast division of CBS News, said the network would not hesitate to
conduct another such investigation. ''We would go back to it and we'd go back to
it fully appreciating the vulnerability that such an action bears,'' he said.

''CBS ought to have gotten a little more praise than it did for the Benjamin
report,'' said Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer who has represented news
organizations. He said the internal investigation ''is precisely what I think
most people would want a news organization to do.''

'A Role Model'

''I don't think it hurts for people to know how we do what we do,'' said Gene
Foreman, the managing editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, who recently
completed a study of press credibility for the Associated Press Managing Editors
organization. He said the flaws in the Westmoreland and Sharon reporting ''were
not characteristic of the media as a whole.''

The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press congratulated CBS for
vindicating ''its journalistic integrity.'' In a telegram to the network sent by
Jack C. Landau, executive director of the Washington-based committee, the group
said CBS ''is serving as a First Amendment role model for other news
organizations large and small faced with the plague of libel suits and other
legal threats.''

Like other journalists, Ted Koppel, the host of the ABC late-night news program
''Nightline'' and of its regular programs on press issues, said much of the
public understanding of how reporters operate has been shaped by heavily
publicized libel suits. But, he said, the courts are not the best place to teach
the public about the press or to argue complex questions of public policy.''

News executives applauded General Westmoreland's statement, made as part of the
settlement, recognizing ''the rights of journalists to examine the complex
issues of Vietnam, and to present perspectives contrary to his own.'' They said
it was important that libel suits not be used to deter reporting about
controversial public issues, as they said some public figures want.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David and Mary Boies being surrounded by reporters

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS NEWS RELIEVED OF BURDEN OF SUIT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 593 words


CBS News began work today for the first time in three years relieved of the
burden of defending the integrity of its 1982 documentary on Vietnam troop
strength.

''I was exhilarated,'' Van Gordon Sauter, the executive vice president of the
CBS Broadcast group, said yesterday in the wake of Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's decision to drop his $120 million suit charging that the
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' had libeled him.

''For the last three years,'' Mr. Sauter said, ''in one way or another, this has
been a part of every day in one's life.''

Mr. Sauter said CBS planned no changes in its news-gathering operations. He said
the producer of the documentary, George Crile, would return to work at his old
job in the documentary unit.

For the last two years Mr. Crile has worked full time on CBS's defense of the
documentary.

CBS also said in a statement that Mike Wallace, who was the narrator of the
Vietnam documentary and a defendant in the case, would be resuming full-time
reporting for the ''60 Minutes'' program. Mr. Wallace had curtailed his work for
''60 Minutes'' so he could be available to testify at the libel trial, a CBS
spokesman, Sara Vass, said.

'Good Day for Journalism'

Mr. Wallace, who was to have testified today, said yesterday that the end of the
trial marked ''a good day for journalism.''

Mr. Sauter spoke at an afternoon news conference at the Dorset Hotel, on West
54th Street, before a score of microphones and a bank of 13 television cameras.

Asked if CBS planned any changes in procedures now that the case was over, Mr.
Sauter replied, ''No.''

During the news conference both Mr. Sauter and the chief lawyer for CBS, David
Boies, were careful not to characterize General Westmoreland's decision to end
his libel suit as a victory for CBS. They also said there had been no
celebration after the agreement to end the case was reached.

Speculation on Perceptions

But afterward, Mr. Sauter, sipping a diet soda as he stood in a corner of the
press-conference room, said in response to a question that he believed CBS would
be seen as the victor over General Westmoreland's complaint.

''Particularly after a spate of headlines about former Westmoreland colleagues
being highly critical of him and then this sudden and totally unexpected
withdrawal,'' Mr. Sauter said, ''I think the public will probably presume
there's something significantly wrong with that plaintiff's case or that there
was a great apprehension to its credibility with the jury.''

Mr. Sauter said he was confident CBS would have won before the jury.

Mr. Boies and Mr. Sauter both said CBS had agreed to a settlement because, as
Mr. Boies put it, ''When a plaintiff wants to settle without any money and
without any apology, I think you ought to let him.''

Mr. Boies said CBS and the three individual defendants agreed with that.

But outside the hotel, Samuel A. Adams, the third individual defendant and the
only one who is not a full-time employee of CBS, expressed doubts. Mr. Adams, a
former C.I.A. analyst who was a paid consultant to CBS for the documentary, said
he would have preferred to see a jury verdict upholding the documentary.

Mr. Adams did not sign the agreement between General Westmoreland and CBS,
although the general's decision to withdraw the charges covers him as well.

Mr. Adams said he did not know why CBS accepted the general's decision to end
the case. But then he added: ''If the general had lost, it would have been very
hard on him.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM TO COURTROOM

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who was commander of United States forces in
Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, filed a $120 million libel suit in 1982 against CBS
over a documentary that stated that his command conspired to underestimate
reports of enemy troop strength before the Tet offensive of January 1968. Here
are some of the events that led to the lawsuit, which General Westmoreland
formally ended on Sunday night.



June 20 - General Westmoreland is named commander of United States forces in
Vietnam, which number fewer than 18,000 advisers and support personnel.  1965

July 13 - Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian becomes chief of military intelligence
on General Westmoreland's staff.  1966

December - Military and Central Intelligence Agency officers in Vietnam begin a
review of enemy strength estimates.  1967

April - General Westmoreland visits Washington, gives President Johnson an
optimistic assessment of the war.

May 19 - General McChristian prepares a cable to be sent to Washington on the
results of a five-month intelligence study that puts enemy strength at more than
500,000 troops. General Westmoreland orders General McChristian not to send the
cable.

May 28 - Col. Gains Hawkins, a senior intelligence officer, meets with General
Westmoreland and is told, according to the colonel's later testimony, that the
higher figures for enemy strength are ''politically unacceptable.''

June 1 - General McChristian is transferred from Vietnam and replaced by Lieut.
Gen. Phillip B. Davidson.

June and July - Colonel Hawkins orders subordinates to cut estimates of enemy
strength. He will later testify that this was done to conform to a ceiling
imposed by General Westmoreland.

August - Military and C.I.A.  analysts meet in Langley, Va., and disagree on
enemy strength. General Westmoreland's staff argues for totals under 300,000;
C.I.A. officials, including Samuel A. Adams, favor more than 500,000.

Sept. 12 - Negotiations between military and C.I.A. analysts lead to acceptance
of the military command's lower figures.

Nov. 13 - General Westmoreland sends President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff figures showing enemy strength at 223,000 to 248,000 troops.

Nov. 21 - Walt W. Rostow, special assistant to President Johnson, warns the
President in a memo that the press might ''latch onto the previous underestimate
and revive credibility gap talk.''

Nov. 22 - General Westmoreland tells reporters that Communist strength has
declined from 285,000 in 1966 to 242,000 in 1967.

Dec. 19 - The New York Times reports that enemy strength in Vietnam could be as
high as 483,000.  1968

Jan. 30 - Communist forces launch the Tet offensive, striking Saigon and 39
other cities and towns in an attack that creates turmoil and comes to be
regarded as a turning point of the war.

Jan. 31 - Mr. Adams, the C.I.A. analyst, tells his superiors that the compromise
figures were ''a monument of deceit.'' He accuses the general's staff of
''outright falsehoods'' that ''basically misinformed policy makers of the
strength of the enemy.''

July 3 - General Westmoreland becomes Army Chief of Staff and is replaced as
commander in Vietnam by Gen. Creighton Abrams.  1973

Jan. 11 - Mr. Adams demands an investigation by the C.I.A. on the handling of
the enemy strength figures, then resigns from the agency.

April - Mr. Adams testifies at the Pentagon Papers trial of Daniel Ellsberg that
the military deliberately cut enemy strength figures. He later asks
Representative Paul N. McCloskey, Republican of California, to keep a file of
Westmoreland-C.I.A. cables and other documents.

April 17 - Representative McCloskey charges that the military ''deliberately
concealed'' the size and nature of the enemy before the Tet offensive.

April 30 - Saigon falls to the Communists.

May - Harper's magazine publishes article by Mr. Adams charging that General
Westmoreland's command ''fabricated'' enemy strength figures. The article is
edited by George Crile 3d, who will join CBS as a producer in 1976.

September-December - A House committee investigates Mr. Adams's charges.  1976

January - The House committee reports that the 1967 estimates dropped numbers
''in what appears to have been an arbitrary attempt to maintain some ceiling''
on estimates of enemy strength.  1980

Nov. 24 - Mr. Crile, now a CBS producer, proposes a documentary on the enemy
troop strength issue. It is accepted and Mr. Adams, now writing a book on the
subject, is later hired as a CBS consultant for the project.  1981 CBS creates a
90-minute, $250,000 documentary. It interviews more than 80 people, 13 of them
on camera, including General Westmoreland and Mr. Adams.  1982

Jan. 23 - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' is shown on ''CBS
Reports'' to a national audience estimated at 9.6 million.

Jan. 26 - General Westmoreland denounces the program as a ''vicious, scurrilous
and premediated attack on my character and personal integrity.'' He demands, but
does not receive, an apology from CBS.

May 29 - An article in TV Guide, ''Anatomy of a Smear,'' criticizes the CBS
procedures used in making the documentary.

July 8 - A CBS internal study finds that the documentary suffered from
''imbalance'' and that there were editing mistakes and other violations of the
network's standards, but it stands by the program.

Sept. 13 - General Westmoreland files a $120 million libel suit, charging that
CBS defamed him by falsely accusing him of lying to the President and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.  1984

Sept. 24 - Judge Pierre N.  Leval denies a CBS motion to dismiss the case,
saying there are sufficient questions to warrant a trial.

Oct. 9 - The trial begins in Federal Court in Manhattan.

November - General Westmoreland testifies for nine days, arguing his case and
denying that he had acted improperly.  1985

Feb. 12 - Colonel Hawkins testifies that General Westmoreland imposed a
''dishonest'' ceiling on enemy troop figures in 1967 because higher numbers were
''politically unacceptable.''

Feb. 18 - Lawyers announce a settlement in which General Westmoreland withdraws
the suit, CBS pays no damages and stands by its documentary, and each side pays
its own legal expenses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Maj. Gen. Joseph McChristian; photo of Col. Gains Hawkins

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELIS PRESS FOR QUICKER PULLOUT FROM LEBANON THAN IS PLANNED

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 19


The mounting Israeli casualties in southern Lebanon and a growing feeling that
little is to be gained from staying there any longer are generating heavy
pressure on the Government to pull the army out faster than was planned.

The Israeli Cabinet is expected to hold an extraordinary session soon to set a
date for the second stage of the three-stage withdrawal from Lebanon. The second
stage, pulling back primarly from the eastern Bekaa front with the Syrians, will
bring Israeli troops to within 10 to 15 miles of the border. This second stage
is expected in April, after the snow melts, and the final stage in August.

Israel completed the first phase on Saturday by withdrawing from the greater
Sidon area. At the Cabinet session on Sunday, Yigael Hurwitz, Minister Without
Portfolio and a former Likud bloc member, proposed that the army leave Lebanon
immediately.

Today Communications Minister Amnon Rubenstein and several Labor and Likud
members of Parliament joined those calling for a speedier pullback.

(The United States and the Soviet Union held exploratory talks in Vienna on the
Middle East. Page A4.)



Editorial Shows the Mood

The new mood in Israel was evident today in the mass circulation daily Yediot
Aharonot, Israel's largest newspaper, which is traditionally pro-Likud and
enthusiastically supported the invasion. In an unusual front-page editorial
signed by the editor in chief, Herzel Rosenblum, the newspaper said:

''What is being done to us by the Lebanese - their gangs and Government
authorities - is the worst thing, the wildest hooliganism. They are murdering
our people who are in the process of a full withdrawal from the area. They lurk
waiting for them behind every corner to kill them before they get out of the
hell, with Assad standing behind the murderers along with that complete zero,
Amin Gemayel.''

Saying Israel did not want to respond to the attacks by destroying southern
Lebanese towns and people, the editorial continued: ''We do not have the means
to paralyze them in any other way. We must get out of there, not in stages,
long-term or short-term, but immediately - today - and not stay there even a
minute too long.''

A senior Defense Ministry official said upon reading the editorial: ''If they
are calling for our withdrawal, then there is no one left to ask us to stay.
They would have supported our invasion of Turkey before.''

Opposition to remaining in Lebanon has been building in the Israeli public for
some time, but recent developments seem to have heightened it.

The first such development was the sharp increase in the number of guerrilla
attacks on Israeli troops. A day rarely passes now without an Israeli soldier
being killed or wounded.

On Monday two senior Israeli officers were killed in ambushes - Col. Avraham
Hido and Maj. Shaul Zehavi. Their death notices were splashed across the front
pages of every Israeli newspaper. Colonel Hido was one of the four most senior
officers killed since the invasion.

Commentators and average Israelis speak of being revolted or disgusted by these
casualties because they see no meaning or possible benefits in them.

''People here have the feeling they want to detach themselves from Lebanon like
you detach yourself from a plague,'' said Zeev Schiff, the respected military
correspondent of the newspaper Haaretz. Mr. Schiff, who just returned from 18
months leave in Washington, published an article last week on the contrast
between the Israeli Army in Lebanon today and the one he left 18 months ago.

Reminder of Vietnam

''It is not just a different Lebanon,'' he wrote. ''It is first of all a
different Israeli Army. It is astonishing and painful. What the people who have
initiated this war have done to the Israeli Army is unforgivable. You no longer
talk about 'what the Israeli Army is defending' but about 'who will defend the
Israeli Army.' You see the change first of all in the eyes of the soldiers. It
is a look that reminded me of the look in the eyes of the American soldiers I
saw in the final stages of Vietnam. It is the look of soldiers and officers who
know that their chances of winning in Lebanon are less than negligible. In
Lebanon you can see an army that has experienced firsthand how military might is
rendered impotent.''

Also increasing the support for an immediate withdrawal were remarks by
President Amin Gemayel when he visited Sidon and praised the attacks by Lebanese
on Israeli troops. Mr. Gemayel's family had been aided for years by Israel and
represented for Israelis ''Christian Lebanon.''

Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin said in a speech on Monday that Mr. Gemayel's
declarations demonstrated how ''all concepts of fidelity in Lebanon are worth
less than the skin of a garlic, and how much any attempt to trust a relationship
has no basis in reality.''

Defense Minister's Concern

The quick shift in public mood appears to have caught Mr. Rabin off guard, even
though he favors the pullback. Mr. Rabin is concerned about withdrawing to the
international border before Israel tries to set up security arrangements along
the frontier, using its South Lebanon Army.

''Getting out of there doesn't just depend on the weather,'' Mr. Rabin said in
an interview published today. ''It also requires prior deployment so that we
will be ready for anything that happens.''

Although a majority of Israelis may want out of Lebanon now, right now there are
no rockets landing in northern Israel. There appears to be a significant
minority in favor of keeping the army in Lebanon, and if large-scale attacks
begin afresh on Israel's northern border that minority could grow into a
majority again.

It is precisely that kind of situation that Mr. Rabin and Prime Minister Shimon
Peres want to avoid, which has put them in the somewhat awkward position of
having to apply some brakes to the withdrawal momentum they helped start.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of relatives (page A4)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ADMIRAL CRITICAL OF WESTMORELAND

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Some retired military leaders and other supporters of Gen. William
Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS expressed disappointment today at the
outcome and disagreed with the general's claim that he had won the vindication
he sought.

Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, who was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1970
to 1974 before his retirement from the Navy, said today that he was ''very
disappointed'' that General Westmoreland had agreed to settle the case without a
jury verdict, a retraction or payment of damages by the network.

In Federal District Court in Manhattan today, Judge Pierre N. Leval dismissed
the jury in the Westmoreland case, saying, ''It may have been for the best that
the verdict be left to history.'' (Page B6.)

Admiral Moorer had joined several other high-ranking retired officers in signing
letters to raise money and in contributing to help pay for the suit, which has
cost almost $3.5 million in legal fees for General Westmoreland's side alone.

''Knowing very little about the legal aspect, I wouldn't have quit at that
point,'' the Admiral said, referring to the general's decision to drop his case
about a week before the jury was to begin deliberations.

He disagreed with General Westmoreland's assertion that CBS had in effect
apologized by saying Monday that it did not think him ''unpatriotic or disloyal
in performing his duties as he saw them.''

''They didn't really apologize,'' Admiral Moorer said. He noted that CBS
continues to hold that its documentary's assertion that General Westmoreland
distorted estimates of enemy troop strength in Vietnam to deceive his superiors
and the public was true. ''I think they libeled him,'' he said.

Other Westmoreland supporters who expressed disappointment that the case did not
go to a jury verdict included Reed Irvine, chairman of Accuracy in Media;
Michael McDonald, general counsel of the American Legal Foundation, both
conservative groups that often criticize news reports, and Maj. Gen. Herbert G.
Sparrow, retired.

General Sparrow also helped raise money for the case. Neither Mr. Irvine nor Mr.
McDonald contributed money to General Westmoreland's suit, but they supported
him in pressing it. The American Legal Foundation has a complaint pending with
the Federal Communications Commission to find the same CBS documentary in
violation of the commission's fairness doctrine.

None of General Westmoreland's supporters criticized the general personally,
however, or suggested that financial contributions for his suit had been
misused.

Dispute With Lawyer

Mr. Irvine said today that he had raised about $40,000 for the Westmoreland case
by 1983 but had ended up using most of it on other libel suits and refunding the
rest to donors because Dan Burt, General Westmoreland's principal lawyer,
refused to agree to document how the money was spent.

Mr. Irvine and Mr. Burt today traded barbs about one another's roles in the
case.

Mr. Irvine said Mr. Burt had committed tactical errors in the trial because of
''lack of experience in such matters,'' had been unreceptive to advice and had
antagonized possible conservative donors by trying ''to distance himself from
the conservative movement.''

Asserting that the case had ended badly for those who believed that CBS had
wronged the general, Mr. Irvine said, ''Is it really worth $8 million to get CBS
to say you're not unpatriotic?'' The $8 million was an estimate of the cost of
the case to both sides.

Mr. Burt dismissed Mr. Irvine's criticisms, saying he had refused to take money
from Accuracy in Media for the case because he could not agree to conditions
that would compromise the independence of the Capital Legal Foundation, his
Washington-based nonprofit law firm.

Used Name Without Consent

Mr. Burt also accused Mr. Irvine of using General Westmoreland's name without
his consent in a 1983 newspaper advertisement for Accuracy in Media. Mr. Irvine
acknowledged today that the general had complained about the advertisement,
adding that it had been a misunderstanding and he had expressed ''my regrets''
to the general.

Mr. Burt said Capital Legal Foundation, which he has headed since 1980, has
worked on the Westmoreland case almost full time, at no charge to the general,
since the suit was filed in September 1982.

Capital has been financed since before the Westmoreland case began primarily by
conservative-leaning foundations, such as the Scaife Foundation and the Olin
Foundation, and still gets most of its money from such groups, Mr. Burt said
today.

But Mr. Burt rejected the label ''conservative'' and said he considered himself
a ''libertarian'' dedicated to free- market economic principles and to checking
the power of large organizations, including news organizations.

Raised $500,000

He also said Capital had raised about $500,000 in contributions from
individuals, mostly small donations by retired military men and others, for the
Westmoreland suit.

Much of this money was donated in response to mass-mailed fund-raising appeals
for Capital signed by Admiral Moorer and other retired top-ranking military men
including Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, another former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs;
Adm. Arleigh Burke, a former Chief of Naval Operations; Gen. Curtis E. LeMay,
former chief of the Air Force, and Gen. Lewis W. Walt of the Marine Corps.

Mr. Burt said Capital had spent about $3.3 million for the case while raising
about $2.9 million, leaving it about $400,000 in debt. ''I'll have trouble, but
I'll do it,'' he said when asked how he would cover the deficit.

Mr. McDonald, of the American Legal Foundation, said the outcome of the
Westmoreland case was ''dispiriting for someone from my perspective.'' He said
he believed CBS News had ''acted maliciously and defamed'' General Westmoreland
and that a verdict by ''a disinterested and neutral jury'' would have
established this.

Some Westmoreland supporters tempered their disappointment that the case had not
gone to the jury with expressions of respect for the general's decision to end
the suit as he saw fit.

''I would liked to have seen it go to the jury,'' said Anthony A. Bliss Jr., a
former staff sergeant who served in Vietnam and a co-chairman of a group called
Veterans for Westmoreland that raised money for the suit. But ''if he feels that
he's vindicated, then we do, too.''

Mr. Bliss said his group had raised about $130,000 for the Westmoreland suit
from about 6,500 veterans, ranging ''from former privates to four-star generals
and admirals.''

''There's a lot of anger out there and a lot of feeling that this is not a dead
issue,'' Mr. Bliss said, referring to the settlement of the suit.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

40 YEARS AFTER BATTLE, SMILES ON IWO JIMA;
EX-MARINES REMINISCE WITH FOES

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: IWO JIMA, Japan, Feb. 19


The island was not as they remembered it.

Tropical bush grew tall and thick along the dusty trails and, to a man, they
marveled at the uninterrupted stretches of new growth. When they had last come
here, 40 years ago, the island was as barren as a shell.

That did not mean Iwo Jima had become a pretty place to visit. No sir, everyone
said. There was nothing pretty about squat mounds of black sand formed from
volcanic residue. There was nothing welcome about the sulfur pits, which shot
out malevolent gases that enveloped parts of the island in fumes whispering of
death.

''It's an ugly place, but at least it's safe now,'' said George Palazzo of
Providence, R.I., formerly Pvt. George Palazzo of the Fourth Marine Division.
''It's safe,'' Mr. Palazzo repeated. ''That's a big difference.''

There were almost too many differences, and even more ironies, to tote up with
any accuracy on Iwo Jima today. Probably none was more obvious than the sight of
nearly 200 American Marine veterans and three dozen Japanese veterans shaking
hands and embracing along the dark beaches, talking of honor and valor and, most
of all, peace. On Feb. 19, 1945, on the same spot, those men became embroiled in
what would prove to be the bloodiest battle of the Pacific hostilities in World
War II.

Over the ensuing weeks, until the Americans finally took full control of the
Japanese island, the Marines suffered their highest casualty rate of the war -
5,931 killed and 17,372 wounded among 70,000 men.

The Japanese force of roughly 21,000 was all killed, except for about 1,000
soldiers. Most of them were stragglers who turned up many weeks after the hard
fighting stopped. They had hidden, with almost no food or water, in oppressive
underground tunnels and caves they had dug across the island.

''It was just carnage everywhere,'' said Charles Early, of Sarasota, Fla.
''There were wrecks everywhere - wrecks of vehicles everywhere, wrecks of men
everywhere.''

''Of course, it was hell,'' said Takeo Abe, who was hit with 27 bullets, yet
managed to become one of the few Japanese survivors. ''All I felt was that I was
going to die. I could never imagine that tomorrow would arrive.''

Haven for Bombers Provided

Militarily, the battle of Iwo Jima was significant because, among other things,
it gave American B-29 pilots the safe harbor they had lacked for bombing runs
between bases on Saipan, 600 miles south, and mainland Japan, about 660 miles
north.

Psychologically, the fighting may have had as great an impact.

It was, historians and participants alike agree, as nasty a battle as ever was
fought, on perhaps the most vile terrain possible. Iwo Jima - ''Sulfur Island,''
in Japanese - is a 10- square-mile blot on a glistening ocean. Some of those who
flew here today on military troop cargo planes had trouble imagining how more
than 90,000 men could have fitted on the place.

Still, all that seemed less important than handshakes, and even a few tears.
Both Americans and Japanese talked about the ''waste'' of so many lost lives.
They swapped stories, or attempted to, in halting English and Japanese. Some
exchanged war souvenirs.

Some Remain Unreconciled

Not everyone tried. Several marines spoke unhesitatingly about their continued
hatred for the Japanese. If many of their colleagues agreed, they kept it to
themselves.

The gathering was the third of its kind held over the last two decades, but it
was the first for nearly everyone in this group of American veterans and their
families. And probably their last, they said. For them, this was a final
opportunity to clasp not only an old enemy but also a remnant of youth.

Military leaders from both countries spoke at an outdoor ceremony about courage.
President Reagan, in a message read in his behalf, talked of the ''spirit,
fortitude and bravery that abounded on all sides.''

The trip here and the ceremony were arranged by American and Japanese veterans'
organizations, with air transportation from Tokyo to Iwo Jima provided by the
United States Marine Corps through the Department of Defense.

A granite monument - paid for largely by the family of John Wayne, who appeared
in the movie, ''Sands of Iwo Jima'' - was dedicated on the beaches where
American marines first came ashore that Feb. 19. The monument's inscription said
in part, ''We pray together that our sacrifices on Iwo Jima will always be
remembered and never be repeated.''

Most Want to Explore

Speeches, however, held little interest for most of the old marines. They wanted
to explore.

Sheridan Peterson, who lives in Japan now, teaching college economics in Akita,
knelt on the invasion beaches and scooped black sand into plastic bags to take
back home. Dozens of others, sifting the sand for memories, did the same.

Everyone rode to the top of bowl- shaped Mount Suribachi and took in the scene
where six Americans raised an American flag on the fifth day of the fighting.

Under a strong sun and steady wind - the same weather, they said, as 40 years
ago - veterans went off on their own to find the sites where they had been shot,
or where buddies had been killed. They explored reopened Japanese caves, so hot
and ridden with sulfur smells that it was almost unimaginable that hundreds of
men had survived many weeks in them.

Dr. Kazuyoshi Morimoto, who is 84 years old and ran a field hospital on Iwo Jima
during the war, said he had hidden deep in one such cave until April 14, weeks
after the Americans considered the island secured. Dr. Morimoto said he had
decided to surrender and persuaded 50 of his men to follow.

Some Refuse to Yield

''But the young soldiers,'' he said, ''truly believed Japan would win the battle
and the war. It took me three full days to convince them that we should
surrender. Even then, three of them committed suicide rather than comply. Others
killed themselves later. I chose life.''

On both sides, veterans came with wives and children. In some cases, the
American families formed instant portraits, capturing shifting national moods.

Lincoln Peck of Pasadena, Md., came with his son, Fred, who like his father
joined the Marines and is now a major. Sam Queen of Waynesville, N.C., came with
his son, Joe Sam, who to the dismay of his father marched on Washington years
ago to protest the war in Vietnam.

Children of Japanese who served here were on hand, too, including Taro
Kuribayashi, whose father, Lieut. Gen. Tadamichi Kuribayashi, commanded the
Imperial Japanese Army forces on Iwo Jima. General Kuribayashi is presumed to
have committed ritual suicide inside a cave. Outside the cave, now sealed, the
son offered Buddhist prayers to his father today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sheridan Peterson (page A6); photo of Tsunezo Wachi, Alfred
Cialfi, Arthur Ford and Clifford Walters

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thailand Says Vietnam Is Using Poison Gas

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 19


Thailand accused Vietnam today of using poison gas in its three-month-old
offensive against Cambodian rebels. It said four rockets containing the deadly
toxin had landed in Thai territory.

In a note today to the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de
Cuellar, Thailand said the purported gas attacks and Vietnamese artillery and
ground assaults across the border were ''murderous acts.''

The Thai military said its laboratory tests showed that four rockets that fell
in Thailand on Feb. 6 contained phosgene and hydrogen cyanide. A Foreign
Ministry spokesman originally said the rockets were fired last Saturday, but the
report later was revised.

Phosgene was first used in warfare by the German Army on the battlefields of
World War I. A colorless gas that smells like newly mowed hay, it reacts with
water in the lungs to form deadly carbon monoxide and hydrochloric acid.

A United States Embassy spokesman said of Thailand's charges, ''We are aware of
the reports and we have no comments at this time.'' The United States has
accused Vietnam of using toxic chemicals in fighting guerrillas in both Cambodia
and Laos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY DEADLOCKS IN SLAYING OF CALIFORNIA PROFESSOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., Feb. 19


The trial of a 21-year-old Vietnamese immigrant accused of killing a professor
ended in a mistrial today as the jurors announced they were hopelessly
deadlocked after four days of deliberation.

Judge Richard Beacom of Orange County Superior Court declared the mistrial
shortly after noon in the trial of Minh Van Lam. He was accused of murdering
Edward Lee Cooperman, a professor of physics at California State University's
Fullerton campus who was a friend of Mr. Lam's. Dr. Cooperman, 48 years old, was
found shot to death in his school office on Oct. 13, 1984.

Mr. Lam contended that he had shot his friend accidentally in a playful
wrestling match for the pistol.

Mel Jensen, the county Deputy District Attorney, who prosecuted the case, had
characterized Mr. Lam as a remorseless killer and called for a verdict of
first-degree murder.

Motive Never Established

The jurors said in interviews that the prosecution's failure to establish a
motive had complicated their deliberations. They said the professor's close
political ties to Vietnam had little influence on them.

Otto Christensen, the jury foreman, said the jury found Mr. Lam not guilty of
first-degree murder, but was deadlocked 9 to 3 for conviction of involuntary
manslaughter. The jury was deadlocked, 7 to 5, for conviction of second-degree
murder, according to Mr. Lam's defense attorney.

Jane Foley, a juror who had voted for the involuntary manslaughter charge, said,
''No reasonable person would have wrestled with a loaded gun, even if the
shooting was an accident.''

Another juror, Murrel Ledbetter, said of Mr. Lam, ''By the evidence and by his
own admission, he was guilty of second-degree murder.''

Lam Pleased but Perplexed

Alan May, Mr. Lam's attorney, said he and Mr. Lam were pleased with the
mistrial, but he said Mr. Lam was perplexed and anxious. ''Some things didn't go
well for us, and I don't think the jury followed its instructions,'' Mr. May
said. ''But I'm confident if it goes to trial again things will go well for
us.''

Mr. Jensen declined to comment on the verdict.

Judge Beacom set a hearing Friday to determine if there will be a retrial.

Dr. Cooperman's friends and family had maintained that the slaying was a
political assassination by right-wing extremists who opposed the professor's
support of the Communist Government of Vietnam. In 1977, Dr. Cooperman founded
the United States Committee for Scientific Cooperation With Vietnam, which was
financed in part by a grant from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization.

Dr. Cooperman had visited Vietnam several times since South Vietnam was defeated
in 1973. He financed, through his committee, several projects involving
hospitals, rice-drying machines and analyses of the effects of Agent Orange, the
chemical defoliant used by United States forces in the war.

He had also arranged to have computer components, soil-testing devices and
medical supplies delivered to Vietnam from various countries. Under the law,
only emergency humanitarian aid may be shipped to Vietnam from the United
States. For this reason, as well as the fact that Dr. Cooperman was known to
travel with large sums of cash, he was under investigation by the Department of
Commerce.

Anthony Russo, a close friend of Dr. Cooperman's, testified that the professor
had received several death threats from military groups in the Vietnamese
community. Mr. Russo, a co-defendant with Daniel Ellsberg in the case arising
from the release and publication of the Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam War, said
the professor had been particularly anxious after returning from Vietnam last
summer.

Schedule Reported Altered

Klaaske Cooperman, the professor's wife, testified that her husband radically
altered his schedule after his return, and that they had installed floodlights,
built a wall in their backyard and cut back the shrubbery to make it difficult
for an attacker to conceal himself.

Mr. Lam, who fled Vietnam in 1979, did not take the stand in his defense in the
eight days of testimony. Mr. May said a videotape of Mr. Lam re-enacting the
shooting in Dr. Cooperman's office for the police provided enough evidence that
the shooting was accidental.

While Mr. Jensen offered no motive for the shooting, he cited inconsistencies in
Mr. Lam's account as evidence that he had lied to the police.

Originally, Mr. Lam told the police that he was not present at the time of the
shooting. He later said he had gone to the movies with a friend and then
returned to the office, planting the gun in the professor's hand to make it look
like a suicide, before telephoning the authorities.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPT FROM JUDGE'S STATEMENT TO THE JURY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


Following is an excerpt from the remarks yesterday of Judge Pierre N. Leval to
the jury in the Westmoreland case:


The jury system in this country is an extraordinary thing. Juries are composed
of men and women drawn at random from lists of citizens who are then given great
responsibility and power. We demand of them that they put aside bias, listen to
the evidence and judge as fairly as they would wish to be judged. It's a tall
order, and you have shown from the first that the job was in good hands.

The settlement of the action deprives you of the opportunity to render a
verdict. I can understand if you feel a sense of letdown, a sense of
disappointment. I want to suggest some thoughts on the other side.

We have been participants in a most interesting and unusual proceeding, a trial
seeking the judgment of history. There can be no such thing as the legal power
to fix the judgment of history. Such judgments must be left to study, reflection
and debate.

We have watched the creation in this courtroom of an extraordinary, unique and
rich record for historians to study. I suggest that the value of this proceeding
may have more to do with the record it has created for history than with the
verdict it could have produced.

Judgments of history are too subtle and too complex to be resolved
satisfactorily with the simplicity of a jury's verdict, such as ''we find for
the plaintiff,'' or ''we find for the defendant.'' Also, they are too subject to
debate and disagreement to be resolved by any legally constituted authority.

I think it is safe to say that no verdict or judgment that either you or I would
have been able to render in this case could have escaped widespread
disagreement.

So I suggest to you that it may be for the best that the verdict will be left to
history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MOST OF WESTMORELAND JURY SEEMED TO FAVOR CBS, BUT DOUBTS REMAINED

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


Judge Pierre N. Leval dismissed the jury yesterday in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS, saying ''it may be for the
best that the verdict will be left to history.''

Within minutes, the courtroom took on the air of a cocktail party. Although the
12 men and women would never deliver a verdict, they eagerly delivered their
opinions in a coda as extraordinary as the case itself.

In one corner was Myron Gold, an accountant from Muncie, N.Y., lecturing an
attentive Mike Wallace about the responsibilities of the press.

A few feet away, the jury foreman, Richard Benveniste of the Bronx, was beaming
as General Westmoreland shook his hand and told him he had ''shown good
leadership.''

'I Was 50-50'

''I was 50-50 at this point,'' the 34- year-old insurance underwriter told the
general. ''I could have rationalized it either way. I'm in business. I
understand these things.''

As the jurors related their impressions, it was clear that they had conflicting
views of the lawsuit that charged that CBS had defamed the general in its 1982
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' General Westmoreland
dropped his suit Monday after he and CBS agreed on a joint statement.

The majority of the jury was siding with CBS and seemed unconvinced that the
network had acted carelessly in producing its program for CBS Reports. But they
appeared equally unconvinced of its thesis that General Westmoreland was engaged
in a conspiracy to deceive President Johnson and other superiors.

''I have a hunch he might have come away with more than he settled for,'' said
Mr. Gold, who sought out the general in the crowded third-floor room in Federal
District Court on Foley Square to clasp his hand. ''Thank God for careerists
like you who are willing to give a lifetime to your country,'' he told him. ''It
was a tough job and an unpopular war and you can do no right in cases like
that.''

Puzzlement Over Outcome

Mr. Gold, who took 400 pages of notes with cross-references, was not alone among
the jurors in expressing puzzlement about why the general had dropped his suit a
week before they were expected to begin deliberations. Although they agreed that
CBS had presented strong witnesses last week, they did not feel the testimony
had become so lopsided that the general should have given up.

General Westmoreland, relaxed and smiling and surrounded by jurors who wanted to
meet him and get his autograph, was asked if he had any regrets.

''No,'' he murmured, grinning.

Both sides were happy with the ending, or at least seemed to be. ''The best kind
of bargain is the kind both sides go away happy with,'' said David Boies, the
lawyer for CBS. ''The second best kind of bargain is the kind both sides go away
saying they're happy with.''

General Westmoreland, accompanied by his wife, Kitsy, shook hands with Mr.
Wallace, the program's narrator, and George Crile, the producer, both of whom
were defendants, along with Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence
Agency analyst who was a paid consultant to CBS in the preparation of the
disputed documentary.

Jurors Are Thanked

Mr. Crile carried his 7-year-old daughter in his arms as he and Mr. Wallace,
both looking delighted, walked around the room to thank jurors.

Cheryl Raymond, an alternate, said she and two other jurors had recently gone to
lunch and conducted ''a little head count.'' ''We figured seven or eight were
leaning toward CBS,'' she said, adding that the others were either undecided or
leaning toward the general.

The only juror who seemed to believe that CBS had acted with reckless disregard
for the truth - an element necessary to a finding of libel in a case involving a
public figure such as General Westmoreland - was Michael Sussman, a 42-year-old
accountant from Manhattan. ''It was reckless disregard for the truth,'' he said.
But, he added: ''What is the truth?''

Nearly everyone agreed that the general had helped himself in his testimony, and
Mr. Benveniste expressed the mood of respect when he said, ''We were trying to
look out for him as best we could.''

But several other jurors said that CBS would have emerged victorious.

'Much More Damaging'

''I thought that everything that came out in court was much more damaging than
the documentary ever was,'' said M. Patricia Roth, 43, an art teacher from
Westchester County.

But Mrs. Roth and others were not prepared to support CBS's contention that the
general had been deliberately deceitful.

''He was doing the best he could,'' said Mrs. Roth, echoing the point made by
others that intelligence reporting was not always General Westmoreland's primary
concern during the war in Vietnam. ''He was relying on his subordinates. He was
totally tunnel-visioned and misinformed.''

The jurors conceded that they were confused by much of the military and legal
terminology.

'They Were All Over the Place'

''I looked up malice and libel and conspiracy in my Webster's dictionary,'' said
Mr. Benveniste. He said he even did some research on the enemy strength,
consulting a friend who had served in Vietnam under General Westmoreland. ''He
said you didn't know who was out there,'' the juror said. ''They were all over
the place.''

Several jurors said that when General Westmoreland was testifying, they thought
he would prevail. But the tide shifted as Col. Gains Hawkins and Maj. Gen.
Joseph A. McChristian, subordinates of General Westmoreland in Vietnam,
testified against him.

But the jurors said they had tried to hold their judgments in abeyance, and not
allow themselves to be swayed by the latest testimony.

The jurors exchanged telephone numbers yesterday before they went home, and
talked of a reunion. They had decorated their small and narrow jury room with
Expressionist posters, and at Christmas, construction-paper stockings. There was
even one for the judge, labeled simply ''Pierre.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of Richard Benveniste

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IN AFTERMATH OF SUIT'S END, MIKE WALLACE REFLECTS

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


Mike Wallace said yesterday that the ordeal of being a defendant in Gen. William
C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS over a Vietnam documentary
had underscored the danger of spreading himself too thin and that it would be
some time before he did another documentary.

But the 67-year-old CBS correspondent - who narrated the documentary that
prompted the lawsuit, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' but was not
required to testify at the trial because of the settlement between CBS and
General Westmoreland - said he disagreed with the general's characterization of
himself and Mr. Wallace yesterday as ''victims of circumstances.''

''I don't feel a liaison with him as a victim of circumstance,'' Mr. Wallace
said. ''I am proud of the documentary. Far from being a victim of circumstances,
we received in court a vindication of the accuracy of the documentary.''

On the first day in nearly five months when he was not preoccupied with the
progress of the libel suit, Mr. Wallace - craggy, tired and considering a
vacation - was nevertheless flashing a large smile to the succession of co-
workers passing the plate-glass wall of his ''60 Minutes'' office on West 57th
Street and waving congratulations for the settlement.

'Too Much on My Plate'

''I don't think that as long as I'm working on a broadcast that takes so much
time and attention as '60 Minutes,' '' he said, ''that I would take the time and
energy to do another 'The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.' I had too much
on my plate.''

But Mr. Wallace said his split concentration between the documentary and his
''60 Minutes'' work had ''nothing to with the accuracy of the documentary.'' He
said he would have preferred to work on the 90-minute documentary as he did with
his ''60 Minutes'' reports - which are about 15 minutes long - ''in which I do
all the interviews, or at least 99.44 percent of them. And I didn't here. I did
about 5 of the 13 on the program.''

That, Mr. Wallace said, ''cost the broadcast my full and undivided attention.''
He compared this to previous projects, among them several other ''CBS Reports''
documentaries in which he did all the interviews and spent considerable time in
the editing room. He said that he planned to devote next season exclusively to
''60 Minutes'' but that he was ''by no means'' through with documentaries.

It is not unusual on documentaries for a correspondent like Mr. Wallace to ask
questions researched and prepared by others. But some people familiar with the
workings of television news and documentaries express doubt that correspondents
will be able to control documentaries in which they participate.

Correspondents with celebrity standing, like Mr. Wallace, might be able to
influence the content of documentaries, but it remains to be seen, in the view
of many familiar with television production, how much time even the
best-intentioned correspondents can devote to carefully checking all the
material they are presented with.

Producer Suspended for 6 Months

George Crile, the producer of the Vietnam documentary and a defendant in the
case, is acknowledged by Mr. Wallace and others as the chief force behind the
program. Because he taped an off-the-record interview without informing the
subject, Mr. Crile was suspended by CBS for six months, after which he devoted
full time to defense of the lawsuit.

Mr. Wallace said yesterday that he had come to know Mr. Crile ''pretty well''
during the trial.

''I would be perfectly confident working with him on a '60 Minutes' piece,'' Mr.
Wallace said. ''In fact, I'd like to do just that.''

Mr. Wallace once more denied that he had ''ambushed'' General Westmoreland, as
the general has charged. ''On my first phone call to the general I informed him
specifically of what I was going to do,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''I told him it was
going to be a 'CBS Reports' that would be longer than the ordinary program, and
would be an attempt to understand the performance of American intelligence
during the war.''

''Then, '' he said, ''I turned him over to George.''

General 'Got a Fair Shake'

''In my estimation,'' Mr. Wallace said, ''General Westmoreland got a fair shake.
He was our commander in Vietnam and he knew the turf a great deal better than I
did. We got from General Westmoreland an interview with a great deal of truth.
He was just caught out. I am a grown man. If I get caught out by being candid, I
don't have much to complain about.''

Nevertheless, he said, despite the months of rancor and contention, he and the
general have a ''civilized relationship'' and spoke in court yesterday. The two
plan to ''sit down and talk,'' Mr. Wallace said.

Earlier in the day, he had left the United States Court House at Foley Square
and was taken to a celebratory lunch at the ''21'' Club by, among others, the
CBS anchorman Dan Rather and the ''60 Minutes'' producer Don Hewitt.

After the lunch, in a taxicab, Mr. Rather, grinning, turned and made a
mock-gallant toast to Mr. Wallace. ''To Mike,'' he said, ''Congratulations. Your
hide has never been thicker and your spine never straighter.'' Mr. Hewitt
laughed, and Mr. Wallace smiled without mirth.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mike Wallace

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE GREATER THREAT

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 767 words


BOSTON The whimpering end of General

Westmoreland's libel suit

against CBS confirms what some of us thought from the start: The dispute about
enemy force statistics in the Vietnam War was a political one that should have
been left to public debate, not put to the courts.

By pressing the lawsuit, the general only hurt himself. Those who encouraged the
suit, using him to fight their war against the press, owe him an apology.
Everyone would have benefited if the judge had dismissed the case before trial.

The failure of this misconceived suit, with its chilling implications for
freedom to criticize public officials, will relieve all those concerned about
the First Amendment. But it is no time to relax in that concern. Other political
libel cases, brought by senators and governors and judges, are still there. So
is a trend that I think is a greater threat than libel suits to the central
meaning of the First Amendment, the right freely to debate public policy.

The trend is toward secrecy in government. Every President finds reasons for
secrecy, but President Reagan and his people have carried the obsession to an
extreme. Right now they are trying to bring off a legal coup that would give the
Government a powerful new weapon to stop public discussion of policy.

The aim, described in a previous column, is to impose on the United States the
equivalent of Britain's discredited Official Secrets Act. The Reagan
Administration is trying to do that not by going to Congress in a direct way but
by asking the courts to apply the Espionage Act of 1917 to the use of leaked
material in journalism.

The case is the criminal prosecution of Samuel Loring Morison, an employee of
the Navy and part time, with Navy approval, of Jane's Fighting Ships. He is
charged with espionage for sending Jane's for publication three U.S. satellite
photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier. The Government argues that he violated
the Espionage Law even if he acted without subversive intent - even, indeed, if
his sole aim was to expose wrongdoing. That view would turn the act into a
strict anti-leak law.

The notion that we already have such a sweeping law is amazing. If so, a former
C.I.A. general counsel, Anthony Lapham, said in 1979, then ''We have had in this
country for the last 60 years an absolutely unprecedented crime wave, because
surely there have been thousands upon thousands of unauthorized disclosures of
classified information . . . yet none has ever been prosecuted.'' Moreover,
Congress has repeatedly refused to pass a general law making leaks a criminal
offense. Instead, it has taken careful aim and outlawed in strict terms only
disclosures of a particularly dangerous kind - of nuclear data, for example, and
communications intelligence such as that gleaned from electronic eavesdropping.
For the Reagan Administration to ask the courts, by ''interpretation,'' to do
what Congress has declined to do must seem extraordinary. Mr. Reagan and his
lawyers have talked so much about the need for ''judicial restraint,'' and urged
judges to leave lawmaking to Congress.  But the talk of judicial restraint is
only that: talk. The Reagan lawyers have not made it a consistent principle.
Their real interest is in moving American law radically to the right; when they
thought judges would do that, they have not hesitated to ask.

And the present Supreme Court just might disregard the long record of
Congressional no's to proposed anti-leak laws and read the Espionage Act to make
disclosures for publication a crime. After all, the Court last year sustained
the Reagan Administration's ban on travel to Cuba in the teeth of contrary
legislative history. The justices seem inclined to say yes to any claim of
executive power, however extravagant, when national security is said to be
involved.  What will the American press do about the Administration's
extraordinary grab for power? About its move to give this country an Official
Secrets Act and thus throttle public debate on large areas of policy? About its
attempt to do all this without putting the proposals to Congress?  I ask those
questions because the press often seems inert, on First Amendment issues, unless
its own interest is directly involved. A big libel suit arouses the passions of
the press, but a move to oppose a new blanket of secrecy on Washington may not.
The Morison case has its first hearing in Federal Court in Baltimore tomorrow.
Editors and members of Congress and Americans generally should see it for what
it is: a dangerous sneak attack on the American system of freedom.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese and Thais Battle on the Border

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 111 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 20


Vietnamese and Thai soldiers fought today on a hill near the frontier that winds
450 miles between Thailand and Cambodia.

The Thai armed forces commander, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, told reporters that
Vietnamese forces tried to storm Hill 347, about half a mile inside Thailand's
northeastern province of Buriram. He said a Thai officer was killed and two
soldiers were wounded in the fighting, which included an artillery duel across
the border.

In recent weeks, a powerful Vietnamese offensive has overrun virtually all key
bases of the Cambodian guerrillas along the frontier, putting the Thais and
Vietnamese in direct confrontation along many stretches.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Joined by U.S. In Sifting Crash Site

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: NONGSONGHONG, Laos, Feb. 20


American and Laotian soldiers dug handfuls of earth from the forest floor today
in a search for remains of 13 United States airmen shot down a dozen years ago.

The joint project, which began Feb. 11 here in southernmost Laos, is the first
excavation of a crash site since the Indochina War ended in 1975.

Journalists arrived here on Tuesday, after a seven-hour trip by plane and
helicopter from Vientiane.

Two Americans in soiled T-shirts, blue jeans and headbands squatted in a
12-foot-deep crater, using knives, shovels and pickaxes to search for the
remnants of the C-130. They handed over the dirt to Laotians in green fatigues,
who clambered up the crater and sifted the earth.

Each day the searchers have found teeth, pieces of bone, bits of military
uniforms, jungle boots, parachute harness and live ammunition rounds.

The C-130 was shot down in 1972 on its way back to a Thai base from a mission
over the Ho Chi Minh Trail, North Vietnam's supply route to the south.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRAISES CRITIC OF DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 609 words


The president of CBS News, calling Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit an
''unfortunate episode,'' issued a memorandum of praise yesterday for the CBS
executive who found the network's standards had been violated in making the
documentary that led to the general's $120 million claim.

Edward M. Joyce, the president, told Burton Benjamin, a CBS senior producer who
had conducted an internal investigation following the January 1982 broadcast of
the CBS Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'':

''Your findings were both painful to us and encouraging to us - they pointed to
embarrassing transgressions of our own CBS News guidelines.'' Mr. Joyce also
noted that the findings of the investigation, conducted between May and July
1982, had enabled CBS executives to take the position that they stood by the
broadcast.



Memo Widely Circulated

Mr. Joyce's memorandum - issued the morning after CBS corporate and news
personnel had celebrated the formal settlement of the lawsuit with a party at
Regine's, a restaurant and discoth eque at 502 Park Avenue, between 59th and
60th Streets - was widely circulated among the CBS News staff.

In addition to foreign and domestic bureau chiefs, Mr. Joyce's memo was sent to
such personnel as Walter Cronkite, Charles Kuralt, Bill Moyers and Dan Rather.
It was also sent to a number of individuals who had been involved in the making
of ''The Uncounted Enemy.'' Among them were the program's chief correspondent,
Mike Wallace, and its producer, George Crile, who were defendants in General
Westmoreland's lawsuit, and Howard Stringer, the documentary's executive
producer.

The thesis of the documentary was that General Westmoreland, who commanded
United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, had conspired to deceive
President Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the American people about the
real strength of enemy forces in Vietnam in the months prior to the Tet
offensive of January 1968.



Reasons for Writing Memo

Mr. Joyce, explaining his motivation in writing yesterday's memorandum, said:

''First of all, I think Bud Benjamin is one of the pillars of our institution
and has been a quiet model of integrity for the past several years. This was an
expression of my great admirationm for Bud.

''Second of all, I think this is a time for us to feel relief but not
jubilation. And I think it is a time for us to reflect, and then go about the
business of good journalism.''

Mr. Joyce said that under ordinary circumstances he might have telephoned Mr.
Benjamin to express his praise. But Mr. Benjamin is in Cambodia and Vietnam,
preparing a documentary marking the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon.

Mr. Benjamin's report, prepared before General Westmoreland filed his suit,
found 11 ''principal flaws'' in the preparation of the documentary.

Among them were ''coddling sympathetic witnesses,'' choosing to interview mostly
witnesses who supported the program's overall conclusions and failing to prove
that there had been a ''conspiracy to suppress information about enemy troop
strength during the Vietnam War.''

But Van Gordon Sauter, then the president of CBS News and now executive vice
president of the CBS Broadcast Group, said later, ''We concluded that any flaws
in the preparation did not undermine the editorial integrity of the broadcast.''

Reacting yesterday to Mr. Joyce's memorandum, a CBS producer, who asked to
remain anonymous, said he interpreted it as Mr. Joyce's effort to temper a
euphoric reaction to the outcome of the trial and remind the staff that the
broadcast that caused it had been flawed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

When Newspapers ;
Own TV Stations

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 414 words


To the Editor:


I have no quarrel with what you said about the CBS docudrama ''The Atlanta Child
Murders'' (''Docudrama Strikes Again,'' editorial, Feb. 10). What I quarrel with
is your refusing to acknowledge a fact of New York Times life that most readers
don't know about and probably will never hear from your newspaper. To wit:

How can you be so Goody Two- shoes Sunday morning about a broadcast you don't
think is fit to be shown and then go out Sunday night and show it on your three
New York Times television stations?

The answer newspapers usually give is: We don't have anything to do with the
television stations. That doesn't wash. If a publisher wants to allow his
newspaper to beat up on television, he owes it to his readers to let them know
that as a station owner he, too, is part of the crowd his newspaper is beating
up on.

When ''60 Minutes'' did a story on U.S. companies going south of the border to
take advantage of cheap labor, we made it a point specifically to mention that
CBS was one of those companies. When we did a story on horror weapons in
Vietnam, we noted that one of those weapons was made by a division of CBS and
also reported that CBS refused to talk to us about it.

It's not just The Times that is stuck in that bind. The Los Angeles Times,
Post-Newsweek, Knight Ridder and a whole lot more are now owners of big-
circulation, big-money-making stations and should tell readers so.

On the subject of newspapers beating up on television news, neither print nor
broadcasting is so beyond reproach or so devoid of the profit motive as to judge
the other's behavior.

It is unbecoming at best for print reporters who vie with television reporters
for public attention to deem themselves arbiters of the right and wrong way to
inform that public.

If your way is the right way, how come that when I grew up in New York the city
had 12 dailies - The Sun, The World, The Telegram, The Herald Tribune, The
Journal, The American, The Post, The Times, The News, The Mirror, The Brooklyn
Eagle and The Bronx Home News - and now has only three? And how come New Yorkers
know more about their city and the people who run it and the people who perform
on its stages, play in its stadiums and grace the walls of its museums than they
did when nine of those dailies were alive?

So, to borrow a phrase in vogue back then: ''Why don't you go peddle your
papers?''

DON HEWITT Executive Producer, ''60 Minutes'' New York, Feb. 19, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SPY LAWS DEBATED IN HEARING ON U.S. WORKER FOR DISCLOSING SECRETS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Feb. 22


A Justice Department lawyer argued in Federal Court here today that a Government
employee who is accused of providing a classified document to a British military
magazine had violated the espionage laws because ''foreign agents read that
magazine.''

But a defense lawyer urged the judge to dismiss the case, saying Congress had
not intended espionage laws to cover disclosures to the press, and because the
defendant was accused of ''nothing more than thousands and thousands of other
Government officials have done.''

The arguments before Federal District Judge Joseph H. Young came at a hearing on
a defense motion to dismiss the case against Samuel Loring Morison, a naval
intelligence analyst charged with providing a British military magazine, Jane's
Defense Weekly, with three classified satellite photographs of a Soviet aircraft
carrier under construction.

Mr. Morison is also charged with theft and illegal possession of classified
naval intelligence reports about an explosion at a Soviet naval base.

Case Could Set Precedent

The case against Mr. Morison, if successful, would establish for the first time
a precedent for using espionage and theft laws to prosecute Government officials
who make public without authorization classified documents relating to the
military. The only similar prosecution, which involved the unauthorized
disclosure of the Pentagon Papers, was dismissed on grounds of Government
misconduct in 1973.

A Reagan Administration report in 1982 contended that the espionage laws ''could
also be used to prosecute a journalist who knowingly receives and publishes
classified documents or information.''

''The Government,'' Mr. Morison's attorney, Mark H. Lynch of the American Civil
Liberties Union, said to Judge Young, ''is asking you, by permitting this
prosecution to go forward, to write a new law.''

Mr. Lynch said that only Congress has the power to pass such an ''official
secrets act'' making it a crime to disclose classified information to the news
media, and that Congress had never done so. Mr. Lynch added that such a law
might be unconstitutional and could stifle an informed public debate on military
issues.

U.S. Interpretation Contested

Mr. Lynch also said that the law barring theft of Government property could not
be interpreted in a way that would allow prosecution for unauthorized disclosure
of classified information, as the Government is doing in the Morison case.

Michael Schatzow, the Federal prosecutor, responded that publication of the
satellite photographs in Jane's Defense Weekly caused ''potential damage to the
United States and potential advantage to various foreign nations'' because of
''information that foreign analysts could derive from these photographs
concerning the capabilities of American intelligence- gathering methods, as well
as American targeting priorities.''

Mr. Schatzow, an Assistant United States Attorney, argued that the espionage
laws applied when a Government secret is ''published so everybody in the world
can read it and not just the enemy'' as well as when information is sold to a
foreign agent.

Mr. Schatzow contended that Mr. Morison's motive was self-interest rather than
to present information for political debate. ''The defendant was trying to get a
job'' with the magazine, Mr. Schatzow said.

Motive Not Important, U.S. Says

In court papers, Mr. Schatzow also asserted that the Government considered Mr.
Morison guilty regardless of whether he intended to harm the United States, or
whether his motive had been to expose wrongdoing.

''If Morison had been inspired to violate his oath and disclose the photographs
due to a desire to expose obvious wrongdoing in high official circles, he would
be just as guilty,'' the prosecutor said in court papers filed earlier.

Judge Young said today that he would rule ''promptly'' on the motion to dismiss
the charges against Mr. Morison. The judge denied several other preliminary
motions by defense lawyers today.

Attorney General William French Smith personally authorized Mr. Morison's Oct. 1
arrest, and the case apparently represents an effort by the Reagan
Administration to win a broad precedent for using the espionage and theft laws
against officials who disclose classified information to the press.

The only previous effort to use such laws in this way was the indictment of
Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo for unauthorized disclosure of the Pentagon
Papers, a Defense Department study of the Vietnam war.

Mr. Morison, who was a civilian employee of the Navy with a top-secret security
clearance, worked with the Navy's consent as United States editor of Jane's
Fighting Ships, a military publication affiliated with Jane's Defense Weekly.

Mr. Morison, the 40-year-old grandson of the late historian Samuel Eliot
Morison, faces a maximum of 40 years in prison and a $40,000 fine if convicted
on all four counts. If the motion to dismiss the charges is denied, the trial is
not expected to begin for weeks or months.

The defendant sat with his attorneys at today's hearing, but said nothing. He
has been free since a few days after his arrest on the condition that he would
owe the Government $100,000 if he fled to avoid prosecution.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LAOS REMAINS OF G.I.'S CALLED HARD TO IDENTIFY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 22


American military officers indicated today that it would take at least a month
to begin identifying remains found at a site in Laos where an American gunship
crashed during the Vietnam War.

At the same time, they praised Laos for its ''extreme cooperation'' in assisting
in the search.

The Laotian-American excavation took place last week at a site near Pakse, in
eastern Laos, where an American C-130 went down in December 1972 with 16
servicemen aboard. Two survived the crash, one body was found, and 13 men have
been reported missing in action.

''There was a midair explosion at 7,500 feet,'' Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, said of
the plane, which was struck by antiaricraft fire. ''One wing came off. It went
into a steep dive. When it crashed, a large amount of ordnance exploded. The
plane burned for two days. Identities will be very difficult to establish.''

''We recovered everthing that could be recovered,'' Maj. Johnie E. Webb, head of
the Central Identification Center in Honolulu, said at a news conference today.

Both he and Colonel Harvey indicated that it would take at least a month to
begin the identifications. The remains and personal possessions are being taken
to Honolulu for examination.

Major Webb described the crash site as ''covered with undergrowth five to six
feet tall.''

Praising the ''extreme cooperation'' of the Laotian military authorities who
searched with the Americans, he said:

''We cut all the underbrush and removed it. We then formed a skirmish line - all
of us on our hands and knees, shoulder to shoulder - to search the ground.''

''We got everything,'' he said. ''I see no reason to go back.''

The leaders of the operation, the first joint American-Indochinese search for
Americans lost during the war, returned to Bangkok today. At the news
conference, Colonel Harvey, commander of the Joint Casualty Resolution Center in
Honolulu, said he hoped the cooperative effort with Laos ''will lead to an
overall improvement in relations.''

Laos, where there is a small American diplomatic mission led by a charge
d'affaires, is the first of the three Indochinese Communist nations to allow a
joint excavation. Vietnam and Cambodia, with which the United States does not
have formal diplomatic relations, have refused to sanction similar explorations.

The United States has listed 2,483 Americans still missing since the Vietnam
War, most of them in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. A few are thought to have died
or disappeared in Thailand and China, and others were lost over water.

The Reagan Administration has said progress on the search for bodies or
information on the whereabouts of the missing Americans is a prerequisite for
better relations with Indochinese Communist nations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM SHULTZ'S SPEECH CONTRASTING COMMUNISM AND DEMOCRACY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22


Following are excerpts from an address called ''America and the Struggle for
Freedom'' by Secretary of State George P. Shultz to the Commonwealth Club of
California in San Francisco today, as made available by his office:


A revolution is sweeping the world today - a democratic revolution.

This should not be a surprise. Yet it is noteworthy because many people in the
West lost faith, for a time, in the relevance of the idea of democracy. It was
fashionable in some quarters to argue that democracy was culture- bound; that it
was a luxury only industrial societies could afford; that other institutional
structures were needed to meet the challenges of development; that to try to
encourage others to adopt our system was ethnocentric and arrogant.

In fact, what began in the United States of America over two centuries ago as a
bold new experiment in representative government has today captured the
imagination and the passions of peoples on every continent. The Solidarity
movement in Poland; resistance forces in Afghanistan, in Cambodia, in Nicaragua,
in Ethiopia and Angola; dissidents in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe;
advocates of peaceful democratic change in South Africa, Chile, the Republic of
Korea and the Philippines - all these brave men and women have something in
common: they seek independence, freedom and human rights - ideals which are at
the core of democracy and which the United States has always championed.

Support for Freedom

Throughout our own history, we have always believed that freedom is the
birthright of all peoples and that we could not be true to ourselves or our
principles unless we stood for freedom and democracy not only for ourselves but
for others.

And so, time and again in the last 200 years, we have lent our support - moral
and otherwise - to those around the world struggling for freedom and
independence.

The struggle for liberty is not always successful. But those who once despaired,
who saw democracy on the decline and who argued that we must lower our
expectations were at best premature. Civilizations decline when they stop
believing in themselves; ours has thrived because we have never lost our
conviction that our values are worth defending.

When Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of the world's largest democracy, was
assassinated, we were shocked and saddened.

Latin America's Record

But our confidence in the resilience of democracy was renewed as millions of
India's people went to the polls freely to elect her successor. As Rajiv Gandhi
leads his nation to new greatness, he demonstrates more clearly than his words
or abstract scientific models that democracy is neither outmoded nor is it the
exclusive possession of a few rich Western nations. It has worked for decades in
countries as diverse as Costa Rica and Japan.

In the Western Hemisphere, over 90 percent of the population of Latin America
and the Caribbean today live under governments that are either democratic or
clearly on the road to democracy - in contrast to only one-third in 1979. In
less than six years, popularly elected democrats have replaced dictators in
Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama, Peru and Grenada.
Brazil and Uruguay will inaugurate civilian Presidents in March. After a long
twilight of dictatorship, this hemispheric trend toward free elections and
representative government is something to be applauded and supported.

Democracy is an old idea, but today we witness a new phenomenon. For many years
we saw our adversaries act without restraint to back insurgencies around the
world to spread Communist dictatorships.

Brezhnev Doctrine Is Resisted

The Soviet Union and its proxies, like Cuba and Vietnam, have consistently
supplied money, arms and training in efforts to destabilize or overthrow
non-Communist governments. ''Wars of national liberation'' became the pretext
for subverting any non-Communist country in the name of so-called socialist
internationalism.

At the same time, any victory of Communism was held to be irreversible. This was
the infamous Brezhnev doctrine, first proclaimed at the time of the invasion of
Czechoslovakia in 1968. Its meaning is simple and chilling: Once you're in the
so-called socialist camp, you're not allowed to leave. Thus the Soviets say to
the rest of the world: ''What's mine is mine. What's yours is up for grabs.''

In recent years, Soviet activities and pretensions have run head-on into the
democratic revolution. People are insisting on their right to independence, on
their right to choose their government free of outside control. Where once the
Soviets may have thought that all discontent was ripe for turning into Communist
insurgencies, today we see a new and different kind of struggle: people around
the world risking their lives against Communist despotism. We see brave men and
women fighting to challenge the Brezhnev doctrine.

Opposition in Afghanistan

In December 1979, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan to preserve a Communist system
installed by force a year and a half earlier. But their invasion met stiff
resistance, and the puppet Government they installed has proved incapable of
commanding popular support. Today, the Soviets have expanded their occupation
army and are trying to devastate the population and the nation they cannot
subdue. They are demolishing entire Afghan villages and have driven one out of
every four Afghans to flee the country. They have threatened neighboring
countries like Pakistan and have been unwilling to negotiate seriously for a
political solution.

In the face of this Soviet invasion, the Afghans who are fighting and dying for
the liberation of their country have made a remarkable stand. Their will has not
flagged; indeed, their capacity to resist has grown.

In Cambodia, the forces open to democracy, once all but annihilated by the Khmer
Rouge, are now waging a similar battle against occupation and a puppet regime
imposed by a Soviet ally, Communist Vietnam.

In Africa, the Brezhnev doctrine is being challenged by the drive for
independence and freedom. In Ethiopia, a Soviet-backed Marxist-Leninist
dictatorship has shown indifference to the desperate poverty and suffering of
its people.

In Angola, a Marxist regime came into power in 1975 backed and sustained by
30,000 Cuban troops and substantial numbers of Soviet and East European
''advisers.''

The Latin Struggle

Finally, an important struggle is being waged today closer to home in Central
America. Its countries are in transition, trying to resolve the inequities and
tensions of the past through workable reforms and democratic institutions.

But violent antidemocratic minorities, tied ideologically and militarily to the
Soviet Union and Cuba, are trying to prevent democratic reform and to seize or
hold power by force. The outcome of this struggle will affect not only the
future of peace and democracy in this hemisphere but our own vital interests.

In Nicaragua, in 1979, the Sandinista leaders pledged to the Organization of
American States and to their own people to bring freedom to their country after
decades of tyranny under Somoza. The Sandinistas have betrayed these pledges and
the hopes of the Nicaraguan people; instead, they have a new and brutal tyranny
that respects no frontiers. Basing themselves on strong military ties to Cuba
and the Soviet Union, the Sandinistas are attempting, as rapidly as they can, to
force Nicaragua into a totalitarian mold whose pattern is all too familiar. They
are suppressing internal dissent, clamping down on the press, persecuting the
church, linking up with the terrorists of Iran, Libya and the P.L.O., and
seeking to undermine the legitimate and increasingly democratic governments of
their neighbors.

The Nicaraguan Battle

This betrayal has forced many Nicaraguans who supported the anti- Somoza
revolution back into opposition. And while many resist peacefully, thousands now
see no choice but to take up arms again, to risk everything so that their hopes
for freedom and democracy will not once again be denied.

The Sandinistas denounce their opponents as mercenaries or former national
guardsmen loyal to the memory of Somoza. Some in this country seem all too
willing to take these charges at face value, even though they come from the same
Sandinista leaders whose word has meant so little up to now. But all you have to
do is count the numbers: more people have taken up arms against the Sandinistas
than ever belonged to Somoza's national guard. In fact, most of the leaders of
the armed resistance fought in the revolution against Somoza, and some even
served in the new Government until it became clear that the comandantes were
bent on Communism not freedom, terror not reform, and aggression not peace. The
new fighters for freedom include peasants and farmers, shopkeepers and vendors,
teachers and professionals. What unites them to each other and to the other
thousands of Nicaraguans who resist without arms is disillusionment with
Sandinista militarism, corruption and fanaticism.

A Pivotal Moment

Despite uncertain and sporadic support from outside, the resistance in Nicaragua
is growing. The Sandinistas have strengthened their Soviet and Cuban military
ties - but their popularity at home has declined sharply. The struggle in
Nicaragua for democracy and freedom and against dictatorship is far from over,
and right now may well be a pivotal moment that decides the future.

The new phenomenon we are witnessing around the world - popular insurgencies
against Communist domination - is not an American creation. In every region, the
people have made their own decision to stand and fight rather than see their
cultures and freedoms quietly erased. They have made clear their readiness to
fight with or without outside support, using every available means and enduring
severe hardships, alone if need be.

But America also has a moral responsibility. The lesson of the postwar era is
that America must be the leader of the free world; there is no one else to take
our place.

4 Areas for Change

Central America's hopes for peace, security, democracy, and economic progress
will not be realized unless there is a fundamental change in Nicaraguan behavior
in four areas:

First, Nicaragua must stop playing the role of surrogate for the Soviet Union
and Cuba. As long as there are large numbers of Soviet and Cuban security and
military personnel in Nicaragua, Central America will be embroiled in the
East-West conflict.

Second, Nicaragua must reduce its armed forces, now in excess of 100,000, to a
level commensurate with its legitimate security needs - a level comparable to
those of its neighbors. The current imbalance is incompatible with the regional
stability.

Third, Nicaragua must absolutely and definitively stop its support for
insurgents and terrorists in the region. All of Nicaragua's neighbors, and
particularly El Salvador, have felt the brunt of Sandinista efforts to
destabilize their governments. No country in Central America will be secure as
long as this continues.

And fourth, the Sandinistas must live up to their commitments to democratic
pluralism made to the O.A.S. in 1979. The internal Nicaraguan opposition groups,
armed and unarmed, represent a genuine political force that is entitled to
participate in the political processes of the country. It is up to the
Government of Nicaragua to provide the political opening that will allow their
participation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Some Things the Baby Boom Doesn't Explain

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


To the Editor:


Your lead editorial Feb. 4 used my book ''Losing Ground'' as its foil, finding I
had overlooked the obvious explanation for the troubles of the 1960's. The gist
was that a baby boom among blacks was to blame - more black teen-agers, ergo
higher black teen-age unemployment rates, for example.

The explanation is too facile, for reasons that ''Losing Ground'' explores.
Consider the anomaly of black teen-agers and labor-force participation. The
1950's were terrible employment years for black teen-agers. But black teen-agers
(a rapidly growing population even in the 1950's) stayed in the labor force at
nearly the same levels as whites.

Then, just as the mid-1960's boom began, the small gap in labor-force
participation began widening rapidly. Why? Black baby boomers were coming into a
red-hot economy that boasted an unemployment rate of under 4 percent.

Perhaps fewer black youths were in the labor force because more blacks were
staying in school. A plausible hypothesis - but it can be tested by the data,
and the explanation doesn't work. Perhaps there were more discouraged workers?
No, that too doesn't work. Perhaps the Vietnam War draft was skimming off the
cream of the black labor force? No. Maybe the growing gap was only among men?
No. Only among women? No. A temporary aberration of the crazy 60's that
subsequently subsided? No.

Perhaps there weren't enough low- skill jobs, even though the economy as a whole
was booming. No - there were lots of new low-skill jobs (814,000 from 1965 to
1970 in the low- skill areas of nonfarm labor and service), but in 1970, blacks
held 320,000 fewer such jobs than in 1965. Blacks didn't need such jobs anymore?
No, the black unemployment rate was still twice as high as the white.

Was racism to blame? But black job applicants for higher-skill and white-collar
jobs in the 1960's competed very successfully against the white baby-boomers.
Why should virulent racism be concentrated against the low-skilled black?

We have shied away from exploring these changes in labor-market experience - and
illegitimacy rates, educational achievement, family structure and crime rates -
because the word ''black'' makes us nervous. Let us not look too closely at
blacks and jobs, I hear, lest we begin to dwell on job-seeking behaviors, job
performance and job-leaving behaviors among young blacks that make us sound like
racists.

In ''Losing Ground'' I propose an alternative. It was not black people who began
behaving differently in the 1960's, but poor people, specifically poor young
people, and they did so for understandable reasons, provided to them by a
racially changed social policy. The thesis is open to all sorts of objections
and arguments, but the baby boom is not a persuasive one.

CHARLES MURRAY Washington, Feb. 16, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WESTMORELAND CASE: A BROKEN WEST POINT TIE

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2849 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland's decision to settle his libel suit against CBS
last week was prompted, according to his friends, by his demoralization over
damaging testimony by his former aides and his feeling that, however right he
was, he was in a ''no-win situation.''

The general knew from pretrial depositions how witnesses were likely to testify.
Nevertheless, his friends said, he was so shaken by the willingness of his
former intelligence chief in Vietnam to ''break the old West Point tie'' and
take the stand against him that he was open to a proposed agreement that bore a
close resemblance to an offer made by CBS a year ago.



Drafts Compared

Of the two significant differences between the documents, one was favorable to
General Westmoreland, the other to CBS.

The proposal in 1984, nine months before the trial, said General Westmoreland
''believes that the broadcast was prejudicial in concept and execution.'' The
agreement reached last week does not. The 1984 proposal also said CBS News
''stands by the accuracy and fairness of its broadcast.'' In the final
agreement, this language was reserved for a separate statement by CBS.

The proposals are similar in that they say that both sides believed their
positions had been ''placed before the public,'' that CBS recognized General
Westmoreland's service to his country and that the general respected the rights
of journalists to present views ''contrary to his own.''

Although the settlement seemed sudden, there lies behind it a little-known
three-year-old story of failed efforts to resolve a case that eventually
required 18 weeks of trial and cost the litigants millions of dollars and an
enormous toll in energy and anguish.



General's Camp Divides

On Monday, when the end came, both sides laid claim to victory, but while CBS
officials and their lawyers were privately toasting one another with Champagne
and diet soda and dancing at Regine's discoth eque, General Westmoreland's camp
was bitterly divided over whether the general could have obtained a better
outcome - either earlier from CBS, or, later, from the jury.

CBS stressed that General Westmoreland had received neither money nor an
apology, and that the network stood by the 1982 documentary on the Vietnam War
that was the subject of the suit. The documentary had charged a conspiracy by
the general's command in 1967 to show progress in the war by understating the
size of the enemy.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, underscored a passage in the joint statement that said the network
respected his ''long and faithful service to his country and never intended to
assert, and does not believe'' that he ''was unpatriotic or disloyal in
performing his duties as he saw them.''

''If that statement had been made after the CBS program was aired, it would have
satisfied me,'' the 70-year- old general declared at a news conference Monday,
standing beside Dan M. Burt, his chief attorney. Indeed, General Westmoreland
said, had that statement been issued at any time since the broadcast on Jan. 23,
1982, ''it would have ended the episode.''

To prevail in his suit, the general had to prove not only that the broadcast -
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - was false, but also that CBS knew
it was false or acted with reckless disregard of its truth or falsity. The first
issue was called the ''truth'' issue; the second, the ''state of mind'' issue.

In recent weeks, as CBS put on a series of military witnesses, the general had
become concerned with losing on the ''truth'' issue. He worried that the jury
would be unable to distinguish what had actually happened in Vietnam in 1967
from what some witnesses recalled they had told CBS during the preparation of
the program.

Assessing the Impact Of Legal Defeat

''If the jury had found against Westmoreland on truth, the trauma of defeat
would have been too much,'' Jay Schulman, a political scientist who was one of
Mr. Burt's closest advisers on the case, said in an interview. ''That was the
fulcrum concern.''

Mr. Schulman said General Westmoreland was ''running profoundly scared'' of the
testimony for CBS this month by his former aides in Saigon, not so much because
of what they would tell the jury, but because their very appearance on the stand
undermined him.

General Westmoreland's former intelligence chief, Maj. Gen. Joseph A.
McChristian, testified Feb. 6 that General Westmoreland had acted improperly and
for political reasons on one occasion. Until that moment, Mr. Schulman said,
''Westmoreland didn't believe he would appear.''

''It was a perplexing thing to me to see someone like McChristian testifying,''
General Westmoreland acknowledged last week. He told friends that the trial had
come to ''look like a no- win situation.''

Mr. Burt, who is president of the conservative, Washington-based Capital Legal
Foundation, which supported the general's suit, shared his client's growing
pessimism and was under other pressures as well. Having spent more than $3
million, he was $500,000 in debt on the case and, with each day, his expenses
mounted. The trial had also disrupted his family life. While he was living in a
New York hotel, his third wife, in Washington with a year-old daughter, was
trying to complete a doctoral dissertation in linguistics.

Meanwhile, CBS had become increasingly confident of winning the ''state of
mind'' element of a jury verdict - making it impossible for General Westmoreland
to receive an award.

But lawyers for the network were concerned about the public relations impact of
losing on the ''truth'' issue - just as Time magazine had suffered from the loss
on that issue in the libel suit brought by former Israeli Defense Minister Ariel
Sharon - and they had other reasons for preferring to settle.

''If Westmoreland was ready to drop the suit on the right terms, it was in some
ways better than winning a jury verdict,'' said a CBS lawyer who asked not to be
identified. ''Westmoreland could always attack a verdict that went against him.
This, he couldn't. Besides, CBS simply had to respond to his offer - it couldn't
be seen as trying to pursue an old man and drive a stake in his heart.''

The General Spurns A Follow-Up Program

Following a controversy over ''The Uncounted Enemy'' in the months after its
broadcast, CBS proposed airing a 45-minute follow-up discussion program, with an
additional 15 minutes for General Westmoreland to state his views. The general,
however, demanded a published apology, a ''full retraction'' on the air that met
his approval and ''was not less than 45 minutes in duration,'' and some payment.
He also sought access to a CBS internal investigation of ''The Uncounted Enemy''
conducted by a senior producer, Burton Benjamin. The report criticized some
aspects of the documentary's preparation.

On Sept. 13, 1982, General Westmoreland, who lives in South Carolina, filed suit
there. ''There is no way left for me to clear my name, my honor and the honor of
the military,'' he said.

Besides CBS, the suit named George Crile, the producer of the documentary; Mike
Wallace, its narrator, and Samuel A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency
analyst who was a paid consultant for the broadcast.

The first overtures toward settling the suit were made in October, 1982, when
CBS asked its local counsel in South Carolina to talk the matter over with a
nephew of General Westmoreland's who was a lawyer. The talks got nowhere,
although they were briefly resumed in November 1982, when CBS won a motion to
change the locale of the trial from South Carolina to New York.

At around the same time, Paul Thompson, a retired general who had been an editor
at Reader's Digest, tried to mediate for General Westmoreland. As a result of
General Thompson's intervention, Mr. Burt said, he met in November 1982 at the
Sky Club atop the Pan Am Building in mid-Manhattan with George Vradenburg 3d,
the CBS general counsel.

''I said, 'Give us an apology and lots of money' - lots of money being only a
negotiating ploy,'' Mr. Burt recalled. ''Vradenburg said no.''

Frank Stanton, the former president of CBS, also tried to arrange a settlement
during that period. But when General Westmoreland insisted on an apology, a
payment and free air time, without a rebuttal by CBS, the network concluded that
a middle ground could not be found.

General Taylor Tries to Mediate

Yet another attempt to settle the case in the fall of 1982 was made by retired
Gen. Maxwell Taylor, who was approached by Roswell L. Gilpatric, a CBS board
member who was Deputy Secretary of Defense under President John F. Kennedy.

Mr. Gilpatric proposed half an hour of air time for General Westmoreland,
coupled with a statement by CBS that it never intended to impugn the general's
patriotism. The offer was rejected.

In the spring of 1983, the judge in the case, Pierre N. Leval, approved Mr.
Burt's motion to force CBS to release the Benjamin report. Just before that
approval, the chief lawyer for the network on the case, David Boies, let Mr.
Burt know that CBS would never settle at a point when something embarrassing to
it had just occurred.

''The only time to settle,'' Mr. Boies is said to have told Mr. Burt, ''is when
we want to avoid what's coming. We cannot settle when something bad has just
come out, or it will look like that's why we settled.''

In February 1984, in an extension of Mr. Gilpatric's effort, CBS proposed the
four-paragraph statement that contained some language and ideas nearly identical
to the joint statement agreed upon last week. It was rejected. Mr. Burt,
according to CBS legal sources, objected at that time to any assertion by CBS
that it supported the broadcast.

In the summer of 1984, Judge Leval appointed a mediator to try to produce a
settlement that might include a broadcast on CBS by General Westmoreland that
would not be immediately rebutted by the network.

The mediator was Stephen E. Kaufman, former chief of the criminal division of
the United States Attorney's office for the Southern District of New York. CBS
and the general are believed to have been receptive to the idea of the program,
but Mr. Burt continued to press for an apology and money.

''All that air time talk - all that khazeray - wasn't worth doing,'' Mr. Burt
said last week.

As Rare as 'a Bear In a Pink Tutu'

Just before the trial started on Oct. 9, and again around Thanksgiving, when Mr.
Burt was saying publicly that a settlement was less likely than ''a bear coming
down Fifth Avenue in a pink tutu with a reefer'' - he and CBS exchanged
proposals for resolving the case. The network's statement again contained
references to the general's loyalty, and CBS indicated that it might pay
$500,000 toward Mr. Burt's legal fees. But Mr. Burt was said to have demanded a
seven-figure sum, perhaps as much as $5 million.

''The insurmountable thing was a retraction or apology,'' a CBS lawyer said.
''Money was never an issue with either side except as a symbol. But anything
over a million - well, it was all psychology, how it would be interpreted.''

Before the Christmas recess, Mr. Burt and Mr. Boies met in a jury room. For the
first time, Mr. Burt said he was prepared to settle without money.

Mr. Burt wanted CBS to say it had learned as a result of the case that General
Westmoreland had ''honestly and accurately'' reported enemy troop strength in
1967 and, had this information been available to the network in 1982, it would
have been included in the broadcast. CBS refused the proposal.

During this period, Mr. Burt called Mr. Crile as a hostile witness - in effect,
cross-examining him. Many of the other lawyers for General Westmoreland thought
that Mr. Burt, who had never presented a case to a jury, had done poorly.

''Dan showed he had minus aptitude for cross and he got an enormous amount of
flak,'' Mr. Schulman remembered.

So David M. Dorsen, who had considerable litigating experience and had been
involved in this case since 1982, took over the cross-examination of virtually
all the CBS witnesses.

''You can't forget,'' Mr. Schulman said, ''that Dan was the lawyer who offered
to help Westmoreland when no one else would. But he had no idea what he was
getting into with this case.''

Last week - with CBS buoyed by its prospects on the ''state of mind'' if not the
''truth'' issue - Judge Leval informed the lawyers that Mr. Burt would have to
prove his case by ''clear and convincing'' evidence, rather than the lesser
standard of a ''preponderance'' of the evidence.

In addition, the judge said, the jury would vote individually on the ''truth''
and ''state of mind'' issues but, unlike the procedure used in the Sharon trial,
would announce its decisions all at once.

Seeking the Headline, 'CBS Wins'

''Even if we lost on the truth issue,'' a a CBS lawyer speculated, ''the
headline on the day of the verdict would read, 'CBS Wins'.'' Still, the lawyer
said, Mr. Boies told Mr. Burt that he would be amenable to waiving a jury
verdict and to letting the judge, who is required to make detailed findings that
can be useful on appeal, decide the case. Mr. Burt declined.

On Wednesday, Feb. 13 - soon after General McChristian's testimony and
immediately following the start of the cross-examination of another former
Westmoreland aide, Colonel Gain Hawkins - Mr. Burt called Mr. Vradenburg, the
CBS general counsel, and asked to have breakfast.

When they met Friday morning, Mr. Burt told Mr. Vradenburg that he was still
interested in settling. After breakfast, he sent the CBS lawyer a suggested
joint statement, handwritten on one page of a yellow legal pad, that resembled
his proposal just before Christmas. He also promised, in effect, not to revive
his pretrial public attacks on CBS about the documentary. Mr. Vradenburg
consulted Mr. Boies, and around noon on Saturday, called Mr. Burt from his home
in New Jersey.

According to Mr. Burt, Mr. Vrandenburg said ''you know, we aren't that far
apart.'' But the CBS lawyer is said to have told Mr. Burt that his proposal was
unacceptable. Mr. Vrandenburg went back to the statement CBS had offered in
February 1984, modified it so that the phrase about CBS standing by the
documentary would appear only in a separate statement by the network, and sent a
copy to Mr. Burt at the Westbury, according to a CBS lawyer.

On Sunday, after some changes in which which the word ''faithful'' was inserted
to describe General Westmoreland's service to his country and the word
''distinguished'' was used to describe CBS's journalistic tradition, senior CBS
News officials saw the joint statement at Mr. Boies's law firm of Cravath,
Swaine & Moore. They had originally planned the meeting that day to review what
they would say when CBS won, or lost, the case. And now they were jubilant.

On the Westmoreland side, only one of the half-dozen lawyers, Anthony S. Murry,
had been told in advance of the decision to settle.  Case Is Ended, Lawyer
Disgruntled

Mr. Dorsen, a former Federal prosecutor who is a partner in the Washington law
firm of Sachs, Greenebaum & Taylor, learned that an agreement was soon to be
announced when a reporter, on Sunday night, called his room at the Harley Hotel,
where he was preparing for court. Mr. Dorsen was furious at both the withdrawal
from the case and his treatment by Mr. Burt.

''I felt we still had a shot at winning,'' Mr. Dorsen said in an interview
later, ''and that it was anybody's ball game.''

George S. Leisure Jr., a senior partner of Donovan, Leisure, Newton & Irvine,
learned that the case was being settled when he picked up a newspaper on Monday
morning.

''I was stunned - I'm still stunned,'' Mr. Leisure said in an interview last
week. ''After all we put into this case - the General and I had become fairly
close - it was a blow to learn this way. I almost fainted.''

Mr. Leisure, whose firm provided legal assistance and office space for Mr. Burt,
said he did not know why the settlement had come when it did or the ''the
thinking, the reasoning behind'' it.

''I'm not going to second guess Dan Burt,'' he said. ''Had I been involved, I
might have come to the same conclusion. I don't know.''

General Westmoreland, who was aware as early as Saturday morning that an
agreement was under discussion, was in Garrison, N.Y., Sunday morning, staying
with friends from his days as Superintendent of the United States Military
Academy at nearby West Point.

Mr. Burt called at 8 A.M., but General Westmoreland was asleep and his wife did
not want to wake him. Mr. Burt called again at 9 A.M., and read his client the
joint statement.

''I listened to it, and I thought it made sense,'' the general recalled last
week. ''I know the historians can deal with a case like this but a jury - well
it could have been happenstance, a flip of the coin. I had to decide whether to
fight or compromise. Now, I've made a lot of decisions in my life. You weigh
them. You make them. And you forget them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. William Westmoreland (page 30)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1985 A joint approach to peace with Israel formulated by
Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization has been outlined in the text
of an agreement between Jordan and the P.L.O. that was made public by Jordan. It
specifies five principles upon which their ''bid for joint action'' should be
based. A key provision includes ''total withdrawal'' by Israel from ''the
territories occupied in 1967 for comprehensive peace as established in United
Nations and Security Council resolutions.'' (Page 1, Column 2.)

A man was killed and 15 people were wounded in Paris when a bomb exploded at an
entrance to the Marks & Spencer specialty store. It was the third bombing at the
Paris branch of the British-owned store since its opening in 1975. (3:3.)

Hans-Dietrich Genscher stepped down as chairman of West Germany's Free
Democratic Party to make way for his hand-picked successor, Martin Bangemann,
the Minister for Economic Affairs. Mr. Genscher, who is the Foreign Minister,
led the party, a pillar of West German stability, for more than 10 years. (3:1.)
National

The Senate confirmed Edwin Meese

 as Attorney General more than a year after his nomination by President Reagan.
The 63-31 vote came after five days of filibustering by Farm Belt senators who
had delayed action on the confirmation to extract pledges from the Reagan
Administration of emergency farm credit relief. The senators voting against the
confirmation were Democrats. (1:6.)

A bipartisan farm credit compromise

 reached in the Senate provides that members from both parties can offer
proposals for additional aid to farmers who are seeking financing to start
spring planting. (1:5.)

Farm aid was the topic of President Reagan's weekly radio broadcast. He said
that only a minority of the nation's farmers are in severe financial distress
and that taxpayers must not be asked to ''bail out every farmer hopelessly in
debt.'' (26:5.)

The national infant mortality rate is declining more slowly than any since time
since 1965, according to Government figures, which have caused concern among
Federal health officials. The rate is one of the most widely used indicators of
the health status of a population. (1:1.)

A disposal site for radioactive waste

 in South Carolina has been accepting 45 percent of the nation's low-level
waste, and now the state wants to close it down. State officials threaten to
close it unless Congress approves an eight-state agreement limiting its use for
waste generated in southeastern states. (1:4.) Metropolitan

Gen. William C. Westmoreland was so dispirited by the willingness of his former
intelligence chief and other former aides in Vietnam to testify against him in
his $120 libel suit against CBS that he decided to settle the case, according to
his friends. He was also shaken by the willingness of his former intelligence
chief to ''break the old West Point tie,'' his friends said. (1:3.)

Community college enrollment

 dropped last fall in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut after more than 25
years of steady growth. The decline, which has also occurred at community
colleges in other states, reflects a declining birth rate and a healthy economy
that prompts people to work rather than study, education officials said. (1:1.)

New York's Dram Shop Act was the basis of a suit brought by a disabled New York
City police officer against a Long Island tavern owner that has been settled for
$275,000. John N. Kane, the former officer, had been injured by three men who
had been drinking at the tavern. He sued the tavern owner for $2 million under
the 111-year-old Dram Shop Act. The act holds a server of alcoholic beverages
responsible for the acts of drunken customers. (32:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT POP LYRICS SAY TO US TODAY

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1889 words


Bruce Springsteen became the first rock lyricist to be courted by both of the
major candidates in a Presidential election last fall. First Ronald Reagan
singled him out as an artist whose songs instill pride in America. Walter
Mondale retaliated, asserting that

he had won the rock star's endorsement. ''Bruce may have been born to run,'' Mr.
Mondale quipped, quoting the title of a Springsteen hit, ''but he wasn't born
yesterday.''

Rock is part of adult culture now, to an extent that would have been unthinkable
as recently as a decade ago. It is no longer the exclusive reserve of young
people sending messages to each other. But pop music has always reflected and
responded to the currents of its own time, and today's pop music is no
exception. What does it seem to be telling us about our own time? Part of the
message is in the music itself - in the insistence of the beat, the shriek of
heavily amplified guitars. But lyrics remain the most accurate barometer of what
makes these times different from, for example, the 1960's and 70's.

Today's pop music is sending several dominant messages. Material values are on
the ascendant, but idealism is by no means a spent force. Most pop songs are
love songs, as always, but today's versions try to look at relationships without
rose-colored glasses. Romantic notions are viewed with some suspicion; so are
drugs. And important rock artists and rappers, while no longer anticipating
radical change, are addressing issues, and challenging their listeners to
actively confront the world around them. There have probably been more angry
protest lyrics written and recorded in the last three or four years than in any
comparable period of the 60's.

In the 60's, it would have been unthinkable for a politician to seek
endorsements from rock musicians; rock was rebel music. Stars like Bob Dylan and
the Rolling Stones wrote and recorded outspoken lyrics that urged sweeping
social change and an end to war and flirted with the rhetoric of revolution.
They sang openly about sex and drugs. The music was the voice of a new
generation and a constant reminder of the generation gap. The battle lines were
drawn.

The rock lyricists of the 60's were fond of talking about ''love.'' To the
Beatles, ''love'' was transcendent, an irresistible force for good that could
accomplish practically anything.

There's nothing you can do that can't be done

There's nothing you can sing that can't be sung

There's nothing you can say, but you can learn how to play the game

It's easy. All you need is love.

Love is still something one hears a great deal about in pop lyrics, but the
contemporary version is more hard-headed and down-to-earth than the cosmic,
effulgent Love of the 60's. Many of today's songwriters argue that romance isn't
as important as material values or sex. ''What's love got to do with it?'' Tina
Turner asked in her recent heavy-breathing hit of the same title. And Madonna,
whose come-hither pout and undulating style have made her pop's hottest video
star, serves notice in her hit ''Material Girl'' that she won't worry much about
love as long as there's money in the bank.

Only boys that save their pennies

Make my rainy day. . .

We're living in a material world

And I'm a material girl''

Madonna's carefully calculated image has struck a chord among many of today's
more affluent young listeners, though she is perhaps too one-dimensional to be
Queen of the Yuppies. And she will never be the darling of the feminists.



Nevertheless, during the past decade, the hue and cry against rock lyrics that
demeaned women seemed to have a broad and salutary effect. One didn't hear many
songs of the sort the Rolling Stones and other 60's bands used to perform, songs
like the Stones' ''Under My Thumb.''

Under my thumb her eyes are just kept to herself

Under my thumb, well, I can still look at someone else

It's down to me, the way she talks when she's spoken to

Down to me, the change has come, she's under my thumb.

The title tune from Mick Jagger's new solo album, ''She's The Boss,'' is sung
like a taunt or a tease, but that doesn't disguise its message; Mr. Jagger seems
to have experienced a shift in values since he wrote ''Under My Thumb.''

She's the boss! She's the boss!

She's the boss in bed, she's the boss in my head

She's got the pants on, now she's the boss.

Still, many of today's pop lyrics continue to celebrate male dominance.
Aggressively macho rock has been making a comeback. Heavy metal rock, which
appeals almost exclusively to white male teen-agers and tends to treat women as
either temptresses or chattel, is more popular than ever. Women like Tina Turner
and Cyndi Lauper, who project a certain independence and strength, are helping
to counter this trend, but sometimes one can't hear them very well over heavy
metal's sexist thunder.



Amid these changes in attitude, the old-fashioned romantic love song, always the
staple of pop lyrics, continues to flourish. Prince, another of today's
biggest-selling artists, has progressed from early songs that dealt explicitly
with various sexual situations and permutations to love lyrics of a more
conventional sort. ''Take Me With U'' (sic), a song from his phenomenally
successful album ''Purple Rain,'' could have been written decades ago or
yesterday.

''I don't care where we go

I don't care what we do

I don't care pretty baby

Just take me with u'' (sic)

Pop songs can do more than chart changing attitudes toward love and romance;
they can address topical issues and appeal to our social conscience. In the
60's, Bob Dylan and other songwriters composed anthems that were sung by civil
rights workers as they headed south, and by hundreds of thousands demonstrating
for peace and equal rights. ''How many deaths will it take till we know that too
many people have died,'' Dylan asked. ''The answer, my friend, is blowin' in the
wind.'' And, he added, in a line in another song that provided a name for the
radical faction within Students for a Democratic Society, ''You don't need a
weatherman to tell which way the wind blows.''

By the late 60's, the peace and civil rights movements were beginning to
splinter. The assassinations of the Kennedys and Martin Luther King had robbed a
generation of its heroes, the Vietnam war was escalating despite the protests,
and at home, violence was on the rise. Young people turned to rock, expecting it
to ask the right questions and come up with answers, hoping that the music's
most visionary artists could somehow make sense of things. But rock's most
influential artists - Bob Dylan, the Beatles, the Rolling Stones - were finding
that serving as the conscience of a generation exacted a heavy toll. Mr. Dylan,
for one, felt the pressures becoming unbearable, and wrote about his predicament
in songs like ''All Along the Watchtower.''

There must be some way out of here, said the joker to the thief.

There's too much confusion, I can't get no relief.

Businessmen they drink my wine, plowmen dig my earth.

None of them along the line knows what any of it is worth.

Many rock artists of the 60's turned to drugs before the decade ended. For
awhile, songs that were thought to be about drugs, whatever their original
intentions (Bob Dylan's ''Mr. Tambourine Man,'' the Byrds' ''Eight Miles High,''
the Rolling Stones' ''Get Off My Cloud''), were widely heard. Bob Dylan sang
that ''everybody must get stoned,'' and many young people seemed to agree. But
the fad for drug lyrics was short- lived. They were never again as prevalent as
during that brief Indian summer of the counter-culture. One hears few drug
references in today's pop lyrics, and when drugs are mentioned, listeners are
usually advised to stay away from them; ''Don't do it,'' Grandmaster Flash and
the Furious Five cautioned listeners about to experiment with drugs in their rap
hit ''White Lines.''



The mainstream rock of the 1970's produced little in the way of socially
relevant lyrics. But toward the end of that decade a change began to be felt.
The rise of punk rock in Britain brought to the country's pop charts angry songs
about unemployment and nuclear Armageddon. In America, the issue of nuclear
energy and the threat of nuclear war enlisted the sympathies of many prominent
rock musicians. But attempts by Graham Nash, John Hall, and other anti- nuclear
activists to turn their concerns into anthems were too self-conscious; the songs
were quickly forgotten.

Rap, the new pop idiom that exploded out of New York's black and Latin
neighborhoods in the late 70's, seemed to concern itself mostly with hedonism
and verbal strutting - at first. Then, in the early 80's, came ''The Message,''
the dance-single by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five that provided
listeners with an angry, eye-witness account of inner- city neighborhoods and
people abandoned to rot, prey to crime, poverty, and disease. ''It's like a
jungle/ Sometimes it makes me wonder/ How I keep from going under,'' chanted the
group's champion rapper, Melle Mel.

The rap records of the last several years have confronted similar issues
head-on, and they have been danceable enough to attract a sizable audience.
Run-D.M.C.'s recent hit single ''It's Like That'' ticked off a list of some of
the daily horrors many black Americans have to contend with. But you can't give
up, Run- D.M.C. insisted to their young, predominately black and urban audience.
You have to make something of yourself, to rise above ''the way it is.''

Bruce Springsteen's recent songs have also been topical and deeply felt. They
have also been the most popular music of his career. He is writing for and about
the America of his dreams and the America he sees around him, and his lyrics are
followed closely by a huge audience, as last year's Presidential campaign
references made abundantly clear.

The narrator of Mr. Springsteen's recent hit ''Born in the U.S.A.'' is a Vietnam
veteran who returns home to confront harsh realities.

Went down to see my V.A. man

He said 'Son don't you understand now'

Had a brother at Khe Sahn fighting off the Viet Cong

They're still there he's all gone

Other songs on Mr. Springsteen's most recent album suggest that there is a
pervasive gloom hanging over the country's decaying inner cities and factory
towns. But their message is a positive one. ''Hold on,''the songs seem to
say,''you've got to have something to believe in.'' The laborer in ''Working on
the Highway'' is certainly hanging on to his dream:

I work for the county out on 95

All day I hold a red flag and watch the traffic pass me by

In my head I keep a picture of a pretty little miss

Someday mister I'm gonna lead a better life than this.

Mr. Springsteen's songs look at America and find both despair and hope. And like
Chuck Berry and so many other rock and roll lyricists, past and present, he
finds a source of strength and inspiration in rock itself. Singing of his
schooldays, he captures rock and roll's heart:

We learned more from a three- minute record than we ever learned in school

Tonight I hear the neighborhood drummer sound

I can feel my heart begin to pound

We made a promise we swore we'd always remember

No retreat, no surrender.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Madonna; photo of Bruce Springsteen; photo of Prince

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
The GeneralEnds His WarAgainst CBS

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


In a surprise decision that was widely interpreted as a surrender, Gen. William
C. Westmoreland last week dropped his $120 million libel suit against CBS. The
court battle ended after 18 weeks of testimony with a joint statement in which
the network expressed respect for the general's ''long and faithful service to
his country'' and the general expressed his esteem for CBS's ''distinguished
journalistic tradition.'' But there was no retraction by CBS, and no money
changed hands.

Nevertheless, General Westmoreland claimed victory, calling attention to the
statement by CBS that it ''never intended to assert, and does not believe, that
General Westmoreland was unpatriotic or disloyal in performing his duties as he
saw them.'' The general interpreted those words as an apology for the charge in
the network's 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
that while commander of United States forces in Vietnam, he had misled
Washington about enemy troop strength in order to support the political argument
that the war was being won.

CBS, for its part, denied that it had apologized and stood by the fairness and
accuracy of the documentary. ''When a plaintiff wants to drop a lawsuit without
any money or apology,'' said David Boies, the chief lawyer for CBS, ''I think
you ought to let him.''

Some of General Westmoreland's supporters and contributors to his legal expenses
expressed disappointment that the case, which had cost the two sides about $8
million, did not go to the jury.

The end came after two high-ranking officers had testified against their former
commander. In an interview following the announcement of the settlement General
Westmoreland said, ''I figured it was the best I could get.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBELS ARE PUSHED INTO THAILAND, AND A CORNER

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


After a three-month sweep of their bases by Vietnamese troops, it was time last
week for Cambodia's displaced guerrilla armies to reassess their strategies.
Aware of their need to maintain political and military credibility and foster a
more effective unity if their war is to continue, the three loosely allied rebel
groups are already making changes.

For six dry winter seasons, since Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 and overthrew
the Communist Khmer Rouge Government headed by Pol Pot, the Vietnamese troops
and their Cambodian allies have harassed the rebels. But during the long summer
rainy seasons, the three groups - the Khmer Rouge Communists and the
non-Communists, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front and the forces of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk - have hit back from their bases on the Cambodian side
of the border with Thailand. Independent observers in the Cambodian capital,
Phnom Penh, say that no province has been immune from rebel attack. The border
camps were sometimes emptied by Vietnamese guns, only to be rebuilt when the
rains came. And the resistance forces grew as Cambodians deserted to the border.

This year, however, Vietnam turned up the pressure. For the first time, it did
not stop at the easy targets, the sprawling camps of the National Liberation
Front, but went for Khmer Rouge mountain hideouts. Several of their command
posts in western Cambodia fell with surprising speed.

What have the Vietnamese won or the rebels lost? Diplomats and military
officials in Bangkok say the answers cannot be known until the rains come again
and rebel capacities and Vietnamese defenses are tested anew. For the moment,
the Vietnamese hold a string of empty rebel camps. Nearly 250,000 of the
guerrillas' followers have fled into Thailand, usually well ahead of a
Vietnamese assault. This classic guerrilla fade-away tactic, familiar in
Vietnam's own history, has kept casualties low and deprived Hanoi's troops of
bounty. Reporters who watched recent evacuations saw rebels in clean uniforms
entering Thailand with livestock and weapons. The Khmer Rouge brought elephants.

Some guerrillas have already returned to their border bases. Last week, the
National Liberation Front was reportedly back at Nong Chan, which had been
overrun in November, and in part of Rithisen, which was attacked at Christmas.

But the Vietnamese sweep, whatever its long-term effect, came as a severe
psychological shock, rebel leaders have conceded. The non-Communist groups
learned the folly of building large, vulnerable bases within sight of a vastly
superior enemy. Prince Sihanouk, the coalition's president, and Son Sann, its
prime minister and head of the National Liberation Front, have announced new
tactics. The days of comfortable camp life are over, they said. Old commanders
such as Dien Del, a near-legendary resistance general who tended a rose garden
at his border home, have been discredited. Henceforth, the struggle is to be
fought with hit-and-run raids deep inside Cambodia. At a reportedly tense
meeting, Gen. Sak Sutsakhan, the rebel chief of staff, issued the new orders to
leaders of the front. ''Thus, a new page of history of the front has turned,''
said a commentary by his followers.

Gilding the Khmer Rouge

For the Khmer Rouge, Vietnam's offensive may have had more effect on the lives
of civilians than on the tactics of the guerrillas, who never built large camps
or sought pitched battles with the Vietnamese. This year for the first time,
they sent their families into Thailand and requested aid from international
agencies. The Khmer Rouge cadres still try to control contact between their
followers and ''outsiders.'' In Cambodia, their camps had been impenetrable;
their people, if not living in captivity, were reportedly kept in a state of
paranoia. In Thailand, however, life is already different. Khmer Rouge
civilians, and some armed guerrillas who accompanied them, are beginning to talk
with strangers. Their accounts indicate that political ''re-education'' has
already begun in their mountain hideaways to give them, the largest and most
heavily armed rebel faction, an acceptable international face. The Khmer Rouge,
known for their brutal, leveling, anti-urban, anti-intellectual rule under Pol
Pot - when as many as two million people may have died from starvation and
disease or been executed - now talk about the return of family life, the
resurgence of education and folk arts and the ''moderate'' leadership of Khieu
Samphan. A French-educated intellectual, he is the vice president and foreign
affairs spokesman of the rebel coalition.

For Thailand, Vietnam's large-scale presence on the border has increased the
slight, although real, danger of brushes with Vietnamese troops, which have
already taken Thai lives. Moreover, it has multiplied the problems of the
already huge refugee influx. The United Nations and a host of international
organizations provide aid, but Thailand has the difficult task of policing the
border area, where refugees report robbery and bribery flourishing. Last week,
two people died when Thai troops pursued illegal residents at a closed refugee
camp. One man was shot. A young woman died of suffocation in a water tank where
she was hiding, evidently in hopes of escaping the seemingly endless war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of residents at a Cambodian resistance camp ; Map of Cambodia and
surrounding countries

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Big, Big Plans

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


With a Dec. 21 date, the Independence Bowl in Shreveport, La., can't expect to
compete with the New Year's Day bowls for the top football teams in the country,
but that doesn't bother the bowl's organizers. At the Independence Bowl,
football takes a back seat to patriotism, and the game sometimes seems an
afterthought to the elaborate halftime ceremonies built around the presentation
of the Omar N. Bradley Spirit of Independence Award, named for the general who
became the first recipient in 1977. This year, after honoring such luminaries as


John Wayne (1978),

Bob Hope (1979) and

Ronald Reagan (1981), the bowl's organizers are thinking big. The 1985 award
will go to those who fought for the nation in Vietnam, and according to

Cecil Lloyd , the bowl's chairman, a blanket invitation is being extended to all
Vietnam veterans to attend the halftime ceremonies. ''It's a belated honor, but
it's well deserved,'' declared Lloyd, who said he could ''envision a field
full'' of veterans. Maybe two fields full. A total of 2.7 million Americans
served in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A CLASSIC RACE: MAN AND DOG VS. ALASKA

BYLINE: By Alex Ward

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3704 words


Alex Ward is editor of The Times's Living Section.







 NEXT SATURDAY MORNING, 63 sled-dog teams will set off from Anchorage for the
frontier town of Nome, Alaska, about two weeks and 1,100 frozen miles to the
northwest. The event is the Iditarod Trail International Sled Dog Race, billed
as ''the last great race on earth.'' These mushers and their dogs will travel
through a couple of time zones, two mountain ranges and a series of checkpoints
with names like Unalakleet, Shaktoolik, McGrath and Koyuk. Just mention them and
the mercury on any self-respecting thermometer will drop.

Iditarod (pronounced eye-DIT-a-rod) may not be a household word in the lower 48,
but in Alaska it's the four-legged World Series. Most of the entrants are
Alaskans such as four-time winner Rick Swenson; Herbie Nayokpuk, the Shishmaref
Cannonball, and Emmitt Peters, the Yukon Fox, for whom 30-below temperatures,
cranky moose and enormous ice fields are all in a day's work.

Challenging these veterans, though, will be an outlander named Bob Bright of
Stephentown, N.Y., a hamlet 150 miles north of New York City, in Rensselaer
County. For much of the year Bright's huskies see as much mud as they do snow,
and Bright himself has to sandwich his dog-training between frequent trips to
Chicago, where he is executive director of that city's marathon. Yet he says he
thinks he has a chance to do well in the Iditarod this time - his second try -
especially if he can position his team with the early front runners.

''I'm more comfortable in the front of the pack,'' he said after putting 17
yapping eager canines through a brisk workout on the course he has marked off on
his 100-acre spread. ''I don't like coming from behind.''

''Tell you one thing,'' he added, ''my team is as fast as any in that race. If I
can work my way up front quickly, I think I can surprise some people. I may be
dreaming, but I don't think so. The dogs are capable of doing it. The only
question mark is the driver - me.''

Self-doubt is not a characteristic that Bright - former Marine, former top-class
miler, former thoroughbred-horse broker and now a key figure in the increasingly
lucrative and competitive world of marathon running - exhibits frequently.
Bright is scrappy and occasionally abrasive and, at 45, a boyish-looking bundle
of energy who in the last three years has propelled the Chicago race -
officially named America's Marathon/Chicago, and run in October, a week before
the New York City Marathon - and himself into prominence.

Lately, when he hasn't been on the phone with marathon runners or executives at
the Beatrice Companies in Chicago, sponsor of the race there, Bright has been
leading his dogs through their paces and mapping out the logistics for
transporting them, along with four sleds, 1,600 pounds of dog food and huge
stores of other gear.

Snow was sparse earlier this winter in the Adirondacks, where Bright and his
charges usually train. Grand Marais, Minn., and Glacier National Park in Montana
offered better conditions, along with a handful of short races to help get the
team in shape. So early last month, Bright, Georgia Hudson, his companion of the
last four years, and 22-year-old Christopher P. Dunlap, a son of Bright's old
friend Harris L. Dunlap, a dog-breeder and fellow racer, packed up the huskies
in his specially equipped truck and headed west.

Bright knows from unhappy experience that the Iditarod requires intensive
preparation. ''It takes a special kind of toughness to run it,'' he said.
''You've got to make up your mind that you're going to endure whatever
terribleness is out there and keep moving. And the dogs key off you, so if you
haven't got it together yourself they'll pick up on it immediately and it'll
affect them, too.''

But his commitment to Beatrice, a company that is considering sponsoring other
big races, meant being available for sudden meetings, which in turn meant
staying near a telephone and an airport. Thus, although Bright and his crew
would have preferred going straight to Alaska in December, they postponed that
leg of their trip until two weeks ago.  CAREFUL LOGISTICS are essential for the
race. On arrival in Alaska, food and supply drops were made at various
checkpoints in advance of the race. Mushers start off with only a one-day supply
of food for themselves and their dogs, usually enough to get them to Rabbit
Lake, about 60 miles into the race, or Skwentna, 34 miles farther on, then pick
up the rest as they progress along the trail. The experienced racer knows where
and when to take on more supplies. Bright has spent the last month poring over
charts that detail where the top finishers in the last three Iditarods made
their food drops, and planning where to stash supplies of beaver, horsemeat and
beef for his dogs and pizza and steaks for himself.

Bright also has plenty of equipment to protect himself and his huskies from the
elements. This includes nearly 600 pairs of disposable polypropylene dog booties
sprayed with nonskid synthetic rubber for protection against the frozen granular
surface over which most of the race is run; a sleeping bag; snow shoes;
different boots for wet terrain and dry terrain; wool and polypropylene long
underwear; an insulated water-resistant climbing suit and beaver-skin mittens.

For most of the race, Bright will drive a North Star Competition Toboggan, built
in Fairbanks. The 6-foot-long 28- pound North Star is the Ferrari of dog sleds:
its runners are laminated ash, as are the upper stanchions; the support props
are aluminum and the bed on which the equipment is carried is plastic. It even
has a fold-down seat. At Unalakleet, about 280 miles from the finish, the
Iditarod terrain gets icier and flatter; there Bright will hitch his team to a
smaller, lighter sled with flat runners. It's faster, and easier on the dogs.

After completing the food and supply drops, Bright set up camp at Trapper Creek,
north of Anchorage and not far from the Iditarod course. From there, he and
Dunlap split the dogs into two teams and drove them for three days on the trail.
Three days of workouts and one day of rest has been the team's training schedule
for the last month and a half.

In a race as long as this one, the premium is on dogs that are ''tough tired,''
meaning those that can maintain their pace even when exhaustion threatens to
take over. As with marathon runners, that comes from countless training miles.
''My dogs don't have nearly as much mileage on them as most of these teams,''
said Bright, ''but what mileage they do have is quality - I've been running them
hard and fast.'' The pre-race workouts will cease on Tuesday, however. Highly
trained sled dogs, like most endurance athletes, need a few days off before the
big push.

About half of Bright's dogs will be running in the Iditarod for the second time.
They pulled him in the 1983 race, an experience that was a disaster for him. ''I
was trying to take care of a lot of business at the time, so I hired a guy to
drive the dogs to Alaska,'' he recalled, ''I was going to fly up later and meet
them in Anchorage.'' The truck, however, was destroyed in a highway crash in
northwestern Canada. The dogs were not hurt, but Bright had to fly to Canada,
buy a new truck and drive the dogs the rest of the way himself. He arrived just
before race time, exhausted, and became lost the first night on the trail.

Iditarod mushers sometimes push their teams for six or eight hours at a stretch,
then break for several hours. ''You pull off the trail, feed the dogs, then try
to get a little rest yourself,'' Bright explained. Mushers of the better teams
will frequently get by with as little as three or four hours of sleep every 24
hours. ''After six or seven days in the wilderness a lot of drivers are so tired
they start to hallucinate,'' said Bright. ''But not me. I was so wiped out I was
hallucinating by the outskirts of Anchorage.''

The coup de gr,ace occurred just south of Unalakleet. ''I was cruising along
beside a low ridge,'' said Bright, ''when all of a sudden a guy on a snowmobile
came sailing over it and plowed right through the middle of my team.'' One of
his dogs was killed and Bright, who had been on the trail for more than two
weeks, dropped out of the race.

The Iditarod is named for a gold-mining town that was on the trail between
Seward and Nome. There is a difference of opinion as to the origins of the word.
Some say it is an Anglicization of ''haitidarod,'' an Ingalik Indian word
meaning ''distant place''; others contend the word means ''headwaters.'' The
race itself, which was started in 1973 by an Alaskan musher named Joe Redington
Sr., commemorates the heroism of a group of dog-sled teams that in 1925 relayed
diphtheria serum over 1,000 miles from Anchorage to the stricken residents of
Nome. A statue near the Arsenal in Central Park memorializes Balto, one of the
lead dogs in that trek.

This year, $200,000 in prize money will go to the top 20 finishers in the race,
with the winner collecting $50,000. It will be money well-earned. Stories of the
hardiness of Iditarod racers are legion, and the field is by no means confined
to men. In last year's race, Lolly Medley, a 33-year-old mother of three, mushed
her team for 35 miles after crashing her sled into a tree stump and breaking her
kneecap. She was picked up by a helicopter, taken to Anchorage for treatment,
then flown, cast and all, back to Nikolai, site of the mishap, where she resumed
the race with a borrowed sled, hers having been totaled in the accident. She got
as far as Ruby, 260 miles from Nikolai, before finally dropping out. A fur
trapper, Larry (Cowboy) Smith, ran most of the same race with a broken arm after
he bounced over some rocks near Rohn.


To help guide the mushers, small triangular reflectors are placed every quarter
of a mile or so along the trail. But bad weather, or darkness, or the mental
condition of the driver frequently makes it difficult to see them. Bright
described it as ''sort of like setting off from New York to Indianapolis, where
you've got a lot of roads but no signs. You keep hoping the guy right in front
of you knows where he's going.'' If you can't see the guy in front of you, he
added, sled marks and dog droppings are your best bets.

Starting positions for the Iditarod are drawn according to the date the
contestant entered (entry deadline for the race, which is restricted to dog
sledders who have completed a 200-mile or longer race, was Jan. 15). Bright will
be in the second half of the draw, so the first hours of the race, described by
one musher as ''bedlam - all these dogs and sleds and adrenalin running
together,'' will be crucial. ''I've got to go out fast enough to get out of that
no man's land and up with the top teams,'' Bright said. ''By Rabbit Lake, I want
to be in the action - in the top 10 at least.''

Bright is not the only non- Alaskan entered in the Iditarod; there are four
other racers from the lower 48, plus mushers from England, France, Italy,
Germany, Japan, Australia and, for the first time, Hawaii. Neither is he an
inexperienced dog sledder, having raced dogs for the last 15 years. Last year he
officially finished third in the 350- mile Nome Sweepstakes, but withdrew
afterward on a technicality, won a couple of shorter races in Canada, and was
the leader halfway through the John Beargrease, a 400-mile race in Minnesota,
when he was summoned to Chicago on business and had to drop out.

''First and foremost, I am a race director,'' he emphasizes. ''The dog racing is
just something I do.'' Still, he sees an integral connection between the two
activities. ''I am fascinated by runners, two-legged and four legged,'' he says.
''I want to know what motivates them, what makes them tick.'' LEE F. FLAHERTY,
the Chicago marketing and promotion executive who founded the marathon and who
hired Bright three years ago when the race was practically unheard of, even in
its hometown, says: ''Bob is very analytical about the elements needed for a
good road race. It's much more than going out and saying, 'Hey, let's grab this
guy because he's got the world's record and he'll run faster than anyone.' What
he wants to do is put together a field that will be real competitive, where the
runners will challenge each other. That means knowing the runners, knowing their
personalities, what brings out the best in them.''

These days it also means paying them, and that's something else Bright is not
shy about. ''Why not?'' he says. ''These are great athletes.'' Last year's
Chicago winner, Steve Jones, a Welshman, took home $35,000, plus $50,000 for
''promotional work.'' All told, Beatrice spent more than $3 million on the
marathon.

Despite his accomplishments, Bright's road to prominence in marathoning has had
some bumps. Part of the reason is his personality, which is refreshingly
straightforward and likable most of the time, but on occasion is
confrontational, even belligerent. Last fall he publicly locked horns with Fred
Lebow, director of the New York City Marathon, over whose marathon was the
greatest. There was a good deal of gamesmanship involved, and Bright says he is
sincerely fond of Lebow. ''I think it's fair to say we really like each other,''
he says, laughing. ''We just don't always trust each other.'' Lebow describes
their relationship as an enigma. ''We scream and yell at each other all day,''
he says, ''then we'll go out and have dinner together.''

''Bob is not the easiest man in America to work with,'' says Flaherty. ''I've
seen some pretty gentle folks here who, after a meeting with Bob, would have
raced over to the hardware store for some rope if anybody'd suggested stringing
him up. On the other hand, there has been a lot of backslapping and
self-congratulation in this city over how our marathon has gone from nothing to
something great. Well, it's all because of one person - Bob.''

Marathons and dog-sled races seem natural environments for Bright, who has never
been able to sit still. The son of a Bell Telephone executive, he was born in
Philadelphia, grew up in Bergen County, N.J., tried college and spent two
hitches - 14 years in all - in the Marine Corps, including jump school and
serving in a Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance unit, as a patrol leader in
Vietnam.

His attachment to huskies started early.''I was given one when I was 3 years
old,'' he said.

When he got out of the service, he had a marriage that was breaking up, two
young sons and a backyard full of the dogs. ''I had them tied to trees and to
the fence and they barked like hell,'' he recalls. ''What a mess. God, the
neighbors hated me.'' Shortly afterward he moved from Fredericksburg, Va. (he
had been stationed at nearby Quantico) to Unionville, Pa., south of
Philadelphia, where, at various times over the next few years he worked in a
series of jobs, collected unemployment, learned to fox hunt with ''a crowd I
couldn't afford to hang out with,'' and became interested in thoroughbred
horses.

He also took up sled-dog racing seriously. Along with Harris Dunlap, who lives
in Bakers Mills, N.Y., near Lake Placid, Bright competed in races in upper New
York State, in Minnesota and in northwestern Canada. ''It was not,'' Bright
said, ''the most responsible period of my life. I ran up bills it took me years
to pay off. Most of the jobs I did have were only to support my dog- racing
habit. Whenever things got too much for me, I'd pack up the dogs and head for
the wilds. They were my big escape.''

Eventually he settled down, for a few years at least, in Far Hills, N.J., and
went into business as a horse broker. In 1978, Bright, who had once run a 4:06
mile in the Marines, volunteered as director of the Midland Run in Far Hills. It
was just a local charity race at the time, but within two years Bright
transformed it into a major event. The 1980 Midland field included Bill Rodgers,
Lasse Viren, Herb Lindsay, Greg Meyer, Garry Bjorklund and Henry Rono.

Unfortunately, this particular race finished in the red and Bright was
subsequently dismissed. ''I'll admit my style may have been a little aggressive
for them,'' Bright says, ''but I did what I felt was needed. If that race still
existed it would be magnificent. Television coverage, the whole thing. The
groundwork was laid for it to be a big moneymaker.''

Upset that his ''attempt to do something good for that community'' turned sour,
Bright and Hudson, an experienced horse trainer whom he had met in Far Hills,
decided to go into the horse-breeding business somewhere else. That turned out
to be Stephentown, where they bought a farm complete with a house that dates
back to 1790 and plenty of room for the horses they intended to raise.



But word of Bright's ability to recruit distance runners had spread, and before
the two had really settled into their new home, Flaherty was calling from
Chicago. Four years later the only evidence of horses in the house are on the
covers of the breeding publications stacked neatly in the front hallway.  ALONG
WITH THE ANtique furniture and the Oriental rugs, however, there are plenty of
signs of dogs: photographs of Bright and his team in the Nome Sweepstakes, a
poster from the Beargrease, a couple of sleds in the living room, sacks of dry
dog food in the garage, and 40 dog houses - each with its own husky - out back.

Racing sled dogs, even parttime, is expensive. Bright estimates his costs at
about $25,000 a year. And that doesn't count the $35,000 his adventure in the
Iditarod is costing (the entry fee alone is $1,249) because that is being picked
up by Beatrice and Flair, which are co- sponsoring him. He did pick up several
thousand dollars in prize money last year, however. And his status as a breeder
- Ray Lang, a veteran racer who lives in Nome, was impressed enough with his
huskies to buy three of them after the Nome Sweepstakes - allows him to write
off some of his costs.

To the uninitiated, at least, Bright's dogs bear only the faintest resemblance
to malamutes or Siberians, the two pure breeds of husky, which have stocky
frames and bushy heads. His seem remarkably small, almost fragile, and it is
difficult to imagine their withstanding the rigors of the Iditarod. They are
about 22 inches high at the shoulder and weigh no more than 40 to 55 pounds
apiece; Bright picks them up effortlessly. The most apparent clue to their
northern ancestry is the eyes: luminescent white, with tiny pupils.

The dogs have been carefully cross-bred, many of them by Dunlap and some of them
by Bright, for speed and durability. There are strains of Siberian and malamute
in them, but they are mixed with those of speedier breeds - greyhounds,
whippets, even Afghans. ''The dogs that are traditionally thought of as
huskies,'' Dunlap explains, ''have a lot of strength, but they're just too slow.
We wanted a smaller dog that retained strength through the shoulder and could go
faster. This generally seems the trend among good sled dogs.''

These dogs are capable of ''double suspension,'' the technical term for a speed
dog's motion; it means that all four feet are off the ground during both
extension and collection (when they are gathered together under the dog at the
end of the stride). Double suspension is used, however, only when passing or
breakaway speed is required; the dogs' cruising stride is single-suspended,
meaning that one foot touches the ground in extension and collection.

Not long ago, Bright invited a visitor to watch a training run in Stephentown.
As the dogs were fastened in place they yelped, clawed the ground, strained at
their harnesses and shook in their eagerness to run. When all of them were in
place, Bright yanked loose the anchor, yelled at his lead dog, Grizzly, to move
it (mushers never actually say ''mush''; they sometimes say ''gee,'' meaning
''right,'' or ''haw,'' meaning ''left,'' but more often what they say is
unprintable), and the 17-dogpower machine took off. The training rig, which with
two men astride weighed close to 400 pounds, sailed along a flat dirt road at
close to 20 miles an hour.

In a race as long as the Iditarod the dogs will not run nearly as fast. The
first few days out of Anchorage, where the terrain is relatively flat and the
team's energy level is high, they should average close to 14 miles an hour.
After that, if all goes well, they will settle into a slightly slower pace, 10
to 12 miles an hour. In winning last year's Iditarod in 12 days and 15 hours,
Dean Osmar's team averaged roughly 12 miles an hour.

Not surprisingly, some of Bright's dogs are named for marathoners. There's B.J.
(for Garry Bjorklund), Roche (for Mike Roche), Deke (for Rob de Castella),
Rookie (for Alberto Salazar). There are also Grizzly, Junior and Spike, his
three best lead dogs. At the start, the team will be 17 or 15 dogs strong, with
a single leader - he will alternate three, or perhaps four, dogs in the lead -
and the remainder in pairs. If he reaches Nome, the team will probably have
dwindled to nine, or seven. Only the strongest dogs will make the entire run,
the others can be dropped off at the checkpoints, where they will be cared for;
the mushers leave food for these dogs and pick them up after the race. For the
sake of the dogs, race rules require that each team make one 24-hour stop.
Eighteen veterinarians will be stationed along the trail to care for injured or
fatigued animals.

Though he didn't finish two years ago, Bright has been in Nome when other
mushers have completed the Iditarod. The impression it left on him is vivid.
''The dogs are what it's all about,'' he said. ''Just seeing them come across
the finish line is enough to bring tears to your eyes. If you thought they were
the greatest athletes you'd ever seen when you started the race, by the time
it's over there is absolutely no doubt about it. They've gone hundreds and
hundreds of miles, their feet are sore, they can hardly move. But they look up
at you, and if you tell 'em to go straight ahead, that's all they want to hear.
They pick themselves up and go.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bob Bright (page 34); photo of man and team

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A CLASSIC RACE: MAN AND DOG VS. ALASKA

BYLINE: By Alex Ward

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3704 words


Alex Ward is editor of The Times's Living Section.







 NEXT SATURDAY MORNING, 63 sled-dog teams will set off from Anchorage for the
frontier town of Nome, Alaska, about two weeks and 1,100 frozen miles to the
northwest. The event is the Iditarod Trail International Sled Dog Race, billed
as ''the last great race on earth.'' These mushers and their dogs will travel
through a couple of time zones, two mountain ranges and a series of checkpoints
with names like Unalakleet, Shaktoolik, McGrath and Koyuk. Just mention them and
the mercury on any self-respecting thermometer will drop.

Iditarod (pronounced eye-DIT-a-rod) may not be a household word in the lower 48,
but in Alaska it's the four-legged World Series. Most of the entrants are
Alaskans such as four-time winner Rick Swenson; Herbie Nayokpuk, the Shishmaref
Cannonball, and Emmitt Peters, the Yukon Fox, for whom 30-below temperatures,
cranky moose and enormous ice fields are all in a day's work.

Challenging these veterans, though, will be an outlander named Bob Bright of
Stephentown, N.Y., a hamlet 150 miles north of New York City, in Rensselaer
County. For much of the year Bright's huskies see as much mud as they do snow,
and Bright himself has to sandwich his dog-training between frequent trips to
Chicago, where he is executive director of that city's marathon. Yet he says he
thinks he has a chance to do well in the Iditarod this time - his second try -
especially if he can position his team with the early front runners.

''I'm more comfortable in the front of the pack,'' he said after putting 17
yapping eager canines through a brisk workout on the course he has marked off on
his 100-acre spread. ''I don't like coming from behind.''

''Tell you one thing,'' he added, ''my team is as fast as any in that race. If I
can work my way up front quickly, I think I can surprise some people. I may be
dreaming, but I don't think so. The dogs are capable of doing it. The only
question mark is the driver - me.''

Self-doubt is not a characteristic that Bright - former Marine, former top-class
miler, former thoroughbred-horse broker and now a key figure in the increasingly
lucrative and competitive world of marathon running - exhibits frequently.
Bright is scrappy and occasionally abrasive and, at 45, a boyish-looking bundle
of energy who in the last three years has propelled the Chicago race -
officially named America's Marathon/Chicago, and run in October, a week before
the New York City Marathon - and himself into prominence.

Lately, when he hasn't been on the phone with marathon runners or executives at
the Beatrice Companies in Chicago, sponsor of the race there, Bright has been
leading his dogs through their paces and mapping out the logistics for
transporting them, along with four sleds, 1,600 pounds of dog food and huge
stores of other gear.

Snow was sparse earlier this winter in the Adirondacks, where Bright and his
charges usually train. Grand Marais, Minn., and Glacier National Park in Montana
offered better conditions, along with a handful of short races to help get the
team in shape. So early last month, Bright, Georgia Hudson, his companion of the
last four years, and 22-year-old Christopher P. Dunlap, a son of Bright's old
friend Harris L. Dunlap, a dog-breeder and fellow racer, packed up the huskies
in his specially equipped truck and headed west.

Bright knows from unhappy experience that the Iditarod requires intensive
preparation. ''It takes a special kind of toughness to run it,'' he said.
''You've got to make up your mind that you're going to endure whatever
terribleness is out there and keep moving. And the dogs key off you, so if you
haven't got it together yourself they'll pick up on it immediately and it'll
affect them, too.''

But his commitment to Beatrice, a company that is considering sponsoring other
big races, meant being available for sudden meetings, which in turn meant
staying near a telephone and an airport. Thus, although Bright and his crew
would have preferred going straight to Alaska in December, they postponed that
leg of their trip until two weeks ago.  CAREFUL LOGISTICS are essential for the
race. On arrival in Alaska, food and supply drops were made at various
checkpoints in advance of the race. Mushers start off with only a one-day supply
of food for themselves and their dogs, usually enough to get them to Rabbit
Lake, about 60 miles into the race, or Skwentna, 34 miles farther on, then pick
up the rest as they progress along the trail. The experienced racer knows where
and when to take on more supplies. Bright has spent the last month poring over
charts that detail where the top finishers in the last three Iditarods made
their food drops, and planning where to stash supplies of beaver, horsemeat and
beef for his dogs and pizza and steaks for himself.

Bright also has plenty of equipment to protect himself and his huskies from the
elements. This includes nearly 600 pairs of disposable polypropylene dog booties
sprayed with nonskid synthetic rubber for protection against the frozen granular
surface over which most of the race is run; a sleeping bag; snow shoes;
different boots for wet terrain and dry terrain; wool and polypropylene long
underwear; an insulated water-resistant climbing suit and beaver-skin mittens.

For most of the race, Bright will drive a North Star Competition Toboggan, built
in Fairbanks. The 6-foot-long 28- pound North Star is the Ferrari of dog sleds:
its runners are laminated ash, as are the upper stanchions; the support props
are aluminum and the bed on which the equipment is carried is plastic. It even
has a fold-down seat. At Unalakleet, about 280 miles from the finish, the
Iditarod terrain gets icier and flatter; there Bright will hitch his team to a
smaller, lighter sled with flat runners. It's faster, and easier on the dogs.

After completing the food and supply drops, Bright set up camp at Trapper Creek,
north of Anchorage and not far from the Iditarod course. From there, he and
Dunlap split the dogs into two teams and drove them for three days on the trail.
Three days of workouts and one day of rest has been the team's training schedule
for the last month and a half.

In a race as long as this one, the premium is on dogs that are ''tough tired,''
meaning those that can maintain their pace even when exhaustion threatens to
take over. As with marathon runners, that comes from countless training miles.
''My dogs don't have nearly as much mileage on them as most of these teams,''
said Bright, ''but what mileage they do have is quality - I've been running them
hard and fast.'' The pre-race workouts will cease on Tuesday, however. Highly
trained sled dogs, like most endurance athletes, need a few days off before the
big push.

About half of Bright's dogs will be running in the Iditarod for the second time.
They pulled him in the 1983 race, an experience that was a disaster for him. ''I
was trying to take care of a lot of business at the time, so I hired a guy to
drive the dogs to Alaska,'' he recalled, ''I was going to fly up later and meet
them in Anchorage.'' The truck, however, was destroyed in a highway crash in
northwestern Canada. The dogs were not hurt, but Bright had to fly to Canada,
buy a new truck and drive the dogs the rest of the way himself. He arrived just
before race time, exhausted, and became lost the first night on the trail.

Iditarod mushers sometimes push their teams for six or eight hours at a stretch,
then break for several hours. ''You pull off the trail, feed the dogs, then try
to get a little rest yourself,'' Bright explained. Mushers of the better teams
will frequently get by with as little as three or four hours of sleep every 24
hours. ''After six or seven days in the wilderness a lot of drivers are so tired
they start to hallucinate,'' said Bright. ''But not me. I was so wiped out I was
hallucinating by the outskirts of Anchorage.''

The coup de gr,ace occurred just south of Unalakleet. ''I was cruising along
beside a low ridge,'' said Bright, ''when all of a sudden a guy on a snowmobile
came sailing over it and plowed right through the middle of my team.'' One of
his dogs was killed and Bright, who had been on the trail for more than two
weeks, dropped out of the race.

The Iditarod is named for a gold-mining town that was on the trail between
Seward and Nome. There is a difference of opinion as to the origins of the word.
Some say it is an Anglicization of ''haitidarod,'' an Ingalik Indian word
meaning ''distant place''; others contend the word means ''headwaters.'' The
race itself, which was started in 1973 by an Alaskan musher named Joe Redington
Sr., commemorates the heroism of a group of dog-sled teams that in 1925 relayed
diphtheria serum over 1,000 miles from Anchorage to the stricken residents of
Nome. A statue near the Arsenal in Central Park memorializes Balto, one of the
lead dogs in that trek.

This year, $200,000 in prize money will go to the top 20 finishers in the race,
with the winner collecting $50,000. It will be money well-earned. Stories of the
hardiness of Iditarod racers are legion, and the field is by no means confined
to men. In last year's race, Lolly Medley, a 33-year-old mother of three, mushed
her team for 35 miles after crashing her sled into a tree stump and breaking her
kneecap. She was picked up by a helicopter, taken to Anchorage for treatment,
then flown, cast and all, back to Nikolai, site of the mishap, where she resumed
the race with a borrowed sled, hers having been totaled in the accident. She got
as far as Ruby, 260 miles from Nikolai, before finally dropping out. A fur
trapper, Larry (Cowboy) Smith, ran most of the same race with a broken arm after
he bounced over some rocks near Rohn.


To help guide the mushers, small triangular reflectors are placed every quarter
of a mile or so along the trail. But bad weather, or darkness, or the mental
condition of the driver frequently makes it difficult to see them. Bright
described it as ''sort of like setting off from New York to Indianapolis, where
you've got a lot of roads but no signs. You keep hoping the guy right in front
of you knows where he's going.'' If you can't see the guy in front of you, he
added, sled marks and dog droppings are your best bets.

Starting positions for the Iditarod are drawn according to the date the
contestant entered (entry deadline for the race, which is restricted to dog
sledders who have completed a 200-mile or longer race, was Jan. 15). Bright will
be in the second half of the draw, so the first hours of the race, described by
one musher as ''bedlam - all these dogs and sleds and adrenalin running
together,'' will be crucial. ''I've got to go out fast enough to get out of that
no man's land and up with the top teams,'' Bright said. ''By Rabbit Lake, I want
to be in the action - in the top 10 at least.''

Bright is not the only non- Alaskan entered in the Iditarod; there are four
other racers from the lower 48, plus mushers from England, France, Italy,
Germany, Japan, Australia and, for the first time, Hawaii. Neither is he an
inexperienced dog sledder, having raced dogs for the last 15 years. Last year he
officially finished third in the 350- mile Nome Sweepstakes, but withdrew
afterward on a technicality, won a couple of shorter races in Canada, and was
the leader halfway through the John Beargrease, a 400-mile race in Minnesota,
when he was summoned to Chicago on business and had to drop out.

''First and foremost, I am a race director,'' he emphasizes. ''The dog racing is
just something I do.'' Still, he sees an integral connection between the two
activities. ''I am fascinated by runners, two-legged and four legged,'' he says.
''I want to know what motivates them, what makes them tick.'' LEE F. FLAHERTY,
the Chicago marketing and promotion executive who founded the marathon and who
hired Bright three years ago when the race was practically unheard of, even in
its hometown, says: ''Bob is very analytical about the elements needed for a
good road race. It's much more than going out and saying, 'Hey, let's grab this
guy because he's got the world's record and he'll run faster than anyone.' What
he wants to do is put together a field that will be real competitive, where the
runners will challenge each other. That means knowing the runners, knowing their
personalities, what brings out the best in them.''

These days it also means paying them, and that's something else Bright is not
shy about. ''Why not?'' he says. ''These are great athletes.'' Last year's
Chicago winner, Steve Jones, a Welshman, took home $35,000, plus $50,000 for
''promotional work.'' All told, Beatrice spent more than $3 million on the
marathon.

Despite his accomplishments, Bright's road to prominence in marathoning has had
some bumps. Part of the reason is his personality, which is refreshingly
straightforward and likable most of the time, but on occasion is
confrontational, even belligerent. Last fall he publicly locked horns with Fred
Lebow, director of the New York City Marathon, over whose marathon was the
greatest. There was a good deal of gamesmanship involved, and Bright says he is
sincerely fond of Lebow. ''I think it's fair to say we really like each other,''
he says, laughing. ''We just don't always trust each other.'' Lebow describes
their relationship as an enigma. ''We scream and yell at each other all day,''
he says, ''then we'll go out and have dinner together.''

''Bob is not the easiest man in America to work with,'' says Flaherty. ''I've
seen some pretty gentle folks here who, after a meeting with Bob, would have
raced over to the hardware store for some rope if anybody'd suggested stringing
him up. On the other hand, there has been a lot of backslapping and
self-congratulation in this city over how our marathon has gone from nothing to
something great. Well, it's all because of one person - Bob.''

Marathons and dog-sled races seem natural environments for Bright, who has never
been able to sit still. The son of a Bell Telephone executive, he was born in
Philadelphia, grew up in Bergen County, N.J., tried college and spent two
hitches - 14 years in all - in the Marine Corps, including jump school and
serving in a Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance unit, as a patrol leader in
Vietnam.

His attachment to huskies started early.''I was given one when I was 3 years
old,'' he said.

When he got out of the service, he had a marriage that was breaking up, two
young sons and a backyard full of the dogs. ''I had them tied to trees and to
the fence and they barked like hell,'' he recalls. ''What a mess. God, the
neighbors hated me.'' Shortly afterward he moved from Fredericksburg, Va. (he
had been stationed at nearby Quantico) to Unionville, Pa., south of
Philadelphia, where, at various times over the next few years he worked in a
series of jobs, collected unemployment, learned to fox hunt with ''a crowd I
couldn't afford to hang out with,'' and became interested in thoroughbred
horses.

He also took up sled-dog racing seriously. Along with Harris Dunlap, who lives
in Bakers Mills, N.Y., near Lake Placid, Bright competed in races in upper New
York State, in Minnesota and in northwestern Canada. ''It was not,'' Bright
said, ''the most responsible period of my life. I ran up bills it took me years
to pay off. Most of the jobs I did have were only to support my dog- racing
habit. Whenever things got too much for me, I'd pack up the dogs and head for
the wilds. They were my big escape.''

Eventually he settled down, for a few years at least, in Far Hills, N.J., and
went into business as a horse broker. In 1978, Bright, who had once run a 4:06
mile in the Marines, volunteered as director of the Midland Run in Far Hills. It
was just a local charity race at the time, but within two years Bright
transformed it into a major event. The 1980 Midland field included Bill Rodgers,
Lasse Viren, Herb Lindsay, Greg Meyer, Garry Bjorklund and Henry Rono.

Unfortunately, this particular race finished in the red and Bright was
subsequently dismissed. ''I'll admit my style may have been a little aggressive
for them,'' Bright says, ''but I did what I felt was needed. If that race still
existed it would be magnificent. Television coverage, the whole thing. The
groundwork was laid for it to be a big moneymaker.''

Upset that his ''attempt to do something good for that community'' turned sour,
Bright and Hudson, an experienced horse trainer whom he had met in Far Hills,
decided to go into the horse-breeding business somewhere else. That turned out
to be Stephentown, where they bought a farm complete with a house that dates
back to 1790 and plenty of room for the horses they intended to raise.



But word of Bright's ability to recruit distance runners had spread, and before
the two had really settled into their new home, Flaherty was calling from
Chicago. Four years later the only evidence of horses in the house are on the
covers of the breeding publications stacked neatly in the front hallway.  ALONG
WITH THE ANtique furniture and the Oriental rugs, however, there are plenty of
signs of dogs: photographs of Bright and his team in the Nome Sweepstakes, a
poster from the Beargrease, a couple of sleds in the living room, sacks of dry
dog food in the garage, and 40 dog houses - each with its own husky - out back.

Racing sled dogs, even parttime, is expensive. Bright estimates his costs at
about $25,000 a year. And that doesn't count the $35,000 his adventure in the
Iditarod is costing (the entry fee alone is $1,249) because that is being picked
up by Beatrice and Flair, which are co- sponsoring him. He did pick up several
thousand dollars in prize money last year, however. And his status as a breeder
- Ray Lang, a veteran racer who lives in Nome, was impressed enough with his
huskies to buy three of them after the Nome Sweepstakes - allows him to write
off some of his costs.

To the uninitiated, at least, Bright's dogs bear only the faintest resemblance
to malamutes or Siberians, the two pure breeds of husky, which have stocky
frames and bushy heads. His seem remarkably small, almost fragile, and it is
difficult to imagine their withstanding the rigors of the Iditarod. They are
about 22 inches high at the shoulder and weigh no more than 40 to 55 pounds
apiece; Bright picks them up effortlessly. The most apparent clue to their
northern ancestry is the eyes: luminescent white, with tiny pupils.

The dogs have been carefully cross-bred, many of them by Dunlap and some of them
by Bright, for speed and durability. There are strains of Siberian and malamute
in them, but they are mixed with those of speedier breeds - greyhounds,
whippets, even Afghans. ''The dogs that are traditionally thought of as
huskies,'' Dunlap explains, ''have a lot of strength, but they're just too slow.
We wanted a smaller dog that retained strength through the shoulder and could go
faster. This generally seems the trend among good sled dogs.''

These dogs are capable of ''double suspension,'' the technical term for a speed
dog's motion; it means that all four feet are off the ground during both
extension and collection (when they are gathered together under the dog at the
end of the stride). Double suspension is used, however, only when passing or
breakaway speed is required; the dogs' cruising stride is single-suspended,
meaning that one foot touches the ground in extension and collection.

Not long ago, Bright invited a visitor to watch a training run in Stephentown.
As the dogs were fastened in place they yelped, clawed the ground, strained at
their harnesses and shook in their eagerness to run. When all of them were in
place, Bright yanked loose the anchor, yelled at his lead dog, Grizzly, to move
it (mushers never actually say ''mush''; they sometimes say ''gee,'' meaning
''right,'' or ''haw,'' meaning ''left,'' but more often what they say is
unprintable), and the 17-dogpower machine took off. The training rig, which with
two men astride weighed close to 400 pounds, sailed along a flat dirt road at
close to 20 miles an hour.

In a race as long as the Iditarod the dogs will not run nearly as fast. The
first few days out of Anchorage, where the terrain is relatively flat and the
team's energy level is high, they should average close to 14 miles an hour.
After that, if all goes well, they will settle into a slightly slower pace, 10
to 12 miles an hour. In winning last year's Iditarod in 12 days and 15 hours,
Dean Osmar's team averaged roughly 12 miles an hour.

Not surprisingly, some of Bright's dogs are named for marathoners. There's B.J.
(for Garry Bjorklund), Roche (for Mike Roche), Deke (for Rob de Castella),
Rookie (for Alberto Salazar). There are also Grizzly, Junior and Spike, his
three best lead dogs. At the start, the team will be 17 or 15 dogs strong, with
a single leader - he will alternate three, or perhaps four, dogs in the lead -
and the remainder in pairs. If he reaches Nome, the team will probably have
dwindled to nine, or seven. Only the strongest dogs will make the entire run,
the others can be dropped off at the checkpoints, where they will be cared for;
the mushers leave food for these dogs and pick them up after the race. For the
sake of the dogs, race rules require that each team make one 24-hour stop.
Eighteen veterinarians will be stationed along the trail to care for injured or
fatigued animals.

Though he didn't finish two years ago, Bright has been in Nome when other
mushers have completed the Iditarod. The impression it left on him is vivid.
''The dogs are what it's all about,'' he said. ''Just seeing them come across
the finish line is enough to bring tears to your eyes. If you thought they were
the greatest athletes you'd ever seen when you started the race, by the time
it's over there is absolutely no doubt about it. They've gone hundreds and
hundreds of miles, their feet are sore, they can hardly move. But they look up
at you, and if you tell 'em to go straight ahead, that's all they want to hear.
They pick themselves up and go.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bob Bright (page 34); photo of man and team

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLINT EASTWOOD, SERIOUSLY

BYLINE: By John Vinocur

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6250 words


John Vinocur is the Paris bureau chief of The New York Times.







 THE SNOW HEAVED AND BILlowed theatrically, the wind groaned with a
sound-studio's boosted resonance, and halfway through a night frozen white and
jagged, an outtake from a Sergeant Preston of the Yukon movie, a Rolls and a
couple of big- boss BMWs discharged a small group of men at the bottom of the
stairway of a private plane at Riem Airport in Munich. Luftwaffe bombing runs to
Coventry or Rotterdam were called off on nights like this, but The Clint
Eastwood Magical Respectability and European Accolade and Adulation Tour moved
on. The Gulfstream's jet engines rumbled, a ground-crew type pleading, in
German, for an autograph was shown to the door, and the plane lifted itself into
the gale, carrying the actor and director, the world's most popular film star
over the last 15 years, to England.

The tour had started in Paris in January with a retrospective at the Cinemath
eque, and Eastwood's decoration by the Ministry of Culture as a Chevalier des
Arts et Lettres. Then it shifted to Munich for more of the same: the start of a
retrospective at the Filmmuseum there, and, as in France, the deep, wet embrace
of at least part of the country's film intellectuals.

As enterprises go, the tour was an intriguing one, bones being consciously
fitted under the flesh of Clint Eastwood's new, public embodiment as a very
important American film maker. As cultural, or political, phenomena go, it was
plain fascinating. Until a couple of years ago, Eastwood, actor or director, had
been consistently reviled as a cinematic caveman, a lowbrow and lunkhead
credited with a single, frightening trick: his Dirty Harry cop pictures seemed
to tap straight into the part of the American psyche where the nation's brutal,
simplistic and autocratic reflexes were stored. The great, foul audience,
guzzling diet cola and wolfing down whole cartons of Milk Duds, had been seduced
into roaring with base delight as Dirty Harry cleaned up murderers the
authorities would have left free. If you paid attention to many of the critics,
this was do-it-yourself justice, and pandering to redneck mindlessness.
Eastwood's approach, some Americans and Europeans insisted, was that of a
potential or proto-fascist; his Dirty Harry films were deeply, truly immoral. A
French writer pushed further: Eastwood was pure bully, pure bigot, America
looking for a new Vietnam. Hollywood, the argument ran, had finally cloned John
Wayne.

Then something changed, and the times, perhaps, caught up to Clint Eastwood.
Jane Fonda did knee bends; Yves Montand began to talk like Alexander Haig.
Encounter groups became a joke, Jimmy Carter told of beating off an assault by
an attack rabbit, the rhetoric of the 1960's fell through the floor, and the
critics switched direction on Eastwood's work like a crowd doing ''the wave'' at
a football game. Perhaps his best film, ''The Outlaw Josey Wales'' - all
outrage, and, most of all, fury against killing, brutality, and war - was made
in 1976, but no matter. Suddenly, in 1985, Dirty Harry, for some, is funny,
ironic, a fantasy, operatic in tone and politically prescient. ''Honkytonk Man''
gets compared to ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (''My God,'' the actor-director says).
The Eastwood acting style has evolved, adjectivally at least, from wooden to
spare or economical. Someone writes that he is a feminist film director. The
Guardian, the left-wing British newspaper, invites him to lecture on film, and
offers a half-page explanation of his tenderness under the mysterious headline,
''A Die-Hard Liberal Behind the Magnum Image.'' Uncharacteristically discreet
about such political transgressions, The Guardian spares its readers news of
Eastwood's occasional telephone conversations with President Reagan, a man the
newspaper treats as a knave or an ogre. Everywhere, all the good, warm,
trust-words come raining down: alienated, vulnerable, sensitive, self-
deprecating. Even Norman Mailer visited Eastwood for a beer and a little talk:
''He's one of the nicest people you ever met.'' ''Eastwood is an artist.'' ''He
has a Presidential face.'' ''Maybe there is no one more American than he.''

The Gulfstream is bucking forward someplace over France, heading for Luton
Airport, outside London, and Eastwood is being asked to talk a bit about respect
and his new respectability, about being deemed vulnerable, generous and terribly
significant, almost overnight, at age 54. He comes at answers slowly, hedging,
digressing, stalling artfully until he figures out what he wants to say. A man
with a good mind and a good memory, he has a knack for suspending a question,
like leaving a pot at the edge of burner, before pushing it back on the fire
when he is good and ready. The Munich segment, Eastwood agrees, keeping the pot
well from the flame, had not really followed the ''serious philosophy'' of the
tour (a Warner Brothers P.R. man's expression), but he considers it no great
loss because it had degenerated amusingly. There was a Spanish countess who had
gotten to interview him, asking questions about whether he wanted to act with
Greta Garbo - ''Who me, I don't have a foot fetish,'' comes Eastwood's exhausted
reply - and there was a television appearance on a variety show with an M.C.
described by Lennie Hirshan, Eastwood's agent, ''as the kind of guy Dirty Harry
would have shot if he had the opportunity.'' It could have been Joe Franklin on
a Tuesday afternoon: the actor's TV slot was between a kid who was going to see
how long he could swim in an icy river and a rock group called the Kane Gang. A
flack named Horst, who had been specifically told that Eastwood did not want to
receive a plaque on the show (a fan-mag job, and not consistent with the new
film-archives image), jimmied open a car's trunk to make sure he got one.

The Warner Brothers' jet descends and the conversation flattens, no clear
answers at hand. A digital altimeter on the passenger-cabin bulkhead ticks down,
800, 700, 500. Nothing to see through the windows except basic black. At 400
feet, a strange nonsound, a sense of nonmotion envelops the cabin. It is as if
the jet engines had been cut and the aircraft is adrift and powerless. Suddenly,
the plane tilts backward, and the passengers are jolted against the backs of the
seats. The Gulfstream pulls up hard and away.

A reporter on the tour, realizing that the plane had dropped to ground level and
then backed off when the pilot noticed the airport was invisible, broke into a
terrified sweat. When he looked around, he saw Eastwood climbing out of his seat
and heading for the cockpit. He was gone quite a while, and during that time,
the reporter, remembering that Eastwood as a soldier in the 1950's had been in a
plane that crash-landed off northern California, thought that if he were going
to see the man at all, well, here was his shot.

The plane ran through its approach again, the altimeter blinked down, and the
runway lights finally broke through the black. Eastwood returned. ''Were you
scared?'' he was asked.

''No,'' he said.

Either Eastwood was wholly bogus, a liar, which seemed unlikely, or he was
answering the question about vulnerability, and explaining why so many people
attach their fantasies to him, and why certain others have detested him so
completely. ''I just went up to watch the pilots work,'' he said. Painful as it
may be to some of his new admirers, Eastwood seems to be exactly what he's told
us about himself as Dirty Harry, or Josey Wales: cool, resolved, in control,
self-reliant, somehow not quite in reach. No need to read him too deeply. No
need to chisel tortured ambiguity, restlessness, into the granite of the distant
hero's face. With Clint Eastwood, you get what you see, what you've always seen.

Up close now, bearded, Eastwood's face has something legendary about it. Driving
past the Houses of Parliament in London, someone says that there is a statue of
Abraham Lincoln there, and someone else recalls a man telling Eastwood that he
looks more like Lincoln these days than Dirty Harry.

The remark seems to make him uncomfortable. He says nothing. He looks out the
window. Needled, kidded, treated like a third-rater for so long, respected so
late, he is essentially a wary man. He finds none of Dirty Harry's easy
derision, no one-line dart, to call on to make the Lincoln talk disappear.
Eastwood is condemned to saying what he thinks.

''You know,'' he says after a while, ''I'd like to know what the economics of
that were. I mean freeing the slaves. I'd like to know what was behind it.'' HAT
IS THIS JERK doing directing films we're not going to like when we don't even
like him as an actor?'' Clint Eastwood said that of himself recently, trying to
sum up the prevailing critical view of his work over the last 15 years.  It's an
old story. The cover of Life magazine on July 23, 1971, carried the actor's
picture and the caption, ''The world's favorite movie star is - no kidding -
Clint Eastwood.''

Mostly, Clint Eastwood has been a surprise and afterthought, even to himself. He
comes from an America where it is bad form to take yourself with gravity, to
sound too analytical, an America that will accept risk and loss but likes
pretense as little as it likes being pushed around. In hours of talking, the
phrase ''the body of my work'' comes out of his mouth once, and he looks
embarrassed, as if he wants it right back, so grand and unlike him does it
sound. He does not treat the metaphysical in any conventional way, and does not
make movies for dealers in subtexts, deep-readers, or people writing term
papers; his films work backward in terms of theme: They are stories first, ones
with human relationships that make Eastwood feel comfortable; later, someone,
perhaps himself, can come and say that one is about loyalty, or about
responsibility. Eastwood's thought process, he explains, runs to small units,
frame after frame. It's the way the family was, he says, looking for an irony.
''My dad's dream was to have a hardware store. I'm his son.'' The pride is
there, but the doubts dilute it every day.

''Did you once describe yourself as a bum and a drifter?'' someone asked him in
Paris.

''No,'' Eastwood answered.

''Then what are you?''

''A bum and a drifter.''

That was Paris, and the line was not so much thrown but flipped away in
Eastwood's modified Smothers Brothers, California deadpan. But the subject
returned in London, and Eastwood rubbed it again, a man massaging an old ache
that he assumes will last as long as he does.

''Wherever I came from, I always came out of left field. I wasn't predicted to
do anything. So it was easy to say that this guy was going nowhere. And then
when he does try to do something, maybe that disappoints the soothsayers who've
decided his type isn't supposed to do anything at all.''

His pride, his sense of what is right, is intense and at times it comes close to
a kind of puritanism. For an extraordinarily rich man, he gets extravagantly
upset about the money and time spent on making films. His own, financed and
distributed by Warner Brothers, and usually made by Malpaso, his production
company, are expedited as if there were Oscars for the fastest shoots and most
firsttakes to reach a final print. For a man who lives in the very protected
elegance of Carmel, Calif., his clothes often look like K Mart and Sears, but
this could be a kiss blown at his audience, the people who came to Clint
Eastwood pictures when Rex Reed was describing them as a ''demented exercise in
Hollywood hackery.''

Talking to people, he is gracious, tolerant, almost courtly. But he wants to be
left alone about his former wife, whom he divorced after 25 years of marriage,
and his friend, Sondra Locke, the actress, who frequently appears in his films.
Little bits of himself work loose though. ''I'm always appalled, just knocked
out by disloyalty,'' he says. ''I never think it's coming.'' He tends to trust
people, and sometimes wonders why:

''I was driving around my place in Carmel, and I saw this guy and his girl
camping on it. I thought, 'What the hell, they're probably having a great time,
let 'em stay.' Later, I went back, and they had left the place a mess. I felt I
had been had.''

When he talks about actors and films he likes, the names are not the Waynes and
the Stewarts, like himself, the redwoods of the American movies. Instead, they
are Montgomery Clift and James Cagney, Simone Signoret and Maggie Smith,
''Saturday Night and Sunday Morning'' and ''Breaker Morant.'' His descriptions
of them are kind but cool, with Eastwood saving his passions for his audience,
the single element, along with his instincts, that he seems to trust totally.

''I never second-guess audiences, because many times they're just so much
further ahead of you. And then sometimes, they miss what you think you've been
explaining so simply. So you can't second-guess. All you do is build on your own
instinctive reactions. That tells you what to do. You do it the best way you
know how, and you hope, of course, that somebody likes it.''

He insists he is ''no great intellect'' and is uncomfortable with ''analyzing
things too much.'' It is not a sham retreat by an intelligent man into some kind
of yokelism, but a very measured view of his own skills. He has always cut
dialogue out of his films, and limited exposition because he feels the audience
will catch on without it. Eastwood describes acting and directing as
''interpretive'' functions, activities at a somewhat lower rung on his creative
scale than writing a script. He waits for scripts, rather than commissioning
them on a theme that interests him. The character of Dirty Harry, for example,
was developed from a story by Harry Julian Fink and R.M. Fink. The script was
originally meant for Frank Sinatra, but he got sick, and Eastwood took over the
project, changing the personality of the detective. His next film, ''Pale
Rider,'' a western, is an exception to the pattern - Eastwood's notion of a
theme came first, and the movie was written to fit it. When he says he can pick
out a good script, but does not have the ability to write one from scratch, it
is as if he is drawing lines and saying: ''This is me. This isn't me. My
limitations are real.''

He harbors considerable anger against the critics who described him as an
apologist for violence and no-nothingism. ''Those are the kind of people who
become dictators and think they should run everybody. There's an awful lot of
people out there who want to tell everybody else what to do. . . . They're
always thinking in terms of all those poor lonely people who don't know anything
out there. It's just a giant ego running around. . . . They're putting
themselves above and looking down saying this is what the masses see.''

Eastwood insists that he does not fully understand the reversal in the critical
current about his work. The pattern of his films has not changed over the years
- a smaller, more detailed, more complicated film, and then a popular one,
broader in approach, the kind of enterprise that Graham Greene refers to as an
''entertainment,'' as opposed to a novel. The same critics who notice that Wes
Block, the cop in ''Tightrope,'' is vulnerable and has ''problems,'' may not
have paid much attention to the fact that Josey Wales, almost 10 years earlier,
had ''problems,'' too: His entire family was wiped out by marauders. Sometimes,
Eastwood says, he has the impression ''a couple of gray hairs don't hurt.''
Other times he assumes that the relative lack of commercial success of a couple
of his more ambitious films probably has been a positive factor - ''Some critics
just don't approve of too much effective screen presence or too much success.''
There is also the accumulation of continued effort: No one in Hollywood of any
stature works as much, or is as completely involved in every aspect of film
making.

Politics count, he knows, and he acknowledges, without elaborating, that a
change in the American and European political mood toward one closer to his
conservative instincts has probably played a role in the critical reassessment.
But the labels and tag words irritate him because he feels they have done him
harm. ''I don't know, I don't have an explanation other than the fact that maybe
there were certain prejudices in the times of Dirty Harry in 1971 that don't
exist now, or are changing now, or times are changing. Maybe I'm older, more
mature, maybe the audiences are changing and I'm changing. It's just
circumstances.''

Eastwood insists he is not sure how much he is enjoying the new respectability -
''maybe yes, in the back of my mind, but I'll hedge it'' - and the reason could
be that a lot of it may be based on what looks like a willful swelling, a
puffing up by critics of what he wants to say. The respect is there now, and
Eastwood cares about it, but with it came the ''liberal behind the Magnum''
headlines, and the kind of phrases, like the ones in the Cinemath eque
presentation that better fit what the critics would like to see than what
Eastwood has offered. One of the articles tacked on the ''hommage'' insisted
that if Eastwood were to do a film on the Vietnam War, he would be ''on the side
of the Vietnamese people, of course, just like he has been, minus any
sentimentalism, on the side of the Indian and black minorities.''

Eastwood is reminded of this and his face stays blank. When he thinks about the
last few years, he makes other points:

''I never begged for respectability.''

''I never said, 'Come, let me show you, come like me.'''

Then what do you need this trip for, someone asks.

''It's nice to come to Europe. It's nice to hear people say nice things, isn't
it?'' CLINT EASTWOOD grew up in about 10 different places in California in the
Depression as his parents moved around looking for work. He was not an Okie, he
says, and never went hungry, being told instead to eat everything on his plate,
and to think about the starving Armenians. He went to high school in Oakland in
a blue-collar neighborhood that also produced Billy Martin, the baseball
manager, and other Dirty Harrys. Nobody ever told him he was smart or promising.
The Army got to Eastwood around the time of Korea, but he taught swimming and
made friends with guys who wanted to be actors. He wound up in Los Angeles and
started L.A. City College on the G.I. Bill. He pumped gas and emptied garbage
cans. Universal Studios, hiring young flesh as contract players, gave him a job
for $75 a week. He got bit parts in giant tarantula and Francis the Talking Mule
movies. Eventually, Universal let him go, but he got a role in ''Rawhide,'' a
new television series that lasted seven years, and it brought him professional
skills and a kind of national popularity.

In 1964, Eastwood went to Europe, packing his own poncho, six-shooter and little
cigars, to make ''Fistful of Dollars,'' the first of three films that became
known as spaghetti westerns. Conceived by Sergio Leone, the Italian director,
they produced the Eastwood personage, and a controversy, that was to run, with
modifications, into the present through the Dirty Harry films. As ''The Man With
No Name,'' Eastwood was a western hero without the western's traditional heroic
characteristics. He had no sense of chivalry, no sense of regret, and an
approach to a witheringly violent world that could be justified as ludicrously
ironic, or condemned as a hired gun's cynicism and amorality.

Enormously successful outside the United States, but little more than cult
pictures at home, the Leone westerns were drawn so large, cut so close to a
grand guignol model in their freaky disproportions and black-comedy
excessiveness, that it took a determined intellectual effort not to classify
them as parody. If you were going to force a Great Metaphysical Theme onto the
films, a reasonable argument might have been this one: that they offered a
consciously fantastic and absurd nonreply to the dilemma of finding the right
response for violence that is insane and absurd. But Pauline Kael, the eminent
critic of The New Yorker, fused what she saw as the immorality of the spaghetti
westerns with the Eastwood character of Harry Callahan, the San Francisco
detective, who represented the actor's first stunning success in the United
States in 1971, and his entry into the arena of politics and myth. Turning her
view of their message into Eastwood's view of the world, she wrote, ''A tall,
cold cod like Eastwood removes the last pretensions to humane feelings from the
action melodrama. . . .'' He is offering ''a man who essentially stands for
nothing but violence,'' a ''hero of a totally nihilistic dream world.''


What Dirty Harry did in the 1970's was to outrun an American political
phenomenon by close to a decade. In the series involving the rebellious
detective, Eastwood caught a mood of blue-collar discontent with a country
portrayed in the films as being run by bureaucrats, sociologists, appeasers and
incompetents. American society's deepest incapacity, the Dirty Harry films said,
was in failing to protect the normal lives of its normal people, and its most
galling trait was rationalizing crime and the intolerable with
guidance-counselor jargon. In the films, the country is reduced to the scale of
San Francisco, and Dirty Harry roams the city, defying the bureaucracy and
restoring order. Better than anything else, Eastwood as Harry transmits a
mixture of irony and outrage about the fact that he, a reasonable kind of guy in
a Sears Roebuck sport coat, should have to be going through all this. Harry
responds to the mess with a very theatrical distance, a kind of hyper-coldness,
and if you watch the films again, it is about as hard to take Harry literally as
it is the almost-campy Eastwood of the spaghetti westerns.

In retrospect, the argument might be that all the killing was really cop-film
convention, and that now, with the wind blowing the other way on Eastwood, no
one gets morally outraged when a woman is stuffed into a clothes dryer in
''Tightrope,'' his much praised recent film. But there's more. What's lasted
from the Dirty Harry movies, and really gone from them into American folk
culture, isn't the hecatomb, but Harry's cool, and with it, the films' sense
that submission to violence is as morally reprehensible as creating it. The
films say it is possible not to cower. Looking at a gunman and wondering how
many shots he has left in his Magnum, Eastwood says, ''You've gotta ask yourself
one question: Do you feel lucky? . . . Well, do ya, punk?'' In another film, he
eggs a thug on, telling him, ''Come on, punk, make my day.'' To use the
anti-Eastwood critics' frame of reference, these are fantasies of omnipotence, a
phrase that doesn't fit Eastwood's style, but one whose reality he acknowledges.
Is Dirty Harry political? Yes, of course. Is Dirty Harry fascist, as Pauline
Kael has suggested? Ask the black audience with whom Eastwood has had enormous
popularity. The answer, instead, may be that Dirty Harry - like Eastwood's Josey
Wales - deals mainly with the audience's fears, its outrage at having to exhaust
itself in steering clear of trouble, and Harry's example as someone refusing to
bend or to run.

In the context of the early 1970's, in terms of America's view of itself then,
Dirty Harry wasn't a fascist, but a romantic, and a rather subversive one. By
1980, measured against the changes in the American political mood, Dirty Harry's
message looked vastly more ordinary. Ronald Reagan had become President, and
Clint Eastwood, obviously, had voted for him.

The success of the Dirty Harry series turned Eastwood into one of the great,
rich, traditional stars of the American film industry without making him an
acceptable, or even interesting, personality for a very substantial part of the
intellectual community that sets the country's cultural standards. In 1976,
after Eastwood directed the western ''High Plains Drifter,'' an article in
Esquire by Bruce Jay Friedman, the novelist and playwright, talked reverently
about his mythic qualities; Andrew Sarris of The Village Voice wrote favorably
about his work. But the tone of reviewers usually had a disbelieving edge. In
Europe, expressing a liking for Eastwood (once described by the left- wing Le
Nouvel Observateur as ''the reactionary antidote to the liberal young lions,
Hoffman and Redford'') was akin to lining up with barbarianism. ''The acting is
a riot,'' said Rex Reed of ''High Plains Drifter.'' ''The direction (by
Eastwood) is as interesting and as mobile as the rear end of Eastwood's horse.
I've seen better westerns at the Pepsi Cola Saloon in Disneyland.''

In the next years, Eastwood alternated movies aimed at mass audiences with
smaller, more personal films. One of these, ''Bronco Billy,'' a film about a
Wild West show troupe, followed ''Every Which Way But Loose'' and ''Any Which
Way You Can,'' Eastwood's two orangutan movies. ''Honkytonk Man,'' his film
about the deterioration of a country singer during the Depression - his first
picture that did not make money - was quickly compensated by ''Sudden Impact,''
the latest Dirty Harry, which took in great amounts of cash. Somewhere in the
early 1980's, the tidal flow had reversed, and Eastwood, directing films since
''Play Misty For Me,'' 1971, found himself being described as a man with an
oeuvre.

''Bronco Billy,'' a favorite when the Museum of Modern Art in New York offered
its Eastwood retrospective in 1980, is a fascinating example of how a
film-maker's work can be co-opted by critics who have decided, on their own
terms, that he is to be treated kindly. Caught in the French re-embrace of all
things American after decades of institutionalized anti-Americanism, Les Cahiers
du Cinema, probably the world's most hyper-intellectualized film review, spoke
of Eastwood's ''self- parodying subtlety'' and ''his perfectly sincere
humility'' in ''Bronco Billy,'' while describing the film's collection of losers
as people who ''have transcended the boredom of daily life and chosen to live in
a universe of poetry and the imagination.''

It is a partially blind read of the film. In rehabilitating Clint Eastwood and
making him fit for Guardian lectures and Chevalier des Arts et Lettres lapel
ribbons, it skips over the Eastwood who was the center of so much scorn all
these years, and who, while finding different tones and nuances, hasn't changed
so enormously. Bronco Billy, the two-bit Wild West show hero, never looks more
angry or less tolerant than when his friend tells him he deserted from the Army
in Vietnam. When a bunch of kids at an orphanage ask him if he ever kills
anybody, Bronco Billy explains ''no,'' and then adds in what is almost an aside
to the theater audience, well, not ''unless it's absolutely necessary.'' When
Bronco Billy allows himself to be humiliated by a policeman to get his deserter
friend off the hook, the very old-fashioned message is one of loyalty and
friendship. And the movie itself is wildly patriotic, urging everyone to dream
Big American Dreams: The little cowboy show is saved when the inmates of a home
for the criminally insane sew them a new big top, stitched together from
hundreds of American flags. If critics are going to take Clint Eastwood
seriously, they are missing the point if they ignore the final, joyous scenes of
the Bronco Billy troop reunited under a crazy quilt of red, white, and blue,
stars and stripes.


''I wanted to say something about everybody being able to participate,''
Eastwood said. ''America is the maddest idea in the world, put together by
madmen. So, here comes this tent. I suppose other people see America as a
collage of crazies. Well, maybe we are kind of hard to fathom.'' THE EUROPEAN
ACcolade and adulation tour bumped forward. Looking back from London, things had
gone well but imperfectly. On one hand, as if by common accord, nobody mentioned
''City Heat,'' the rather recent blip below the median line of what Positif,
another ambitious French film publication, grandly described as Eastwood's
ability to ''totally control his audience and his own universe, both
stylistically and mythologically.'' On the other hand, in Paris, Jack Lang, the
Minister of Culture, had another engagement and could not make it to the
Cinemath eque award ceremony. Lennie Hirshan took the green chevalier ribbon
anyway and later threaded it through the buttonhole of one of Eastwood's Dirty
Harry corduroy jackets. A man quietly checked the list of other American
cultural chevaliers of the Mitterrand era. They included Myron Karlin and Sidney
Sheinberg, studio executives at Warner and Universal; the investigator decided
not to tell Eastwood. John Huston became a member of the order in 1984, but with
a higher rank, commander. Maybe the French were still not convinced about
Eastwood's perfection.

The Germans, who followed one another into Eastwood's suite at the Vier
Jahreszeiten in Munich, asked the actor continuously about the New York subway
vigilante. One young man, apparently hoping to nail Eastwood as a fascist, or to
pronounce him reformed and contrite - Eastwood would later call the visitor
''the Wehrmacht lieutenant'' - failed on both scores. Eastwood insisted there
was something pretty significant about the wave of sympathy for the vigilante;
he also said he didn't approve of people shooting other people because their dog
had urinated on their lawn, a line, he pointed out, that came from a 10-year-old
Dirty Harry picture.

In London, the Daily Mail, noting that Europe was suddenly discovering
Eastwood's ''hidden depths,'' announced his arrival with the headline: ''Dirty
Harry Gets Arty.'' Lord Snowdon was waiting for him, having turned two rooms at
Claridge's into photographic studios. ''As you know,'' Eastwood's typed
itinerary said, ''Snowdon is one of most respected portrait photographers
working today. His family connections on his wife's side (his first wife's side)
are also not to be sneezed at (!).'' The photographer asked the actor-director
to wear black for his pictorial immortalization. He said he was thinking of
doing a photo book about stars, titled, very tentatively, ''Twinkle, Twinkle.''

A man from The Guardian came, furiously intent on liking Eastwood, but on his
own terms. At first, he seemed hopeful that Eastwood would say that his film
''Honkytonk Man'' was about the death of the American Dream. He did not; it was
not. Then, he seemed interested in drawing Eastwood into confessing that his own
youth was hard and bleak, and perhaps, from there, into some psychopolitical
construct: a 54-year-old man finally coming to terms with his youth and the
working class? Eastwood would not bite; he chewed on an apple instead, and told
a couple of companions later that he saw ''that failed American Dream stuff
coming a mile away.''

Wherever he went, the bottom-line question was really whether he was going to be
President of the United States. The question usually came cautiously wrapped,
maybe with a reference to an actor- President who also had been upstaged in a
movie by a monkey co-star, but the intent was serious.

And why not? So many people were finding so much in him, co-opting the details
that made them feel comfortable, ignoring the rest. Clint Eastwood: Very
un-freaky, likes Oskar Werner and ''Amadeus'' and jazz, works out every day; or:
displays a Californian's fascination about diet (fish extract, thyons and things
called cholines), owns a bunch of expensive cars, thinks hunting is obsolete;
or: rather likes guns, says he worries about the environment, fears losing his
luggage in airports, and photographed right, looks not entirely unlike Abraham
Lincoln.''

After all, Eastwood had already laid out his positions. It was clear from
''Firefox,'' another blip under the Cinemath eque median of high artistic
achievement, that Eastwood did not trust the Russians much, although not in any
obsessive proportions since he believed that John Milius's ''Red Dawn,''
described widely as of the loony-right and paranoid, was not a very good movie.
The nation knew where he stood on law and order, and ''Honkytonk Man,'' a film
set unromantically in the Depression, made it clear he didn't approve of poverty
as a builder of character; the problem in helping the poor was education and
incentive, he said. His audience was aware he voted for Nixon, and Eastwood
described Reagan as ''a very nice guy - I like him.'' He was a Republican, he
acknowledged, but not doctrinaire, defining people with very ideological
positions as ''the most boring guys in the world.'' The right-to-life groups
made him nervous since they seem to lead to people bombing abortion clinics, and
the born-again types did, too, since how could Clint Eastwood be sure, or the
Russians for that matter, that one of them, near the nuclear trigger, might not
decide that everyone, atheists excluded, would be much happier in the hereafter.

He felt strongly about civil rights, he said, and he felt strongly about the
need for less government and fewer taxes. Eastwood also felt he knew something
about America, perhaps in the way that a Lee Iacocca or a mailman or a mechanic
did. In the last elections, he saw that Mondale ''was going to all these fringe
groups, but he forgot about the people in the middle. Mr. and Mrs. America out
there were saying: 'What is this about? We don't care about that. What about
us?'' '

And he noticed other things. When he was planning to film ''Escape From
Alcatraz'' in the 1970's, he sought permission from the National Park Service to
use the abandoned prison island, turned into a park. ''In order to film we
promised to clean the place up, to paint it. That meant in particular painting
over the graffiti that was left behind by Indians who occupied the island in a
protest thing.''

The Eastwood squint narrowed, his portrayal of reason about to clash with
nonsense. ''So we did our little presentation, and the Park Service guy said,
'No, no, you can't paint that over. It's part of our history.'''.

Eastwood let his view of the world sink in. It is not Dirty Harry outrage, but a
kind of can-you-believe-this look that assumes total agreement. ''Well, that's
the way the country was,'' he said. Eventually, he explains, he convinced people
to let him paint and restore the buildings on Alcatraz, and he seems now to look
back at the situation as if it had some kind of symbolic value, a little victory
for what he considers good sense. ''I think things have changed a bit in the
meanwhile,'' he said. Straight, no subtext.

But there was a problem.

''I've never thought of myself as . . . first of all, I wouldn't be able to
operate in that kind of . . . ''

Why? someone asked.

'' 'Cause I'm not . . .''

Because you aren't a liar?

''I guess I can lie like anybody else, but I don't like it. I'd hate to exist
constantly, day- in, day-out, having to come up with something. Having to come
up with something whether it's the truth, a variation of the truth or whether
it's an outright lie or variations on a lie.''

The Presidency talk amused him, he said, ''but what I think was being referred
to was just a physical look, a look that he thought might inspire some sort of
credibility with the public. It's just thinking out loud. I don't think it's
meant to say I am the best prepared. I'm probably the least prepared.''

Eastwood smiled. The next question was: ''Would you have liked to make movies
with Greta Garbo?'' SOMEPLACE DURING the award ceremony at the Cinemath eque,
the movie museum in the Palais de Chaillot, Pierre Viot, who made the
presentation, began to talk about ''the abyss of perplexity'' that Eastwood had
created for reviewers and students of film. He threw in a couple of references
to paradoxes, heroes and anti-heroes, to an ''America that is not summarily
Manichaean'', construction or destruction, contradictions, and even quoted a
Dirty Harry line - ''I'm afraid you've got the wrong idea about me.''

Somebody hunting for a paradox might have sought to look at Eastwood's face at
that moment. The oils of annointment were being poured on full force, but he was
being drowned in explanations that didn't reflect Eastwood as much as an
intellectual establishment's difficulties in classifying him - and its race to
mark him down matured, reformed, liberal, or whatever.

The joke was close to enormous. The strained exegesis of Eastwood and his work
mostly showed the impossibility of his existing as a man who is what he seems.
Now, Eastwood had got institutionalized respect, but at a price: being told
about representing 17 levels of ambiguity and enigma, and then, as the most
popular film star in the world, hearing Mr. Viot tack on a peculiar indignity:
''You really are someone'', he told Eastwood. ''You really have something to
say.''

Later, a man would ask Eastwood a question he asked a couple of times before:
What did you go through all this for?

''Well, it's like this,'' Eastwood said, his voice the same soft monotone of all
his films, of Bronco Billy, of Josey Wales, of Harry Callahan. ''They're pretty
nice people. And I hadn't been in Europe for a while.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Wayne (page 21); photo of Cary Grant (page 21); photo of
Clark Gable (page 21); photo of Rudloph Valentino (page 21); photo of Clint
Eastwood (page 20); photo of Clint Eastwood (page 19); photo of Clint Eastwood
(page 18); photo of Clint Eastwood

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NO MORE FAMOUS VICTORIES

BYLINE: By D.J.R. Bruckner; D.R.J. Bruckner is an editor of The New York Times
Book Review and co-author of ''Art Against War''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


THE OXFORD BOOK OF WAR POETRY

Chosen and Edited by Jon Stallworthy.  358 pp. New York: Oxford University
Press. $19.95.

WHO now would write poetry to praise with Henry Newbolt those who ''count the
life of battle good?'' It is difficult enough for us to understand Richard
Lovelace going to the wars writing, ''I could not love thee, dear, so much, /
Loved I not honour more.'' Byron noted that ''martial immortality'' was a fading
reward. It is gone now. The spirit of the heroes of World War II was caught by
Louis Simpson who makes us remember ''how hands looked thin / Around a
cigarette, and the bright ember / Would pulse with all the life there was
within.'' James Tate, in ''The Lost Pilot,'' the remarkable poem about his
father who died in that war when the poet was a baby, sees his father not among
fabled heroes in the constellations, but in a ''crazy orbiting'' around the
poet's world ''like a tiny, African god'' whom the poet can never reach and who
passes overhead fast, perfect, and unwilling to tell me that you are doing well,
or that it was mistake that placed you in that world, and me in this; or that
misfortune placed these worlds in us.


World War II inspired superb poetry, one is reminded by selections Jon
Stallworthy includes in ''The Oxford Book of War Poetry'' - poems by Randall
Jarrell, Lincoln Kirstein, James Dickey and others. But they are a world away
from the poetry of World War I, and not only because the outstanding voices of
the earlier conflict were English and those of the later one American. To the
democratic Americans the personal voice comes more naturally than it did to an
English soldier of the empire; it was a tone set during the Civil War, in poems
by Whitman, Melville, Emily Dickinson, even Julia Ward Howe. But the real
difference is that until World War I many poets in England believed the life of
battle could be good. They were a special breed.

Mr. Stallworthy comes well prepared to write about that breed. His biography of
Wilfred Owen swept the field of prizes when it appeared; he is the definitive
editor of Owen's poems and his knowledge of war literature is wide. In his
introduction to this anthology he traces the lineage of the World War I poets to
the 19th-century English public school, its curriculum chock full of ancient
heroic poetry which upper-class youth took as personal inspiration. By 1918 the
ideal had died with the class in the trenches. The emotional power of the poems
written by the best of the group comes not only from their recognition of the
degradation and hopelessness of soldiers, but from a feeling they were turning
their backs on their upbringing. They could never again believe with James
Thomson that ''guardian angels'' sang the refrain of his hymn, ''Rule,
Britannia!''

But they did leave behind, in David Jones's phrase, effective words: ''How
intolerably bright the morning is where we who are alive and remain, walk lifted
up, carried forward by an effective word.'' That is from ''In Parenthesis,'' a
surprise to find here. There are more surprises. Hugh MacDiarmid's epitaph on
mercenaries, in response to Housman's famous one, is fine and fierce. Robert
Lowell's translations from Rimbaud's ''Eighteen-Seventy'' are inspired. Among
the good translations in the anthology, none is more unexpected than a version
from Anglo-Saxon by Tennyson of ''The Battle of Brunanburh,'' a 10th-century
poem about the English defeat of the Vikings who had been supported by the Scots
and Welsh - ''Earls,'' the Tennyson version says, ''that were lured by the /
Hunger of glory.'': Many a carcase they left to be carrion, Many a livid one,
many a sallow-skin - Left for the white-tailed eagle to tear it, and Left for
the horny-nibbed raven to rend it, and Gave to the garbaging war-hawk to gorge
it, and That gray beast, the wolf of the weald.


Mr. Stallworthy's selections begin with the Old Testament and come up through
Greece, Rome and the Middle Ages before the poetry of the Renaissance appears.
Even much of that is not so familiar. Since Mr. Stallworthy excludes dramatic
verse, we get not Shakespeare but Michael Drayton on the battle of Agincourt and
Samuel Daniel, not Shakespeare, on the Wars of the Roses. Excerpts can be
unsatisfying except as reminders, but one here, an angelic battle taken from
''Paradise Lost,'' reveals new meanings out of context. It might just be a
battle, but it could be also an ironic comment on the wars of Cromwell's era.

Mr. Stallworthy never really defines war poetry. Is Chaucer's Knight's Tale a
war poem? Here it is, in Dryden's version. Did Wordsworth or Coleridge ever
write war poems during the time of Napoleon? The choices here leave one in
doubt. Versions Mr. Stallworthy gives of poems by Adam Mickiewicz, Victor Hugo
and Fyodor Tyutchev about the Napoleonic wars have such power that they make one
doubt the two English Romantics' emotions overflowed at all. (Thomas Hardy's
certainly did in ''The Dynasts'' and it is instructive to compare him with the
two great Romantics.)

Two groups of poems are problematic. Those about Vietnam and Cambodia are oddly
distant. It is hard to imagine them surviving long in people's memories. They
were written by poets who have big reputations, but who seem not personally
involved, and one wonders why translations of a few Vietnamese poems or some by
soldiers are not given. The same problem of emotional distance marks the poems
about the Spanish civil war. Here are Louis MacNeice, Auden and Orwell. Perhaps
they should be here; that war attracted participants from many places who were
drawn to it by all kinds of social causes. But it was a Spanish war, after all,
and Spanish poets might be allowed a word about it, even in an Oxford anthology.
Mr. Stallworthy could have satisfied his rule that translations would be
included only if they are good English poems, and still have given powerful
Spanish poems about the war - for instance, translations of Garcia Lorca or
Rafael Alberti.

Anyone who has surveyed the literature of any war knows how much is written at
the time and how little survives a generation. But ''The Oxford Book of War
Poetry'' reminds one of the large numbers and great variety of war poems from
many centuries that are very good poems. Mr. Stallworthy's selections include
most of the best, at least the best in English. They also remind one of many
others he could not include if the book was to be kept to a comfortable size,
and that too is a measure of how shrewd a judge he is.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORIES OF VIETNAM WAR ARE SHOWN IN HARTFORD EXHIBIT

BYLINE: By Robert A. Hamilton

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 22, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


NOT all the memories that Jacques von Schneden brought home after three years in
Vietnam were bad.  He recalled, for instance, the time he and four Vietnamese
friends took a jeep and roamed the countryside as tourists, instead of soldiers.

''I came home with thousands of slides,'' Mr. von Schneden, of Farmington, said.
And now, 20 years after his Vietnam experience, he has found a way to ''deal
with'' his memories through art.

''Cham Con,'' his 1984 oil painting of a Vietnamese girl, was painted from one
of those slides he brought home. Mr. von Schneden is one of 30 Connecticut
artists and Vietnam veterans whose works comprise a multi- media display
entitled, ''Back in the World.'' The show will run through March 8 at the Aetna
Gallery at 205 Farmington Avenue in Hartford.

''I think it's great, because it shows what we've been doing since the war in a
positive light,'' said Kenneth Polanski of Wallingford, another of the
exhibitors. ''Many people are frightened of Vietnam veterans, but if you look
around the work here, they're very sensitive people.''

Mr. Polanski's works in the exhibit are several color photographs and 11 wooden
chessmen that were carved from gunstocks.

Some of the works are war related, such as John Puzzo's ''En Route to Mission,''
a black- and-white photograph of a heavily armed soldier standing in the door of
a helicopter.

''I printed that picture 12 years later, and it blew me away,'' Mr. Puzzo, of
West Hartford, said. ''I remember the guy's name, I remember the mission, I
remember everything.''

Many of the art works have no connection with the war, however. Mr. Puzzo's
photographs of several eastern Connecticut landscapes stand in stark contrast to
his single war photo.

But the artists say that what they saw in their years overseas has left its mark
on them.

''After Vietnam,'' said Jeanne Marie Christie, an exhibitor, ''my ceramic bowls
and other works had a very Oriental influence. I guess it never really leaves
you.'' Miss Christie, of Milford, served in the Red Cross during the war.

''Back in the World'' was the idea of Jill A. Mishkel, a former Army nurse from
Glastonbury. Three years ago she went to a show at the Arsenal Gallery in New
York that featured war-related works by Vietnam veterans.

Miss Mishkel said she came home determined to put together an exhibit of works
by Connecticut Vietnam veterans, but ''it was frustrating.''

''I called up all sorts of galleries and talked to all sorts of people, and what
it came down to was I needed $25,000 to put the show on,'' Miss Mishkel said.

She said he had never applied for government or corporate sponsorship for the
arts, so she contacted Whitey Jenkins, whom she knew through her work at the
Vietnam Vet Center in Hartford.

Mr. Jenkins is an art consultant to the Aetna Corporation, and has put together
four previous exhibits in the year-old Aetna Gallery, all of them focusing on a
specific theme, such as the Solidarity movement in Poland, the topic of a
previous show.

''Based on the number of vets there are in Connecticut, I figured there had to
be a lot of artists among them,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''I told Aetna I thought
this was real important. I wanted a celebration of what Vietnam veterans are
doing today, not to be retrospective or political.''

Although there were numerous other ideas for exhibits, Mr. Jenkins got approval
to proceed with the show.

A committee of six Vietnam veterans from the Vet Center, including Mr. Jenkins
and Miss Mishkel, began meeting last August to discuss a name for the exhibit.

''We threw out a lot of names at that first meeting, titles we thought would be
appropriate,'' recalled Roy W. Driver, director of the Vet Center and a member
of the committee. At a meeting just before Thanksgiving, the committee decided
on ''Back to the World.''

'' 'Back to the World' was a term used to describe coming back to the U.S. after
your tour of duty,'' Mr. Driver explained.

John Del Vecchio, a Newtown writer with his works on display in the exhibit,
uses the term in his book, ''13th Valley.''

Mr. Jenkins said he wanted to limit the exhibit to 18 artists, but as he
screened the work of 75 veterans who answered his newspaper advertisements, he
could narrow the list to no fewer than 30.

''Most of them have never been in an art show before, have never thought that
their work would be in a gallery setting,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''But I think it's
really important to show what they're doing now.''

The show has 126 works in different media such as paintings, photographs, books,
music and sculpture.

For the exhibitors, the opportunity to show their work together was welcome.

''There's a real sense of camaraderie,'' Mr. Jenkins said.

Mr. Polanski said he hoped this would notbe the last time the artists gather
their works under one roof.

''We have a lot of things to say,'' Mr. Polanski said, ''and an art show is one
of the ways to say them.''

The exhibit is free and open to the public from noon to 3 P.M. Saturdays and
Sundays, and by appointment during the week. Call 232-2417.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COST OF LIBEL SUITS PROMPTS CALLS TO ALTER SYSTEM

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


The public debate over libel law that raged with special intensity in the recent
trials pitting Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS News and Ariel Sharon
against Time magazine has often seemed a standoff between two warring
camps.Those who side with the press say the risk of a costly libel suit could
deter news organizations, particularly smaller ones, from reporting aggressively
on controversial matters. Those who side with critics of the press say libel law
makes it too hard for officials and others to protect their reputations against
falsehoods. Both camps think the law should be changed, but in opposite
directions.

However, there is also a surprising amount of agreement among experts on both
sides about what is wrong with libel law and, to a lesser extent, about some
changes that might be considered. And a move is under way to hold Congressional
hearings on the matter.

Costly for Both Sides

Some prominent lawyers and academics agree that trying a libel case has become
too costly and complex for plaintiffs and defendants alike. For example, the
cases of General Westmoreland and of Mr. Sharon, the former Israeli Defense
Minister, both ground through millions of dollars in legal expenses only to end
ambiguously, with each side claiming victory.

In an interview weeks before the settlement of the Westmoreland case, Dan M.
Burt, who was the chief attorney representing the general in his $120 million
suit, said that ''the present system is appalling.''

He said the law ''gives the libeled public figure, and in many states today the
libeled private figure, no opportunity for redress, and the effort of a lifetime
gets destroyed.''

On the other hand, he said, ''it puts parties on both sides into appallingly
expensive wars, it permits an extraordinary intrusion into the editorial mind of
the publisher,'' and it may not adequately protect small news organizations
against ''being trampled to death with megaverdicts.''

New Option Proposed

There is a kernel of agreement that it might make sense to give officials, and
perhaps others who are willing to forgo suing for large monetary damages, an
option of filing a simplified suit. In such an action, the only issue would be
the truth or falsity of an injurious report, without regard to whether the
defendant was reckless or negligent.

The reasoning is that everyone fares badly under the current system, because the
possibility of large damage awards has led the courts to make it more difficult
for plaintiffs to win any redress, has intensified the legal combat and has made
some news organizations reluctant to admit errors.

Public figures who are victims of false allegations have difficulty winning
vindication because they must prove defendants guilty of knowing or reckless
falsehoods, and plaintiffs who are not public figures must prove negligence.
Defendants who publish controversial allegations may face millions of dollars in
damages if they are sued and lose. Even victory comes at a heavy price - long,
arduous, expensive and often embarrassing legal combat.

'It's Too Expensive'

''Over all, it's too expensive for both plaintiffs and defendants,'' said
Michael McDonald, general counsel of the American Legal Foundation, a
conservative group that often criticizes press reports and seeks to help
plaintiffs in libel suits.

Although there is widespread agreement that multimillion-dollar extravaganzas
are a severely flawed way to settle libel disputes, there is considerable
disagreement about how the law should be changed.

The kinds of changes that seem to have the broadest appeal, such as allowing
lawsuits for judicial declarations of falsity without monetary damages, would
probably have to be made by Congress or state legislatures. Both have
traditionally left development of libel law to the courts, and before such
measures could be passed they would have to overcome concern about possible
Constitutional problems. They would also face the difficulty of building
political consensus in so controversial an area.

'A Lot of Rethinking'

But as Floyd Abrams, who often represents news organizations in libel cases,
said in an interview, ''this death grip of libel litigation, which leads to
elephantine costs and awful personal results on some of the participants, is one
which has led a lot of people to do a lot of rethinking.''

He added, ''I think there's a growing consensus that there must be a way to
permit public figures who believe that their reputations may have been unjustly
tainted or destroyed to go to court while still assuring the press will function
actively and robustly in reporting about such people.''

Mr. Burt, Mr. Abrams and others, including Prof. Marc A. Franklin of Stanford
Law School, and Jonathan W. Lubell, a New York lawyer who represents the
plaintiff in a libel suit that still awaits trial after 11 years, all said that
some change in the law might be desirable. But they disagreed about how such
changes should work.

Differences on Details

Professor Franklin and Mr. Abrams, for example, said they might favor allowing
officials and others who are willing to forgo seeking monetary damages the
option of suing for judicial findings of falsity, without having to prove
recklessness or knowledge of falsity.

Professor Franklin has developed a detailed proposal for legislation of this
kind, which, like most similar proposals, would ordinarily require the losing
party in a libel suit to pay the winner's legal expenses. ''The objective is to
promote settlement,'' he said. His plan would also make victory more difficult
for plaintiffs who elect to sue for monetary damages.

But Mr. Burt and Mr. Lubell, who said the costliness of libel suits ''impinges
more heavily on plaintiffs'' than on defendants, said that the option of a
declaratory judgment would be attractive to plaintiffs only if a losing news
organization could be ordered to publish a retraction of statements found to be
false.

Constitutionality Questioned

Mr. Abrams and Professor Franklin both said that any law requiring retractions
would be unacceptable and perhaps unconstitutional, although a law designed to
encourage retractions as a means of settling disputes without monetary damages
might pass muster.

Many news executives and their lawyers would also be wary of tampering with the
libel law framework that the Supreme Court has laid down to protect the press in
a series of First Amendment rulings beginning with The New York Times v.
Sullivan in 1964. That decision held that a public official seeking damages for
libel must prove intentional or reckless falsity.

Thus, it is very much in doubt whether any proposed legislation could command
the agreement of many press advocates as well as press critics, or could pass
muster with the Supreme Court.

But Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, said that he hoped
to persuade a House subcommittee chairman to hold hearings on the matter.

''I think the system is rotten for both plaintiffs and defendants,'' he said. He
described himself as a ''strong defender of the First Amendment'' and of the
right of the press to engage in robust criticism. But he expressed concern that
under current law ''virtually every public official'' has been been the victim
of false news reports, with ''almost no redress unless you get into one of those
lengthy suits.''

''I just sense that there is a solution,'' Mr. Schumer said, ''and the question
is: Does Congress play a role in that solution?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


THE PENTAGON AND THE ART OF

WAR: The Question of Military Reform. By Edward N. Luttwak. 333

pages. Illustrated with charts. Institute for Contemporary Studies/Simon

& Schuster. $17.95.  LIKE so many vocal observers, Edward N. Luttwak is highly
critical of the American military establishment. In his new book, ''The Pentagon
and the Art of War: The Question of Military Reform,'' he questions the emphasis
that the Reagan Administration is putting on matters of defense, he wonders at
the way our defense budget is allocated, and he expresses skepticism over the
seriousness with which we take the threat of Soviet military might.

But there is a difference between Mr. Luttwak and most critics on the scene
these days. He thinks we put too little emphasis on matters military. He
believes that we need more so- called ''waste and mismanagement'' in the
Pentagon's development of weapons. He doubts that we take the Russian threat
nearly serious enough. In short, Mr. Luttwak shares the view that there is waste
in the Pentagon. But he thinks the source of the waste is different from what
other vocal critics believe.

Mr. Luttwak is a Senior Fellow in Strategic Studies at Georgetown University's
Center for Strategic and International Studies, and serves as a consultant to
the Defense and State Departments. His half-dozen previous books include ''The
Grand Strategy of the Soviet Union,'' ''Dictionary of Modern War,'' and ''The
Political Uses of Sea Power.'' In ''The Pentagon and the Art of War,'' he
identifies what he believes to be the symptoms, the sources, and the
consequences of our defense-system ailments, and he proposes an astonishingly
simple program for reform. In fact, his whole analysis is a model of ease and
clarity.


To put his case even more simply than he does: the symptoms he identifies are
our failure in virtually every military engagement that we have undertaken since
Vietnam, as well as our continuing inability to match Soviet military strength
with a properly balanced array of nuclear and conventional forces. (He believes
that the Russians have now achieved nuclear parity with the United States,
which, coupled with their superior nonnuclear forces, creates a highly dangerous
situation.) The problem he sees simply as the cancerous growth of the American
command bureaucracy since 1945, exacerbated by a swelling of the ratio of the
chiefs to the Indians, and the lack of a single integrated authority to tell the
chiefs what to do.

The reform he proposes is to ''provide a central military staff that can present
the true choices of national military strategy for the policy decisions of the
President and Secretary of Defense.'' The head of such a National Defense Staff,
as he calls it, ''would be the nation's chief military officer: not a
commander-in-chief, of course, but rather a chief adviser, as the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs now is - except that instead of quite suddenly having to think
in multiservice terms after a lifetime devoted to one service, that chief
adviser will have had many years of experience as a national-defense officer.''

The rank and file of such a staff would provide an integrated strategic overview
all the way down the chain of command - something that has been sorely lacking
for decades now and, in Mr. Luttwak's view, accounts for every recent American
military disaster, from the failure of the Iranian hostage-rescue mission to the
terrorist bombing of the Marine headquarters in Beirut.

What Mr. Luttwak writes makes solid sense, providing of course that the reader
believes in some sort of defense system for nations, and accepts the author's
hypothesis that the best way to prevent war is to prepare for it. His logic is
precise: ''Just as the invader is always peaceful - for he seeks only to advance
and not to fight, while it is his victim who causes war by resisting - so the
Soviet Union has every reason to avoid nuclear war, because it is now stronger
than the West in the nonnuclear military forces.'' His statistics are
illuminating: for instance, they reveal, surprisingly, that the portion of the
military budget devoted to strategic nuclear forces went from 7 percent under
President Carter - ''the arms- controller,'' as Mr. Luttwak calls him - to only
10 percent under President Reagan, ''the great advocate of nuclear strength.''


His explanation of the differences between military and civilian logic makes one
understand why Congress's incessant review of military appropriations may
possibly be missing the whole point. Indeed, Mr. Luttwak's case seems so
compelling and straightforward, a reader must wonder why it wasn't implemented
yesterday. He himself offers some answers when he writes that ''the new cadre of
nonservice officers will immediately evoke the dread prospect of all-service
unification, arousing much Congressional opposition for all sorts of reasons,
from the plain sentimentality of some veterans, to antique fears of military
usurpation by armed forces that are no longer divided.'' He adds: ''Other
Congressmen will decry the 'elitism' of the reform, which would reserve the
higher command of the forces and the national advisory role to a small body of
selected officers.''

My own question is whether his proposal for reform isn't just too rational. As
he points out several times, America's system for military accomplishment has
always followed a pattern of being unprepared at the start, of failing at first,
and of reorganizing while fighting, cranking up our industrial base, and finally
overwhelming the enemy with more equipment and personnel - in short, by getting
bigger, not smarter. To alter that pattern might involve deeper changes in the
way we live than we would want to make.

On the other hand, as this book also points out emphatically, no one is likely
to get bigger than the Soviet Union. So maybe it's time we got a little smarter.
And maybe Mr. Luttwak has shown us part of the way.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edward Luttwak

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ARGENTINE ACTIVIST, AT U.N., DENOUNCES CHILE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Feb. 25


Adolfo Perez Esquivel, Argentine human rights activist, met today with Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate, to express concern about rights
violations in Chile and elsewhere in Latin America.

Speaking through an interpreter at a news conference before the meeting, Mr.
Perez Esquivel called the Chilean regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet ''one of the
bloodiest dictatorships in Latin America.''

He said repression in Chile had intensified.

''For this reason, it is incomprehensible that the Reagan Administration holds
that the situation has improved,'' he said.

Last week, at the end of a visit to Chile, Langhorne A. Motley, the Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, said, ''The destiny of Chile is
in Chilean hands - in good hands.''

On Central America, Mr. Perez Esquivel expressed concern over the consequences
of a breakdown in the Contadora peace process and in United States-Nicaraguan
discussions.

''We will have a second Vietnam with serious consequences not only for Central
America but for the world in its totality,'' he said.

Mr. Perez Esquivel, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1980 for his advocacy of
human rights, was visiting the United Nations at the end of a 12- day speaking
tour of the United States. His news conference was sponsored by the Fellowship
of Reconciliation, an interfaith pacifist organization.

He also presented a letter to the Chilean delegate, Pedro Daza, calling for the
release from prison of political prisoners, labor leaders and student activists;
an end to the state of siege imposed in November; information on thousands of
people who have been detained or have disappeared, and legalization of political
parties as a precondition for the return to democracy.

After the meeting, Mr. Daza said in a statement that he could not transmit the
letter to his Government ''because of the absolute lack of evidence to back up
the charges.''

While Mr. Perez Esquivel focused on the situation in Chile, Dr. Kirkpatrick, at
a news conference of her own, spoke about rights violations in Cuba.

Dr. Kirkpatrick has been critical of what she calls a ''double standard'' on
human rights, in which some countries like Chile and El Salvador are criticized,
while others like Cuba are not.

At her news conference, Dr. Kirkpatrick introduced three former Cuban political
prisoners who were freed last year during the visit of the Rev. Jesse Jackson to
Cuba. They spoke of brutality and said 15,000 political prisoners were in Cuban
jails.

One of the three, Andres Vargas Gomez, a former diplomat who spent 21 years in
prison for his role in the United States-backed Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961,
read a list of names of prisoners who he said had died during detention.

After each name, a group of Cuban exiles in the audience answered, ''Presente,''
meaning that the dead were ''present'' in spirit.

Two Soviet-bloc journalists, a Cuban and an East German, walked out in protest,
and the East German lodged a complaint against the presence of unauthorized
people at a news conference and the use of the United Nations briefing room for
political demonstrations.

Only accredited reporters are allowed to attend news conferences, although
conference hosts may bring guests.

Mr. Vargas Gomez, in response to a question, said he was ''absolutely opposed''
to the restoration of full diplomatic relations between the United States and
Cuba.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON FASHION

BYLINE: By Anne-Marie Schiro

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


CARLOS FALCHI has all kinds of news brewing, both here and abroad. Here, at
Bloomingdale's to be precise, he is getting his own boutique. It's opening
Thursday in Cul-de-Sac between Fendi and Chanel, and there will be no mistaking
his soft and pouchy bags for theirs. Then, come April, he is opening a shop on
the Left Bank in Paris, on Rue Bonaparte. He will show his first collection of
ready-to-wear in the unfinished Paris shop in March and later in New York. He
says the collection will consist of printed leathers, knits and coordinated silk
blouses.

If French designers can bring their clothes and their boutiques here, why can't
it work the other way around, he reasons. Why, indeed? After all, Coach
Leatherware, which is as American as the pony express, has had a shop in Paris
for seven years, and it's still going strong.


SAKS FIFTH AVENUE has decided that fashion is O.K., but it isn't for everyone
all the time. Some people, and some occasions, call for Real Clothes. That's the
store's new line of private-label sportswear that will be sold through a
mail-order catalogue coming out in mid-March. The catalogue will be called, of
course, Real Clothes.

According to Saks, ''real clothes'' are the classics many people like to wear on
the weekend in the country or in the suburbs almost anytime. That means
T-shirts, sweatshirts, cotton pullover sweaters, twill trousers, button-down
oxford shirts and cashmere cardigans.

The store suddenly realized that while it was concentrating on fashion, people
were ordering these basics from L. L. Bean and such places. As Ellin Saltzman,
Saks's fashion director, put it, ''There's a lot of antifashion fashion going
on.'' And Saks wants a piece of that apple pie.


IF your name were Veronique

Cartier and your grandfather were the Louis Cartier of Art Deco fame, no one
would be surprised if you became a jewelry designer yourself. And that is
exactly what 26-year-old, beautiful-as-a-model Veronique Cartier has done. She
has just produced a 64-piece collection of precious jewelry that is being sold
at Fred Leighton Ltd., 773 Madison Avenue (66th Street).

Although her family sold the Cartier business when she was a child, the
Swiss-born Miss Cartier said she had been interested in gems as a teen-ager and
then developed an interest in designing and making jewelry with the gems.

She favors colored stones and likes to combine unusual elements such as pink
sapphires with mother-of-pearl, steel and gold. She thus gives a contemporary
twist to styles that don't look at all out of place amid the estate jewelry that
is Fred Leighton's stock in trade.

''Creativity in design means to me something more than just being different,''
she explained. ''The piece must have a look not just of fashion, but a look that
will last.''

One might say she's making the estate jewelry of the future.


THERE were auditions on the stage

of Carnegie Hall yesterday, but not a note of music was heard. Instead, designs
were paraded in front of Giorgio Sant'Angelo, Willi Smith and Michaele
Vollbracht, who chose the finalists for this year's More Fashion Awards from
among 24 contestants. Designers who have been in business for one to five years
are eligible.

Interestingly, only one finalist was born in this country - Douglas Ferguson,
who comes from New Jersey. The others were originally from Mexico, Venezuela,
Zimbabwe, South Africa, Vietnam and Britain.

But there was nothing ethnic about the clothes, which included leather shirts
and pants, floral chintz, hand- painted metallic mesh, pictorial sweaters and
even a cotton dress with a vinyl midriff.

For the record, the other finalists are Nicola and Rodolfo Contreras, Anthony
Moorcraft and John Murrough of T. J. Boys, Pedro and Alejandro, and Vinh Pham.
One winner will be selected at a black-tie dinner and fashion show on April 29.
No, it won't be televised this year. But there's always next year.


JOAN KANER, Macy's new fashion

director, is just back from a quick trip to Europe with the following report on
designers who showed their fall collections early: ''It was tartans, Jacquards,
paisleys, florals and Nordic.'' Nothing exciting there. But, she added, ''There
were two designers who were real finds for us - Ben Anderson in England, who
makes oversize vests in home-furnishings fabrics, and Maggie Calhoun for Gala
Forest in Paris, who takes basic sweater shapes and makes them new by making
them all oversize.''

Those clothes will be seen at Macy's eventually, but meanwhile, what's selling
at Herald Square right now? ''Anne Klein's raw-silk coral blazers and printed
sarong skirts sold out in one day,'' Mrs. Kaner reported. ''Our customers are
really into bright colors and prints.'' Well, we can always dip last year's
neutrals into the dye pot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Quietest Of Winters

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 817 words


MANHATTAN'S conspicuous winter social season has all but vanished.  There were
virtually no big January benefits and few in February. Even March won't be the
usual madhouse. ''It's been the quietest winter in years,'' Barbara Walters
said, and she's right.

''Please don't tell anybody,'' a corporate executive begged. ''If you do,
somebody will hustle up something I'll have to do. We don't need that.''

''We need the rest,'' said Mica Ertegun, an interior designer who chairs her
share of the fund-raisers. ''I can't tell you how nice it is just to work.''

Smallish and very private dinners have sprung up to replace the galas. The rich
and powerful can actually hear what others at the table are saying. They are
more informal. They're having a good time, lingering in restaurants and museums,
and going to concerts, chic little invitation-only Bach musicales, weekend
movies and the theater. They are openly watching more television, including
''Dynasty,'' ''Cagney & Lacey'' and ''The Jewel in the Crown.'' They are even
suspected of wilfully staying home nights to read books.

''I don't know why anybody'd think that,'' Charlotte Ford, the automotive
heiress, said sadly. ''I'm reading catalogues. I must get 10 a day.''

Miss Ford has her own dress line. She counts on Saks, Magnin, Horchow and the
other prestigious catalogues to illustrate what clothes retailers are offering
these days. Inger McCabe Elliott of the China Seas fabric business is hiding
out. She's having her furniture reupholstered, writing an article on Tibet and
savoring Sunday nights.

''We had delicatessen sandwiches and people in, and sat around watching 'Jewel
in the Crown,' '' she said. ''My God, it's good.''

Clearly, something new is going on in this glamour town. But what? The
establishment itself isn't sure. The usual travelers are off skiing or lounging
around Palm Beach, the Caribbean or some other properly extravagant tanning
factory.

There is serious work being done in Wall Street and the corporate suites. In
their leisure time, most powers- that-be are eagerly delighting in this glorious
freedom from diamonds, dinner dress, dancing and do-gooders. But perhaps a third
of the club is feeling insecure, downright confused and close to tears. They
figure they've been dumped.

''I thought it was me,'' a stalwart of the benefit circuit whispered. ''If my
phone doesn't ring all morning, I'm ready to take cyanide. I thought I'd
misplaced my invitations.''

That ever-popular stalwart hasn't misplaced her invitations or her fabled charm.
She is simply down with symptoms typical of the war-horse syndrome, and so are
her elegant friends.

They are the big names who really love to go out every night and class up the
community. Without them New York would be a duller place. They are gregarious.
They have stamina. Their beloved charities validate them socially, demonstrate
their power to pull in big money and ''the right crowd.'' Galas give them a
chance to show off their expensive clothes while impressing friends and press
photographers. They argue, and there's some logic to it, that if you're
involved, you can't just write a check. You can moan a lot and carry on. But you
still have to dress up and go.

It never occurred to them the benefit calendar could go dim. Except in July and
August. Aside from the winters of 1970-7l (because of Vietnam, campus unrest and
the recession) and 1973-74 (Watergate, Vietnam and the energy crisis), it rarely
has. And when it did this year and stayed that way for weeks on end, they began
to get nervous.

The truth is that there was only a scattering of invitations. When the envelopes
fluttered into the mail boxes last fall, the recipients were so busy with fall
and holiday benefits, they failed to notice what was happening. A flood had
become a trickle.

Fall now seems l00 years ago. But it was also a time when many of these same
regulars were dawdling in Europe or at the beach, waiting for the leaves to
turn. Mostly, they've been on the circuit for 30 years or more. They told one
another they'd had enough, that the fall schedule was overloaded, that they were
definitely cutting down, and that they were going to spend more time at home and
send all their money to Ethiopia.

And the odd thing is that after years of saying that sort of thing while doing
the opposite, this time some of them meant it. Not about Ethiopia, of course.
Nor even staying home.

But it is the aging pacesetters themselves who help plan the galas, and though
the insecure seem to have forgotten, it is they who planned a quiet winter. They
wanted this respite. They gave it to themselves. And they might as well
celebrate now, while there's time. And, lest they've forgotten what else they
planned, they might want to look at what they've done to May. There's a gala of
some sort every other night, and it's going to be a killer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 27, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Vietnam Memorial Pledge

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


With the 10th anniversary of the

end of America's role in Vietnam approaching, the money-raising campaign for the
city's Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission has been renewed.

Yesterday, Donald J. Trump, the developer who is co-chairman of the commission,
pledged to contribute $1 million if the commission could match it with money
from other donors by May 7, the anniversary.

Brig. Gen. Peter M. Dawkins of the Army, retired, a Vietnam veteran who is an
executive at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., is commanding the campaign, which
will have to raise an average of $15,000 a day to meet Mr. Trump's offer.

About $800,000 had been raised before Mr. Trump's offer, much of it for building
a memorial at American Express Plaza, the former Jeanette Park, at Coenties
Slip, between Water and South Streets. It will be dedicated on May 7.

The memorial itself will cost $500,000. The rest of the money raised by the
commission is to be used to create a jobs program for Vietnam veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 27, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 95 words


Because of a mechanical error, a chronology on Feb. 19, recalling events that
led to Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS, omitted a heading.
The heading - 1975 - should have preceded the April 17 reference to
Representative Paul N. McCloskey's charge that the military ''deliberately
concealed'' the size and nature of the enemy before the Tet offensive. The fall
of Saigon (April 30), the article by Sam Adams in Harper's magazine (May) and
the House committee's investigation (September-December) should also have
appeared under the 1975 heading.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 27, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE FLAVORS OF VIETNAM RE-CREATED IN AMERICA

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2968 words


THERE is a Vietnamese specialty called cha gio, spring rolls of ground pork,
crab meat, onion, garlic and seasonings, wrapped in thin rice paper, that I
first tasted 20 years ago in Paris. It made such an impression that a few years
later I traveled to Saigon to taste it at the source. The trip was more than
worth the effort.

The best cha gio I have eaten since - in fact, I found them the equal of those
in Vietnam - were prepared recently by Nicole Routhier, a 28-year-old
Saigon-born student at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y. She
began with the rice paper, a very thin, brittle, translucent ''skin'' made of
rice flour, which she dipped into warm water and laid out on a flat towel. She
then put a portion of the filling onto the skin and rolled it into a cylinder
resembling a small Chinese egg roll. This she cooked in fresh oil until it was
crisp and golden brown. While she prepared the cha gio, Miss Routhier explained
that in Vietnam it is the dish most commonly used for celebrations: weddings,
birthdays, engagement parties and the New Year, which is perhaps that country's
most important holiday. The proper way to eat cha gio is to wrap it in a lettuce
leaf, along with fresh herbs such as mint, coriander leaves, cucumber slices,
green onions and a small portion of cooked noodles. It is dipped into a sauce
consisting of nuoc mam, lime juice, garlic and hot chilies, before it is eaten.

Like egg rolls, cha gio is generally served as an appetizer, and it was only the
first course of a Vietnamese banquet that Miss Routhier produced. What followed
was a shrimp soup of exceptional texture and flavor (containing fresh slender
bamboo shoots available in Chinatown). Miss Routhier prepared several dishes
using a basic caramel sauce made with nuoc mam. Two of these included an
easy-to-make dish with chicken wings and another barbecued pork. The meal ended
with a delectable dessert of bananas cooked in a fresh coconut cream and topped
with toasted white sesame seeds. Vietnamese cuisine, Miss Routhier said, varies
greatly from region to region. Her mother's family has lived for generations in
Haiphong, so most of her cooking is based on northern styles.

''In the North, there is a strong Chinese influence,'' she said. ''They use a
lot of stir-fried dishes and fish and seafood are prominent in that cooking:
fresh fish, dried fish, salt fish and so on.''

Saigon cooking, she said, has a decidedly French flavor, and in the kitchens
there you will find widespread use of tomatoes, asparagus and beef, which are
practically unknown in other regions. In the central region of Vietnam, around
Hue, tastes run to highly spiced dishes. Nuoc mam, incidentally, is a salted
fish liquid that has been called the ''vanilla'' of authentic Vietnamese
cooking. (In Thailand, it is known as nam pla.)

Miss Routhier's mother is Vietnamese, her father is a Frenchman from Alsace. Her
parents divorced shortly after her birth and her mother remarried an American
who managed officers' clubs for the United States Army.

The family traveled a great deal, to other countries in Southeast Asia and to
Europe. Miss Routhier's principal interest, however, remained Vietnamese
cooking. Her mother is a fine cook who opened a restaurant in Laos while the
family was there, from 1967 to 1970.

''I spent that part of my life surrounded by woks and pots and pans,'' Miss
Routhier recalled, ''and I was fascinated by the behind-the-scenes goings-on in
a professional kitchen.''

They later moved to Belgium and France, where they lived in Paris, Cannes and
Nice. ''In Cannes,'' said Miss Routhier, ''I was 14 years old. We stayed in a
hotel and I spent most of my days there giving the chef a hand in the kitchen. I
was involved in all kinds of food preparation, washing dishes and making some of
the simpler sauces.''

She came to the United States four years ago and, through friends, met Anthony
Laudin, a New Yorker and the project manager of a clinical laboratory computer
system at Montefiore Medical Center. Shortly afterward they were married.
Happily, it turns out, because his favorite food is Vietnamese and his favorite
Vietnamese food is cha gio.

Miss Routhier, who will graduate from the Culinary Institute next month, said
that of all the professional training she has received, she prefers banquet
cooking with classical game dishes, such as quail with raisins in a
Burgundy-style wine sauce, p,ate of hare, terrines and so on. On graduation she
hopes to work in a corporate dining room or with a French chef in a small inn.
''I'm not made to work in enormous kitchens,'' she said.


THE ingredients in these recipes, including the rice paper for cha gio, are
widely available at Oriental markets. A source in New York City is Kam Man Food
Products, 200 Canal Street.

Canh Chua Tom (Sour shrimp soup)

2 ounces tamarind with seeds
1/2 cup boiling water
6 ounces fresh bamboo shoots, preferably slender shoots, or use canned bamboo
shoots cut into thin lengths
5 large shrimp, about 1/4 pound, shelled and deveined
1 teaspoon finely minced garlic
1 teaspoon plus 1/4 cup nuoc mam
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper
2 medium-size red tomatoes, about 1/2 pound
1 large shallot, peeled
3 tablespoons corn, peanut or vegetable oil
2 cups water
1 small fresh hot, red or green chili, finely chopped, about 1/4 teaspoon
2 ounces fresh bean sprouts, about 1 1/4 cups
Salt to taste if desired
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh coriander leaves
2 tablespoons finely chopped scallions or green onions.

1. Put the tamarind in a small bowl and add boiling water to cover. Stir to coat
well.

2. Cut each bamboo shoot lengthwise in half. Set aside.

3. Cut each shrimp lengthwise in half. Put the shrimp in a bowl and add the
garlic, 1 teaspoon nuoc mam and pepper. Refrigerate briefly.

4. Peel the tomatoes. Cut them in half and remove and discard the seeds. Chop
the tomatoes. There should be about Z cup. Set aside.

5. Cut the shallot into thin slices. There should be about 1/4 cup.

6. Put the soaked tamarind through a sieve, pushing as much of the pulp through
as possible.

7. Heat the oil in a kettle until it is almost smoking. Add the shallots and
cook briefly, stirring, without browning. Add the tomatoes. Cook over relatively
high heat until slightly thickened.

8. Add the bamboo shoots. Cook, stirring, until the shoots are heated through.
Add the cold water and bring to a boil.

9. Cook about 2 minutes and remove from the heat. Add the tamarind and remaining
1/4 cup nuoc mam. Stir to blend.

10. Bring the soup to a boil and add the shrimp mixture, chilies, bean sprouts
and salt. Let cook 30 seconds and sprinkle with coriander and scallions. Serve
immediately.

Yield: 4 to 6 servings.

Cha Gio (Vietnamese spring rolls)
16 tree ears, available in Oriental markets
4 water chestnuts, preferably fresh
1/4 pound fresh crab meat
1/4 pound shrimp, shelled and deveined
3/4 pound not-too-lean ground pork
1 cup finely chopped onion
1/4 cup finely chopped shallots
1 1/2 tablespoons finely minced garlic
1 tablespoon nuoc mam, known in Thai stores as nam pla
Salt to taste if desired
1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper
2 small eggs
30 to 40 rounds of rice paper (see note)
Corn, peanut or vegetable oil for deep frying
Traditional garnishes for a Vietnamese meal (see recipe)
Nuoc cham or spicy fish sauce dip (see recipe).

1. Put the tree ears in a bowl and add warm water to about 2 inches above the
ears.

2. If fresh water chestnuts are used, peel and drop them briefly into a small
basin of cold water to cover. Chop them. There should be about 1/2 cup.

3. Pick over the crab to remove and discard all traces of shell and cartilage.
There should be about 1 cup.

4. Put the shrimp on a flat surface and chop them finely. There should be about
1/2 cup.

5. Drain the tree ears and squeeze to extract most of the soaking liquid. Place
on a flat surface and chop finely. There should be about 1/2 cup.

6. Put the pork in a large mixing bowl and add the tree ears, water chestnuts,
crab meat, shrimp, onion, shallots, garlic, nuoc mam, salt, ground pepper and
eggs. Blend well with the hands.

7. Rice paper is quite fragile. Work with only 4 sheets of paper at a time. As
you work, keep the stack of rice paper covered with a barely damp cloth to
prevent curling. Have ready a large basin of warm water.

8. Wrapping the spring rolls properly takes patience, but it is basically
simple. Immerse the rice paper, one sheet at a time, into the warm water and
quickly withdraw it. Lay it flat on a dry towel. Do this with four sheets of
rice paper without letting them touch. The rice paper will become pliable within
seconds. Fold over the bottom third of each round of paper.

9. Put about 2 teaspoons of filling in the center of the folded-over portion.
Press it into a compact rectangle. Fold over one side of the paper over the pork
mixture, then fold over the other side. Roll the filled pork mixture bottom to
top to enclose the filling. Continue until all rolls are filled.

10. Fry the spring rolls in 2 skillets, if possible. Pour about 1/2 inch of oil
into each skillet. Heat the oil. When it reaches a temperature of about 325
degrees, add a few rolls. Do not crowd them and do not let them touch or they
may stick together. Cook over relatively low heat 20 to 30 minutes, turning
often, or until crisp and golden brown. Always cook over gentle heat.

11. Drain the spring rolls on paper towels. Serve with the traditional
Vietnamese garnishes. The guest should pick up a lettuce leaf and add herbs such
as mint and coriander plus a slice of cucumber and a small portion of cold
noodles. Place a spring roll in the center, wrap the lettuce leaf around the
filling, dip it into the nuoc cham or spicy fish sauce dip and eat. Serve 2 or 3
spring rolls as an appetizer or 4 to 6 as a main course.

Yield: 30 to 40 spring rolls, depending on the amount of filling used.

NOTE: Some rice paper contains too much salt for the handling required in this
dish; other kinds are not properly dried. Miss Routhier prefers a brand called
Banh Trang (9 inches in diameter).

Bun Cha (Barbecued pork in caramel sauce)

Pork and sauce:
1 pound lean, streaky unsmoked pork belly with skin attached
1 cup sugar
1/4 cup nuoc mam
1 cup shallots sliced as thinly as possible
Salt to taste if desired
Freshly ground pepper to taste
1/2 pound not-too-lean ground pork
1 teaspoon finely minced garlic

Garnishes: See traditional garnishes for a Vietnamese meal

Dip: Nuoc cham or spicy fish sauce dip (see recipe).

1. If there are any bones in the pork, cut away and discard them, but do not cut
away the thin skin. Cut the pork belly crosswise against the grain into thin
slices, about 1/8 inch thick. Put the slices in a mixing bowl.

2. Put the sugar in a heavy saucepan. Do not add liquid. Cook, stirring and
watching carefully to prevent burning and scorching. Shake and swirl the pan
over the heat until the sugar becomes liquid and caramel colored and smokes
slightly. Add the nuoc mam and swirl the pan off the heat until blended. Quickly
add the shallots, salt and pepper and stir.

3. Put the ground pork in a small mixing bowl and add the garlic. Add about 1/2
of the caramel mixture and blend with the fingers. Shape the mixture into 14
meatballs. Slightly flatten each ball to make small patties. Arrange the patties
on skewers, about 3 or 4 to each skewer. Set aside on a baking sheet lined with
aluminum foil.

4. Add the remaining caramel mixture to the sliced pork belly. Stir until the
pieces are coated.

5. Pick up one piece of pork at a time and thread it on a thin wooden skewer.
Arrange about 5 pieces of pork belly on each skewer. Let the pieces lie flat and
close together on the skewers. Arrange all of the skewers on a baking sheet
lined with aluminum foil.

6. The skewered foods may be cooked under the kitchen broiler or on top of an
outdoor charcoal grill. They should be cooked under or over moderately gentle
heat. If the cooking unit is too hot, the meats will burn. Preheat the kitchen
broiler or the charcoal grill. Cook the pork-belly skewers and the skewered
patties for from 5 to 10 minutes, turning once, until the patties are cooked
through and browned on both sides. The pork- belly pieces should be crisp and
neatly browned.

7. Drain the meats thoroughly on paper towels. Serve with the Vietnamese
garnishes. Serve the nuoc cham or spicy fish dip on the side.

Yield: 4 to 6 servings.

Traditional Garnishes
6 scallions or green onions
1/5 pound (about 3 inches) white somen (Japanese noodles)
1 bunch fresh coriander leaves
1 bunch fresh mint
1 small head Boston lettuce
1 large cucumber.

1. Trim off the root ends of the scallions. Cut the tops crosswise into 5-inch
lengths. Cut the white tops crosswise into thin shreds, but leave the onion
sections intact. Drop the white shredded portion into a basin of cold water.
Refrigerate until the white shreds open into flowers.

2. Bring 4 cups of water to a boil in a saucepan. Break the noodles in half and
drop the pieces in the water. Cook exactly 1 minute and drain. Run under cold
water to chill well. Drain. Set aside.

3. Neatly trim off the stem ends of the coriander leaves and the mint. Rinse
separately under cold running water and pat dry. Set aside.

4. Remove and discard the core from the head of lettuce. Separate the leaves.
Rinse under cold running water and pat dry. Set aside.

5. Trim off the ends of the cucumber. Peel away alternate strips of the outer
skin, leaving a green and white exterior all around the outside of the cucumber.
Cut the cucumber into thin slices.

6. When ready to serve, drain the onion sections and pat dry. Garnish Vietnamese
dishes such as spring roll or barbecued pork with all or a choice of any of
these garnishes.

Nuoc Cham (Spicy fish sauce dip)
1 1/2 teaspoons finely minced garlic
1 or 2 small fresh hot red chilies, finely chopped
8 teaspoons sugar
1/4 cup freshly squeezed lime juice
1/2 cup rice vinegar, available in Oriental markets
1/2 cup nuoc mam, widely available in Oriental markets.

1. Combine the garlic, chilies and sugar in a small mixing bowl or, preferably,
in a mortar. Crush the mixture together with a heavy spoon or, preferably, a
pestle. The mixture should be pastelike.

2. Add the lime juice, vinegar and nuoc mam and stir to blend.

Yield: About 1 1/4 cups.

Che Chuori (Bananas in coconut cream)
2 1/2 cups coconut cream (see recipe)
1/2 cup sugar
1 cup plus 1/2 cup water
1/4 cup very small tapioca pearls, available in Oriental markets
4 large firm ripe unblemished bananas, about 1 3/4 pounds
2 tablespoons white sesame seeds.

1. Combine the coconut cream, sugar and Z cup water in a saucepan and bring to a
boil. Take care that the mixture does not boil over.

2. Meanwhile, combine the tapioca and remaining 1/2 cup water and let stand
until ready to use.

3. Peel the bananas and cut them into 1 1/2-inch lengths.

4. Drain the tapioca. Add the tapioca and banana pieces to the coconut cream
mixture and bring to a boil. Cover. Let simmer about 10 minutes.

5. As the bananas cook, put the sesame seeds in a small skillet and cook over
moderate heat, shaking the skillet and stirring, until the seeds are golden.
Remove from the heat. Serve the bananas in cream hot or at room temperature with
the sesame seeds on top.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Coconut Cream

1. Using a hammer, crack one small coconut at 4 or 5 points. This should produce
4 or 5 large pieces. Discard the inner coconut liquid.  Rest 1 piece at a time,
shell side down, over a gas or electric burner. Let stand over moderately low
heat for about 1 minute. Using a towel to protect the fingers, lift the coconut
and lift the fleshy part from the shell. It should come off easily. Using a
swivel-bladed vegetable scraper, scrape away the dark exterior, leaving only the
white meat. Cut the meat into small cubes. There should be about 3 cups.

2. Put these cubes into the container of a food processor or electric blender.
Add 2 1/2 cups of hot tap water. Blend until the coconut meat is finely
pulverized. Pour the liquid through a sieve into a bowl. Press and squeeze to
extract excess liquid. Reserve both the grated coconut and the liquid. There
should be about 2 cups of squeezed-out pulp and 2 1/2 cups liquid. The liquid is
coconut cream. If you add more water to the pulp and squeeze a second time, you
will have a thinner liquid, which is coconut milk.

NOT all Vietnamese dishes are time-consuming to prepare. For those home cooks
who want a quick and simple dish with a touch of the exotic, Nicole Routhier
offers the following:

Vietnamese Chicken Wings With Ginger
2 pounds chicken wings
1 cup sugar
1/4 cup nuoc mam
4 shallots sliced as thinly as possible
1 tablespoon finely shredded fresh ginger root
Salt to taste if desired
Freshly ground pepper to taste.

1. Cut each chicken wing into three pieces, the main wing joint, second joint
and wing tip. Discard the wing tip.

2. Put the sugar in a large, heavy saucepan. Do not add liquid.  Cook, stirring
and watching carefully to prevent burning and scorching. Shake and swirl the pan
over the heat until the sugar becomes liquid and caramel colored. It will smoke
slightly. Add the nuoc mam and swirl the pan off heat until blended. Quickly add
the shallots and stir. Add the fresh ginger root, salt and ground pepper.

3. Add the wing pieces to the saucepan and cover. Return to moderate heat and
cook, stirring occasionally, for 30 top 40 minutes until the pieces are tender.
Skim off excess fat. Serve with hot rice.

Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: YOUNG CHEFS

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HENRY CABOT LODGE, 82, IS DEAD

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2960 words


Henry Cabot Lodge, the articulate Massachussetts Republican who was United
States delegate to the United Nations, Ambassador to South Vietnam and a
three-term Senator, died yesterday at his home in Beverly, Mass., after a long
illness. He was 82 years old.

At the United Nations from 1953 to 1960, Mr. Lodge, an energetic debater,
engaged in ticklish diplomacy, helping bring the Soviet Union into negotiations
on the peaceful use of outer space and making behind-the-scenes efforts that
helped bring about a cease-fire during the 1956 British, French and Israeli
invasion of Egypt.

In Saigon During Anti-Diem Coup

As Ambassador in wartime Saigon in 1963-64 and again in 1965-67, Mr. Lodge was
on hand for the generals' coup that, in late 1963, overthrew the Government of
President Ngo Dinh Diem - although Mr. Lodge later contended that he and the
Kennedy Administration had not worked for Mr. Diem's overthrow, as has been said
in the Pentagon Papers and elsewhere.

During his second tour in Saigon, in 1966, Mr. Lodge was involved in a peace
effort that proved fruitless at a time when, he later said, United States
bombing of North Vietnam was being ''conducted on a largely military basis
without enough regard for its political and diplomatic implications.'' He went
on to serve as delegate to the Vietnam peace talks in Paris in 1969.

During his long and varied career, Mr. Lodge was also an unsuccessful Republican
candidate for Vice President in 1960, the year Richard M. Nixon was defeated by
John F. Kennedy; Ambassador to West Germany in 1968-69, and an occasional
Presidential envoy to the Vatican from 1970 to 1977.

Grandson of Namesake Senator

The patrician grandson and namesake of the Massachusetts Senator who did much to
keep the United States out of the League of Nations after World War I, Mr. Lodge
saw combat in Europe during World War II and came to say that ''the ideal of a
provincial nation has given way to the realization that we have become the
world's greatest power'' and that ''World War II first taught us the value of
collective security.''

It was as an ardent internationalist that he supported the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Marshall Plan in the Senate and defended the United
Nations, saying, ''The fact that the talk may be boring or turgid or uninspiring
should not cause us to forget the fact that it is preferable to war.''

It was after stints as a newspaperman and as a Massachusetts state legislator
that Mr. Lodge was first elected to the Senate, in 1936. He won re-election in
1942, resigned to serve in the Army during the war and was again elected in
1946. He ran again in 1952 but - after spending much effort toward insuring
Dwight D. Eisenhower's election as President - was narrowly defeated by John F.
Kennedy.

Eisenhower then named Mr. Lodge to the United Nations post.

Taking up the polemical cudgels against the Soviet Union, Mr. Lodge denounced
what he called its ''wholesale brutality'' in Hungary in 1956, when the Russians
crushed the Hungarian uprising. At another time he said: ''Where the people of
Eastern Europe are concerned, the United States seeks to fill their stomachs
with food; the Soviets seek to fill their stomachs with lead.''

Debate Over U-2 Incident

Probably his most dramatic United Nations debate came in 1960, after a U-2
intelligence plane was shot down over the Soviet Union.  In reply to Soviet
charges that the United States had committed aggression, Mr. Lodge said the
Soviet Government, ''well known for its expansionist proclivities and armed to
the teeth, has repeatedly used force in its relations with other sovereign
states.''

He defended what he called ''one single harmless observation flight'' and caused
a furor when he produced in the Security Council a wooden plaque with the Great
Seal of the United States. The plaque bore a microphone hidden by the Russians
and for years, since it was presented to the American Ambassador, it had relayed
conversations held in the United States Embassy in Moscow to Soviet
eavesdroppers outside.

In another widely cited riposte, when the Soviet Union denounced the United
States as guilty of aggressive actions, he declared: ''Membership of the United
Nations gives every member the right to make a fool of himself, and that is a
right of which the Soviet Union in this case has taken full advantage.''

As a Senator, he was especially proud of his role in passage of the Lodge-Brown
Act. This legislation led to the formation of the Hoover Commission, which
studied the operations of the Executive Branch of the Government from 1947 to
1949 and which, he liked to say, led to savings of more than $3 billion. He also
liked to say that, during World War II, he was the first American since the
Civil War to quit the Senate to enter the Army.

Family Traditions

Public life and service were traditions in Mr. Lodge's family: the branches of
his prestigious family tree were heavy with officeholders, including six United
States Senators, a Governor of Massachusetts, a Secretary of State and a
Secretary of the Navy.

Nature seemed to cast him to succeed them: He stood nearly 6 feet 3 inches tall,
was handsome in a somewhat larger-than-life way and was gifted with words -
capable by turns of eloquence, wit and bruising bluntness.

But some critics said he was not a good administrator. In December 1963, Defense
Secretary Robert S. McNamara asserted in a report to President Johnson, which
was cited in the Pentagon Papers, that Mr. Lodge ''simply does not know how to
conduct a coordinated administration'' and ''has operated as a loner all his
life and cannot readily change now.''

A Poet's Son

Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., as he was originally named - he dropped the Jr. in 1956 -
was born July 5, 1902, at Nahant, a resort northeast of Boston, the son of
George Cabot Lodge, a poet, and Mathilda Frelinghuysen Davis Lodge.

After George Cabot Lodge's death from a heart attack seven years later, his
widow took the young Henry Cabot Lodge and her two younger children to Paris for
two years to learn French, which, Mr. Lodge wrote years later, ''has stood me in
good stead all my life.''

Mr. Lodge's grandfather, the first Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, was a great
influence on him in his youth, according to his 1973 book ''The Storm Has Many
Eyes.'' ''I inherited my party affiliation from my grandfather, who was the
Republican leader of the Senate, and always my beloved counselor and friend,''
Mr. Lodge wrote.

The young Cabot, as he came to be known, graduated from Middlesex School in
Concord, Mass., in 1920 and, cum laude from Harvard in 1924.

After college he worked as a reporter and editorial writer for The New York
Herald Tribune. Then, in 1932, he was elected to the lower chamber of the
Massachusetts state legislature. In 1936, at the age of 34, he won election to
the United States Senate, besting James M. Curley, who was then the Governor of
Massachusetts.

Early in his political career Mr. Lodge was an isolationist, and he remained one
until after Pearl Harbor.  But as a reserve officer - he had risen to the rank
of captain in 16 years in the Army Reserve - he went on active duty with the
Army in the summer of 1941. In the following year he saw combat with American
tank units with the British Eighth Army in North Africa.

He was re-elected to the Senate later in 1942, but then resigned his seat after
President Roosevelt decreed that incumbent members of Congress must choose
between Congress and the armed forces.

Mr. Lodge spent the rest of the war in Europe, rising to the rank of lieutenant
colonel. His military service earned him six battle stars and several
decorations, including the Bronze Star and the French Legion of Honor and Croix
de Guerre with palm. He went on to become a major general in the Army Reserve.

Immediately after Mr. Lodge was defeated by John Kennedy in 1952, he became, as
he put it later, ''President- elect Eisenhower's liaison man to help carry out
the transfer of power from President Truman.''

Sent to United Nations

Eisenhower also gave him the United Nations post, Mr. Lodge wrote years later,
because ''he assumed that my experience in the Senate and on the stump would
stand me in good stead.'' He added, ''My French and some fairly convincing
noises which I could make in a few other languages were also helpful.''

Mr. Lodge held the post for seven years and eight months - from 1953 to 1960 -
longer than any other American delegate.

Eisenhower also made Mr. Lodge a member of his Cabinet and a special adviser,
drawing, as Mr. Lodge put it later, on his ''thoughts about people, politics and
public opinion.''

''President Eisenhower wanted to know what the political angle was,'' he went on
in his 1976 book ''As It Was.'' ''He would then take it or leave it - or take
part of it.''

After Mr. Lodge's diplomatic stint at the United Nations, he plunged into the
1960 campaign as Vice Presidential candidate on Mr. Nixon's ticket; in the end,
the ticket lost, but by the razor- thin margin, in the popular vote, of 113,057
out of 68,832,778 votes.

Afterward, Mr. Lodge served as director general of the Atlantic Institute, a
private organization concerned with strengthening democratic systems in Europe.
Beginning in 1961, he was also a general consultant on international affairs to
Time Inc.

Appointed to Saigon Post

In June 1963, President Kennedy named him Ambassador to South Vietnam. The
appointment was a deft political move, some analysts have said. William Safire,
the New York Times columnist, wrote in 1977 that the appointment ''foreclosed
'mainstream' Republican opposition to the way the war was conducted until
1967.''

Mr. Lodge arrived in Saigon in August 1963, holding the view, he wrote later,
''that the people of South Vietnam had a right to exist independently of North
Vietnam and that South Vietnamese rights were being threatened by aggression
from North Vietnam.''

''I thought from the beginning,'' he went on in his 1973 book, ''that an
exclusively military solution to the Vietnam problem was impossible,'' and ''I
eventually reached the conclusion that we should withdraw our troops from
Vietnam as fast as this could be done in an orderly way and try to negotiate a
settlement.''

But in 1963, with the United States military presence in South Vietnam still
relatively small, Mr. Lodge was largely concerned with the prospects of
President Diem's Government.

'A Coup Will Be Needed'

On Aug. 28, 1963, Mr. Lodge wrote later, the State Department informed him that
President Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, a key figure in the Government, as Mr.
Lodge put it, ''must go,'' and that, in the State Department's words, a ''coup
will be needed.''

On Aug. 30, Mr. Lodge wrote, this telegram and an earlier similar one were
''canceled'' from Washington. This, he contended, ''removed the basis for the
charge'' that came later from various quarters that, as the Pentagon Papers put
it, the United States had ''variously authorized, sanctioned and encouraged''
the Nov. 1 coup, led by South Vietnamese generals who overthrew President Diem
along and his brother. Both were killed.

''Our policy, under instructions from President Kennedy,'' Mr. Lodge wrote, was
merely ''not to thwart'' a coup, and he observed that ''to this day we do not
know whether the murder'' of President Diem ''was an act of private revenge or
arranged by the coup plotters.''

Noting that he had been reported to have - in the words of an article by a Times
reporter accompanying the published Pentagon Papers - ''authorized C.I.A.
participation in tactical planning of the coup,'' Mr. Lodge said he had been
''specifically ordered by'' by President Kennedy ''not to help in the
planning.'' He added, ''I scrupulously obeyed orders.''

While he was still in Vietnam and without campaigning, he won the 1964 New
Hampshire Republican Presidential primary on a write-in vote, defeating the
eventual Republican nominee, Barry Goldwater. In June 1964, Mr. Lodge resigned
the ambassadorship, largely, he wrote in the 1973 book, because his wife, the
former Emily Sears, whom he had married in 1926, had not been well.

At President Johnson's request, Mr. Lodge embarked on his second tour as
Ambassador in Saigon in 1965; it was in the following year that Mr. Lodge came
to hope, through an undertaking code-named ''Project Marigold,'' to end the
conflict in Vietnam, which by then included the United States bombing of North
Vietnam.

A 1966 Peace Effort

The undertaking began June 6, 1966, Mr. Lodge wrote in his 1976 book ''As It
Was,'' when he was visited by Janusz Lewandowski, a Pole who was a member of the
three-member International Control Commission that had been set up in 1954 to
oversee a cease-fire in Vietnam. Its members visited Hanoi every few weeks.

Mr. Lewandowski ''said there was a definite desire in Hanoi for conversations
with the United States,'' Mr. Lodge wrote. ''His words made a deep impression on
me and my hopes soared. I instantly reported his call and learned later that it
had also deeply impressed President Johnson and the Secretary of Defense, Robert
S. McNamara.''

Two days later, Mr. Lodge wrote, he was visited by the Canadian member of the
commission, Victor C. Moore. ''He said that Hanoi wanted to talk and added that
our bombing had caused economic damage and dislocation in the life of the
community,'' Mr. Lodge wrote. ''Evidently Hanoi wanted our bombing to stop, but
not at the price of appearing to have been humiliated.''

Encouraged, Mr. Lodge reported to President Johnson that the prospects for talks
with the North Vietnamese Government were the best since he had arrived in
Saigon. Avoiding embarrassment to Hanoi was crucial, he reported: ''They might
be willing to end hostilities in a fuzzy way with no dotting of i's or crossing
of t's.''

Role of the Vietcong

Later in June, Mr. Lodge wrote, Mr. Lewandowski told the Italian Ambassador in
Saigon, Giovanni d'Orlandi, who was the dean of the Saigon diplomatic corps,
that the North Vietnamese Government wanted the National Liberation Front - the
political arm of the Vietcong - to take part in the eventual talks with the
United States, but not as the only representative of the Communist side, and it
wanted the bombing suspended.

Mr. Lodge then, in July, held secret meetings with Mr. Lewandowski. At the first
session, Mr. Lodge declared, on instructions from Washington: ''The U.S. shares
the desire for a political settlement,'' and asked questions about Hanoi's
position.

At a subsequent meeting Mr. Lewandowski provided no answer to the questions but
said, ''We have reason to state that no proposition without the cessation of
bombing on North Vietnam would produce results.''

''There was no further activity,'' Mr. Lodge wrote, until the beginning of
December 1966. Events, as he chronicled them, moved swiftly.

Discussing Direct Talks

On Dec. 1, Mr. Lewandowski, ''returning from Hanoi, quoted Hanoi as saying that
American willingness to hold direct talks should be confirmed to the North
Vietnamese Ambassador in Warsaw.''

On Dec. 2, there was a United States bombing of North Vietnam.

On Dec. 3, Mr. Lodge, acting on instructions from Washington in response to Mr.
Lewandowski's proposal, told him that ''our man will be in Warsaw on Dec. 6,''
but ''a few hours thereafter,'' the Polish Foreign Minister, Adam Rapacki,
called off the contacts, giving the United States bombing as the main reason.

On Dec. 4, the United States again bombed North Vietnam.

On Dec. 5, ''Rapacki repeated that he and Hanoi intended to back out of the
understanding reached between Lewandowski and me on Dec. 3 whereby the U.S. had
agreed to speak to the North Vietnamese in Warsaw.''

''I was mystified by Hanoi's change of policy,'' Mr. Lodge wrote, ''and I still
am. One thing was clear: control of our bombing appeared to have been
inadequate. It seemed to have been conducted on a largely military basis without
enough regard for its political and diplomatic implications.''

Paris Talks Begin

It was not until March 1968 that President Johnson - seeing that the North
Vietnamese could not be overcome militarily, and wanting to get them to the
negotiating table - halted the bombing, except for an area just north of the
border zone separating the two countries.

Protracted peace talks then began, in Paris; it was not until 1973 that they
resulted to the signing of peace accords and the withdrawal of all United States
forces from Vietnam.

In the intervening years, Mr. Lodge served as an Ambassador at Large in 1967-68
and then spent seven months as Ambassador in Bonn in 1968-69. He then led the
United States delegation in 1969 at the Paris peace talks, which were deadlocked
when he stepped down after 10 months and returned to Massachusetts.

Then, in 1970, President Nixon asked him to visit the Vatican occasionally as a
special Presidential envoy - a title he held until 1977. In 1970 and 1971, Mr.
Lodge also served as chairman of the Presidential Commission for the Observance
of the United Nations' 25th Anniversary.

In his last years, while essentially retired, he did some lecturing at North
Shore Community College in Beverly, Mass., and some teaching at Gordon College
in Wenham, Mass.

He is survived by his wife; a brother, John Davis Lodge, who is Ambassador to
Switzerland; a sister, Baroness Helena de Streel of Brussels; two sons, George
C. Lodge and Henry S. Lodge, both of Beverly; 10 grandchildren and 6
great-grandchildren.

The funeral service will be private.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Henry Cabot Lodge

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE PAYMENTS PLAN LIMITS THE NUMBER OF AWARDS

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words


A long-awaited master plan for the distribution of a $200 million Agent Orange
settlement fund to aid Vietnam veterans who claim to have been harmed by the
herbicide was filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

The plan proposes to restrict sharply the number of cash awards to permit larger
awards to the most severely affected claimants.

It also provides for two $30 million endowments for social services to veterans
and to any of their children suffering from birth defects.

A distinctive feature of the 623-page plan, prepared by an appointee of Chief
Judge Jack B. Weinstein, is that claimants would not have to prove that Agent
Orange actually caused their injuries, only that they had ailments and that they
were exposed to the herbicide in or around Vietnam during the sprayings from
1961 to 1972.

But under the plan only 5 percent of current claimants would receive any cash
awards. These would not exceed $25,000 in the most severe cases of total
disability and would be paid out over 10 years. Payments for a death would range
up to $5,000 and also be payable over 10 years. The plan called for Federal
legislation to make the awards nontaxable and exempt from consideration as
income in determining Social Security and other benefits.

More than 200,000 claims - many times the number expected - have already been
filed under the pretrial agreement last May settling a group liability lawsuit
against seven manufacturers of Agent Orange. Many of the claims, however, may be
judged invalid.

The plan, drawn up with the aid of veterans and consultants, is still subject to
re jection or revision by Judge Weinstein after a public hearing in court next
Tuesday. Lawyers representing veterans said they would take issue with some of
the plan's provisions.

Kenneth R. Feinberg, a Washington lawyer who prepared the plan for Judge
Weinberg, said he anticipated controversy. But he said, ''My one consistent view
is the need to prioritize and help the living.''

''The claims submitted reflect an enormous amount of suffering and despair,'' he
said in his report to the judge. ''It is impossible to determine to what extent,
if any, Agent Orange caused or contributed to this suffering. But both the
physical and psychological problems of the members of the class are
staggering.''

Among these, he said, are an array of ailments from disfigurement to fatal
cancers as well as 60,000 claims of birth defects among veterans' children and
24,000 miscarriages by veterans' wives.

Key Provisions in the Plan

Among the key provisions of the plan are these:


- The $200 million Agent Orange settlement fund - $180 million plus interest put
up by the chemical companies - would be split into three parts. The largest,
$130 million, would go for cash payments to the most severely affected group of
totally disabled veterans and the families of deceased veterans. The program
would end on Dec. 31, 1994.


- An additional $60 million would be divided into two $30 million endowments
administered by a nonprofit foundation. One would create a 25-year fund to
provide services to families of children suffering from birth defects. A second
would create a 10-year fund to provide outreach and counseling services and
grants to assist veterans and their families.


- The remaining $10 million would be set aside for administrative costs.


- In a departure from what the plan calls ''the traditional tort approach to
compensation,'' claimants would not be required to establish that exposure to
Agent Orange caused their ailments, because of the difficulties of scientific
proof and the administrative costs involved. Instead, claimants would be
required to provide only medical proof of their disabilities and Vietnam service
information that would be compared with Defense Department records of herbicide
spraying.


- Only those totally disabled according to Federal or private insurance
standards and the families of deceased veterans would be eligible for cash
awards. But in this group, awards would be given only in cases where the victims
ranked among the 50 percent with the highest exposure to Agent Orange, according
to military records. And the awards, payable over 10 years, would be not exceed
$25,000 for the most severe disability and $5,000 for a death, provided they was
not self-inflicted or the result of battles or accidents.


- The two $30 million endowment funds would be for those veterans and their
families who did not qualify for cash awards. The funds would not be distributed
directly to claimants but would be used for a hot line, counseling programs and
research so long as they did not duplicate existing programs.


- Claimants rejected for compensation or other services would have a right of
appeal. The funds would be administered by a board of directors made up
primarily of Vietnam veterans.

The Suggestions of Veterans

Mr. Feinberg, the lawyer who prepared the plan, told Judge Weinstein that he
hoped the payment program and service funds would be operational within a year.

Mr. Feinberg - a partner at Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays & Handler - said he had
been guided by the suggestions of veterans that they preferred larger awards for
disability than for death in order to avoid the implication that a veteran would
be worth more dead than alive.

Mr. Feinberg, who played a major role in fashioning the settlement last May 7,
acknowledged that the number of claimants was far greater than expected at the
time of the settlement.

But he said no fund would ever be considered adequate. ''It could be $500
million or $700 million or $1 billion and it would not provide for all the
victims and their families,'' he said.

He voiced regret that the Government, which had commissioned, bought and sprayed
the dioxin-contaminated herbicide, had consistently declined to take part in any
settlement.

U.S. Position Criticized

Earlier this month Judge Weinstein dismissed the remaining claims by Vietnam
veterans against the Government. But he criticized the Government's position,
which he called ''vindictive'' and ''harsh and unyielding.'' He ruled that the
children were free to try to sue again in the future.

Mr. Feinberg's plan drew quick opposition from two of the leading lawyers in the
veterans' lawsuit who had been devising their own guidelines for distribution of
the $200 million fund.

One of the lawyers, Gene Locks, of Philadelphia, said he favored a plan that
would relate cash awards to certain diseases linked to dioxin, such as
soft-tissue sarcomas, a type of cancer.

He also expressed doubts about allocating a large part of the money to the two
funds proposed by Mr. Feinberg. But he said he did not have all the figures
available to Mr. Feinberg.

''We will scrutinize it extremely carefully,'' he said of the plan.

Thomas Henderson, another leading lawyer for the veterans, who worked with Mr.
Locks on the distribution issue, said he too had serious doubts about the plan
as proposed.

Mr. Feinberg said he was prepared for revisions in the plan, especially as
better figures became available through questionnaires to be sent to the
claimants. He said that he had discussed his proposals with Judge Weinstein but
that the court might impose other changes. ''Anyone who tries to predict what
Judge Weinstein will do is making a mistake,'' he said.

The seven companies that agreed to the settlement in exchange for the dropping
of a lawsuit against them were the Dow Chemical Company, the Monsanto Company,
the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, Uniroyal Inc., the T. H. Agriculture and
Nutrition Company, Hercules Inc. and the Thompson Chemical Company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of spray

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 620 words


THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1985 International

Nicaraguan rebels are incapable of overthrowing the Sandinista Government in
''the foreseeable future'' regardless of whether they receive United States aid,
according to Gen. Paul F. Gorman, the retiring commander of American forces in
Central America. (Page A1, Column 4.)

A halt in Nicaraguan arms imports was announced by President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra. He also said that Nicaragua would send home 100 Cuban military
advisers in an effort to help reduce tensions in Central America that would
hopefully be a first step toward a complete withdrawal of all foreign military
advisers from the region. (A1:5.)

Israel backs a new peace bid suggested by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt
calling for direct talks between Israel and a joint delegation of Jordanians and
Palestinians provided that known members of the P.L.O. are excluded, Government
officials in Jerusalem said. (A1:2-3.) National

Emergency loans for farmers to finance spring planting were approved by both the
House and the Senate in the face of a veto threat by President Reagan. (A1:6.)

Worried farmers gathered in Ames, Iowa, to stress that rural America is in
trouble, with farms laden with debts farmers cannot pay and crops bringing in
less than costs of production. The meeting drew more than 15,000 farmers from
across the Middle West. (B7:1-4.)

A bid to drive the dollar down was pressed successfully by major European
central banks for the second consecutive day. Dealers and bankers estimated that
five European central banks sold $1 billion or more from their reserves to
depress the dollar. (A1:1.)

Henry Cabot Lodge died at his home in Beverly, Mass., after a long illness. The
articulate 82-year-old Republican was United States delegate to the United
Nations, Ambassador to South Vietnam and a three-term Senator from
Massachusetts. (A1:5-6.)

A vice president of the Bank of Boston was told by Federal bank regulators as
early as 1982 that the bank was not complying with international currency
reporting regulations and promised to correct the situation, according to
Treasury Department officials. (A1:3-5.)

Republicans plan to target 25 to 30 Democratic members of Congress and spend $4
million to $5 million attacking their records for 18 months before the 1986
elections. (A16:1-2.)

The synthetic fuels program is a ''waste'' but the Reagan Administration is not
proposing to eliminate it because of a compromise reached in the Senate last
year, according to David A. Stockman, the Federal budget director. (B7:1-2.)

Owning a freestanding house on its own land is still a goal of most Americans as
it was of earlier generations, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll and
interviews with owners and renters. (C1:1-2.)

Confusion over the two Bookbinder's seafood restaurants in Philadelphia occurs
routinely among dining groups. (A14:1-2.) Metropolitan

After shooting at four young men in a subway train in Manhattan last December,
Bernhard H. Goetz said to one of them, ''You don't look so bad, here's
another,'' and shot at him again, according to a police report just made public.
(A1:1-2.)

Seat belts must be worn by people in the front seats of cars in New Jersey,
beginning tomorrow. State officials said they would rely more on good
citizenship than on tough enforcement to increase use of the belts. (B5:1-2.) In
New York, the first state to impose a mandatory seat-belt law, motorists and
their passengers generally appear to be complying with the new law. (B1:1-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR VETERANS AT YET ANOTHER BIVOUAC

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


One rainy night this winter, a woman in a long evening gown approached a
weathered green tent near the Vietnam Memorial here. She was crying. ''I've
tried for two years to be able to walk by that wall,'' she told Frank Vanover,
who was on nightshift at the Veterans Vigil of Honor.

When another volunteer took his place, Mr. Vanover offered a comforting arm and
accompanied the woman to the place where her husband's name was inscribed on the
wall of black granite that is the Vietnam Memorial.

Since Dec. 24, 1982, when a Vietnam veteran, Terry McConnell, sat down with a
poncho and a flashlight and founded the Vigil of Honor, a living tribute has
joined the etched names and bronze figures at the memorial.

''We're out here for one reason only: to bring M.I.A.'s and P.O.W.'s home,'' Mr.
Vanover said of the countless veterans who have manned the vigil.

Signatures on Petitions

The vigil collects signatures on petitions calling for the release of the 2,482
Americans still missing in action or unaccounted for in Vietnam. Vigil
participants believe some of the missing are being held prisoner.

So far 3.5 million signatures have been sent to the Vietnamese mission at the
United Nations.

But the Vigil of Honor is more than a petition drive. It is a place where parts
of the Vietnam experience are remembered and even recreated. The grassy lawn in
front of the tent is an outdoor museum, with a trunk-sized bamboo ''tiger cage''
of the type in which some American prisoners were held, a camouflage helmet, a
flak jacket and two worn pairs of infantrymen's boots.

The volunteers dress in fatigue pants and Army-issue boots. Wreaths of flowers
and letters from distraught families are clearly displayed even at night,
lighted by kerosene lanterns. The American and the South Vietnamese flags fly
from tall poles beside those donated by veterans' delegations from different
states.

''Vets come here and want to talk,'' said Mr. Vanover, who served in an ordnance
battalion in Vietnam.

The vigil can be a grueling task, especially in winter. The canvas tent is
little protection from the cold. Last month, while temperatures were below zero,
the wind blew the tent down. Small donations collected in a glass jar barely pay
for food, kerosene and the rent for a Virginia headquarters where five
unemployed volunteers live in their off-hours.

Mr. Vanover works the vigil seven days a week, but to him it is not a job.

''It's more like a love affair,'' he said. ''It's something in me that won't let
go.''

''The war is not over,'' he added. ''It'll never be over till we get every man
back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

William Ahearn Is Promoted To Managing Editor of A.P.

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


William Ahearn, who has been the assistant managing editor of The Associated
Press, was named managing editor yesterday.

Mr. Ahearn, 41 years old, of Manhattan, will replace Wick Temple, who was named
director of human resources. The announcement was made to employees of the news
service by Louis D. Boccardi, president and general manager.

Mr. Ahearn, a native of Port Chester, joined the A.P. in 1971 as a broadcast
newswriter in the New York headquarters and moved to the general desk as an
editor and supervisor. He was later promoted to enterprise editor and became
assistant managing editor four years ago.

Mr. Ahearn is a veteran of the Vietnam War and is married.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: CHUCK NORRIS IN 'MISSING IN ACTION 2'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


Chuck Norris is back, dishing out patriotism and heavy sadism in ''Missing in
Action 2 - The Beginning,'' which opened yesterday at the UA Twin and other
theaters. Confused by the chronology? Don't be. ''Missing in Action,'' the first
film in the series, told what happened when Colonel Braddock (Mr. Norris), a
Vietnam veteran and former prisoner, went back to rescue missing men. Everything
went swimmingly: The men were rescued, and the film made money. So, a second
installment is here to reveal the details of Braddock's 1972 escape. If it too
does well, we will undoubtedly be seeing a Part 3 covering his high school
years.

The new film, like its predecessor, is primitive but shrewd. Its first hour is
devoted to ugly and repeated humiliations of Mr. Norris and the supporting cast,
so that the last section can present their ferocious assault on their Vietnamese
captors. In the first section, for instance, Mr. Norris is hung up by his feet
and has his head covered with a burlap bag containing an angry rat. No wonder
the rat is angry; this is not his lucky day. Mr. Norris does not lose fights
with any opponent, man or rodent.


His chief antagonist in the film is a Vietnamese officer who enjoys torturing
the hapless Americans, and who still has starched uniforms and polished boots
after a decade in the jungle. (This is only one of the film's numerous
peculiarities; another is that Mr. Norris, supposedly after years on prisoner's
rations, hasn't lost any weight.) His final bout with this officer provides a
karate match that Mr. Norris's fans ought to relish, although some of them
yesterday had a hard time enduring the suspense leading up to this climactic
moment.

''Don't kill him that way!'' pleaded one man in the audience, when it appeared
that Mr. Norris would merely blow up his enemy with a grenade. This man then
went on to make a highly imaginative suggestion. Mr. Norris, imaginative in his
own way, proceeded to deliver a series of kicks, punches and strangleholds,
dedicating these blows individually to each of his fellow prisoners. The last
stroke, and the nastiest, he dedicated to himself.


The Cast

MISSING IN ACTION 2, directed by Lance Hool; written by Arthur Silver and Larry
Levinson and Steve Bing; director of photography, Jorge Stahl; edited by Mark
Conte and Marcus Manton; music by Brian May; produced by Menahem Golan and Yoram
Globus; released by The Cannon Group, Inc. At UA Twin, Broadway and 49th Street;
UA East, First Avenue and 85th Street and other theaters. Running time: 96
minutes. This film is rated R. Colonel BraddockChuck Norris Colonel YinSoon-Teck
Oh NesterSteven Williams Colonel HoBennett Ohta MazilliCosie Costa OpelkaJoe
Michael Terry FranklinJohn Wesley


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chuck Norris in role

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Lessons of Libel Suits

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


To the Editor:


Now that the Sharon and Westmoreland libel trials are over, we should remember
why the Supreme Court decided some 20 years ago that public persons have to meet
a higher fault requirement than private persons.

Neither general could show he had been maligned intentionally. In the landmark
New York Times v. Sullivan case, the Court ruled in favor of uninhibited debate
on public issues. Justice Brennan quoted Judge Learned Hand: ''The First
Amendment presupposes that right conclusions are more likely to be gathered out
of a multitude of tongues, than through any kind of authoritative selection.''

But we also need to be mindful of the historian Carl Becker's plea for a balance
between freedom and responsibility. Freedom unrestrained by responsibility, he
said, becomes mere license; responsibility unchecked by freedom becomes
arbitrary power.

RICHARD F. HIXSON New Brunswick, N.J., Feb. 18, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL FORCE RAIDS LEBANESE VILLAGE

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, March 2


Israel was reported today to have mounted the largest operation in its week-and-
a-half-old crackdown in southern Lebanon, moving in force into a Shiite Moslem
stronghold.

An Israeli force estimated at 800 soldiers converged from three directions on
Marakah, an isolated hilltop village east of Tyre, at about 8:30 A.M., according
to sources with the United Nations peacekeeping force in the area. They said the
columns were supported by 3 tanks, 50 armored personnel carriers, 2 bulldozers
and 30 other vehicles.

One Lebanese was killed ''evading capture,'' Israeli officials said tonight, and
three houses were destroyed. Another house was bulldozed in the nearby village
of Teir Dibba, witnesses said.

Details were scarce because the Israeli Army has prohibited foreign
correspondents based in Beirut from entering the area it occupies. Also, Israeli
troops prevented local reporters from getting closer to Marakah than Teir Dibba,
at times firing over their heads.

But from Teir Dibba, bursts of automatic weapons fire could be heard along with
several explosions, according to reports reaching Beirut, and black clouds of
smoke could be seen from tires set afire by the villagers.

The Israeli crackdown began after a colonel, a major and a sergeant were killed
in ambushes in the first three days after the Israeli withdrawal from the Sidon
area on Feb. 16.

Since then, the Israelis have raided dozens of villages in the Shiite ''arc of
resistance'' between Tyre and Nabatiye. Tough new regulations have been put into
effect, including a dusk-to-dawn curfew, a ban on cars carrying only a driver -
to protect against suicide bombers - and a warning that unattended cars parked
by roadsides would be routinely blown up.

There were unconfirmed reports from some residents that the Israelis had at
times torn up the Koran in mosques and made grain supplies unusable.

Israeli officials, including Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who described the
operations as an ''iron fist,'' say the new measures will crush the mounting
Shiite attacks on Israeli occupation troops.

''It is working,'' an Israeli colonel, who was not identified, told a group of
Israeli-based journalists this week on an army-escorted tour of the new
checkpoint at the Qasmiye Bridge over the Litani River north of Tyre.

''Our feeling is that the population today is beginning to build a rejection
towards these radical elements that live among them,'' the colonel said.

The Israeli-based journalists who are allowed into the occupied area must travel
with an Israeli Army escort officer and are guarded by soldiers. Their
dispatches are subject to military censorship. The accounts noted that Lebanese
declined to speak to them.

Western diplomats in Beirut and military experts who have studied the growth of
Shiite attacks in the last year and a half expressed doubts that the new Israeli
crackdown would work.

''There seems to be every indication to the contrary,'' a Western diplomat said.
''I am definitely of the view, and I think we all are, that this is not going to
break their spirit, but is going to create something much worse than the
Israelis have ever had to deal with before.

''This is really a short-sighted effort,'' he went on. ''It only helps feed
those who are saying 'on to Jerusalem.' Nobody wins these kinds of wars, not the
Russians in Afghanistan, not the Americans in Vietnam, and not the Israelis in
Lebanon.''

Nabih Berri, the leader of Amal, the main Shiite organization, threatened
retaliation in northern Israel for the raids on the Lebanese villages today.

''From now on, whenever a southern village is attacked, a Galilean village will
be hit,'' Mr. Berri said at a news conference.

His remarks echoed those earlier in the week of Daoud Daoud, the clandestine
leader of Amal in the south.

Thus far, the Shiite fighters in the south have only mounted guerrilla raids
against the Israeli Army and its local militia allies and have not launched
terrorist attacks against Israel itself. But several recent attacks against
Israeli positions have used Katyusha rockets, which would be able to reach
across the border.

The National Resistance Front, in figures published in Beirut newspapers today,
said it had conducted 210 attacks against the Israeli Army and its local allies,
mainly the South Lebanon Army, in February. The front said it had killed 35
people, including 8 Israelis, and wounded 95.

Overnight, there were nine rocket or bomb attacks on Israeli positions; four
Israeli soldiers were reported wounded.

A pattern of the new Israeli tactics is emerging from the accounts of United
Nations troops, Beirut's Arabic language newspapers who have local
correspondents in the south, interviews with refugees from the raided villages
and the accounts of a few Western journalists who have managed to slip through
the Israeli lines.

Dozens Are Taken Away

The Israelis have been surrounding the villages, sometimes for several days,
preventing people from entering or leaving. They move into the villages shooting
into the air and order all the men to assemble. Houses suspected of containing
weapons are blown up or bulldozed. Dozens of people have been taken away under
arrest.

In some villages, according to local residents, the Israeli troops have ripped
up the Koran, the Moslem holy book, in the mosques. At times they have also
taken the stores of various kinds of grain the villagers have laid up to carry
them through the winter and mixed them together so they cannot be used,
villagers said. The grain cannot be replaced in the isolated villages at this
time of year.

''They went to the mosque, and first they cut the pages out of the Koran and
then they put their boots on it,'' said Suheila Kiserwani, who fled from the
village of Mansouri near Tyre with her three small children after an Israeli
raid last week.

''The Israelis went to each house and searched it,'' she said. ''Where we had
made supplies for the winter, they mixed everything together, the cornflour and
the bulghar and everything. They mixed out things so we don't have it anymore,
because it's not like a city where you can go to the store. The people are
hungry now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARK F. ETHRIDGE Jr.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 32, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, March 2


Mark F. Ethridge Jr., former editor of The Detroit Free Press, died of cancer
Friday at his home in Chapel Hill, N.C. He was 60 years old.

Mr. Ethridge was the editor of The Free Press for six years, beginning in 1966.
He was noted for his editorial opposition to the Vietnam War and his support of
black political power, said Joe Stroud, editor of The Free Press.

Mr. Ethridge, born in New York City, graduated from Princeton University and
joined The Free Press in 1960.

He left the paper in 1973 to become editor of The Akron Beacon Journal in Ohio,
then resigned from that post in 1976 to teach in the journalism department of
the University of South Carolina.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV'S INTERVIEWER PAR EXCELLENCE



BYLINE:
By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2220 words


Five years ago, Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News, put a little-known
diplomatic correspondent on the air at 11:30 P.M. to oversee a 20-minute nightly
interview and news analysis program. Few gave the venture much chance of
attracting a large enough number of viewers to survive. Although the
correspondent had distinguished himself with his reporting, he had yet to prove
himself as an anchor; indeed, he had been removed from a job as a weekend anchor
by Mr. Arledge only three years earlier.

Today, however, Ted Koppel is described by the ABC News chief as ''one of the
most unique and important talents in news and broadcast journalism, capable of
doing any kind of programming.'' And Mr. Koppel's program, ''Nightline,'' is, in
the view of Mr. Arledge, ''an institution in this country. It will be on
forever.''

As it marks its fifth anniversary this month, ''Nightline'' is likely to attract
more attention than usual by broadcasting five nights of programs from various
locations in South Africa. And next month, if current plans pan out, the
45-year-old Mr. Koppel may be seen broadcasting live from Saigon as the
Vietnamese Government marks the capture of the city by the North Vietnamese a
decade ago.

Although ''Nightline'' consistently runs behind NBC's ''Tonight Show'' with
Johnny Carson in the ratings and periodically behind CBS's late-night adventure
programs, the 5.5 million- strong average nightly audience for Mr. Koppel is
desirable enough to make his program profitable and thus relatively secure.



''Nightline'' can be distinguished from other television interview programs in
several ways. It is live, it engages several people in debate and discussion at
the same time, and it is tightly controlled by Mr. Koppel. Other live programs,
such as ABC's ''This Week With David Brinkley,'' are less sharply focused than
''Nightline'' because they employ more than one interviewer and usually query
guests one at a time. The ''MacNeil/ Lehrer NewsHour,'' which often has several
guests at the same time, generally lacks the electricity of ''Nightline''
because the program is taped in advance.

''Nightline'' is custom-designed for Mr. Koppel, whose style is singular on the
home screen - blunt, precisely framed questions, polite but effective
interjections, and the adroit management of debate among two or more guests. Mr.
Koppel listens attentively to his guests, keeping them on course and minimizing
rhetoric. Above all, he maintains an aura of fairness without lapsing into the
sort of reflexive even-handedness that often leaves viewers wondering what all
the fuss was about.

While Mr. Koppel is widely regarded as the most effective interviewer on
television, he is given highest marks for his work on subjects in which he has
expertise, such as foreign affairs and national security issues. On some other
subjects, however, where he may have only a glancing familiarity, his approach
is less distinctive.

''People say Koppel is the sharpest interviewer,'' says Dr. Sidney Wolfe,
director of the health research group at Public Citizen, a consumer advocacy
organization. ''That may well be for most of what he does, but on health and
science issues I can't say he is better than anyone else. The ability of
interviewers to move debates depends on their research staffs, and his staff is
good, but no better than anyone else's.''

Although Mr. Koppel's orchestration of live interviews on the air has an almost
improvisational quality, each ''Nightline'' telecast is carefully planned by the
program's editorial staff of 50. Included on the staff are four full-time
correspondents and 21 producers, many of whom prepare ''focus pieces'' -
videotaped background reports on the problem to be discussed on each program. In
its current half-hour form ''Nightline'' usually covers one subject; a 10- month
experiment with an hour-long format addressing as many as five subjects was
dropped last year after ABC management concluded that the program lacked a
consistent focus and affiliate stations objected to its length.



As was evident during the preparation of one recent broadcast, Mr. Koppel, who
also carries the title of editorial manager, helps shape the program at each
step, from framing the theme of the telecast to choosing the guests and finally,
on the air, determining the questions he will ask.

Mr. Koppel's day begins at 9 A.M., with his ritual of reading five domestic
newspapers at his home in Potomac, Md. From his kitchen table, he participates
in a conference call at 10:45 that includes his executive producer, Rick Kaplan,
who is based in New York, and his ''bookers,'' Stephen Lewis in New York and
Tara Sonenshine in Washington, staff members who find guests for the program and
prepare briefing papers for Mr. Koppel.

This particular morning's phone call lasts about a half-hour as the participants
debate the merits of prospective guests for that evening's program on the
escalating violence against United States narcotics agents by South American
drug dealers. The group settles on three guests: a Colombian politician, an
official of the Drug Enforcement Administration and an ABC News correspondent
who covers developments in the narcotics trade.

Mr. Koppel arrives at his office, as usual, at 3:30 in a bright red-and- black
380 SL Mercedes convertible, leased by ABC at his request instead of a
chauffeur-driven limousine. In his small office, dominated by a large Chinese
flag (a gift from U. S. Marines stationed in Peking in 1973) and cluttered with
piles of papers, books and a half-opened case of wine, he sits, arms folded, and
discusses his career.

Born in Lancashire, England, where his parents had fled from the Nazis, Mr.
Koppel came to the United States at age 13. He received his bachelor's degree in
speech from Syracuse University and a master's in journalism at Stanford
University. He joined ABC News in 1963, serving as a correspondent in Vietnam,
Hong Kong and Miami.

In 1976, he became a minor celebrity when he took a year's leave of absence from
his State Department post with ABC News to enable his wife, Grace Anne, to enter
law school. During that time, he collaborated with Marvin Kalb, an NBC News
correspondent, to write a thriller, ''In the National Interest.''

Shortly after his return to ABC in 1977, he quit for a month after a
disagreement with Mr. Arledge, then resumed his job covering the State
Department. In November 1979, following the seizure of the American Embassy in
Teheran by Iranian terrorists, Mr. Arledge appropriated the 11:30 P.M. time
period for a special news series, ''The Iran Crisis: America Held Hostage.'' Mr.
Koppel contributed State Department reports and then filled in as the anchor for
the network's continuing late-night updates on the hostage situation. On March
24, 1980, when the program was reshaped as ''Nightline'' and given a permanent
place on the schedule, Mr. Arledge officially named Mr. Koppel its anchor.



''Nightline'' is at its best - and attracts its largest audiences - with
breaking news when it can satisfy a viewer's hunger for facts and explanations.
Indeed, Mr. Koppel confesses a mild aversion to the pre- planned stories, such
as the one on this evening. ''We plan five of these a week,'' he says. ''If we
are lucky, we don't use any of them. Somehow the sharp edge comes from the late-
breaking story.''

Mr. Koppel is supremely confident; he admits to having been nervous on his
program only twice: in the presence of Geraldine Ferraro, last year's Democratic
Vice Presidential candidate, and of Orson Welles. At 5 foot 9, Mr. Koppel has a
thick, carefully cut thatch of reddish hair that occasionally has been the butt
of jokes. He puts in long hours, and once a week plays tennis after the program
at 1 A.M. near the Jefferson Monument.

Mr. Koppel has a droll side as well. In an appearance on NBC's ''The David
Letterman Show'' recently, Mr. Koppel not only did impersonations of Richard M.
Nixon and William F. Buckley Jr., he balanced a dog biscuit on his nose. ''I'll
balance a dog biscuit on my nose if it causes enough people to have the renewed
interest to tune us in if before they thought we were humorless stiffs,'' he
explains.



In preparing for his program, Mr. Koppel avoids cramming himself with
information. ''If you have identified the theme of the program, cramming is
incidental,'' he says. ''I need to know the facts and the guests.'' Late each
afternoon his bookers supply him with several pages listing the salient points
likely to be covered by each guest. For this particular evening's program, for
example, the notes on one guest, Ambassador Alvaro Gomez from Colombia, advise:
''Key point to get from Gomez. These traffickers have counted on a certain level
of tolerance from the U.S. and Latin American authorities. Now we are seeing
gov'ts stand up to these groups.'

Nor does Mr. Koppel write his questions in advance, although he does write a
two-page introduction just prior to airtime. After he is on the air, he composes
his first query and decides to whom it should be addressed as he watches the
focus piece and studies the demeanor of his guests on television monitors. He
alone determines the line of inquiry, and he rarely takes questions whispered by
his producer through the receiver he wears in his ear.

Mr. Koppel says he has learned from experience about the pitfalls of preparing
too much. When Mrs. Ferraro was on the program last year, he grilled her in a
manner that later prompted him to apologize.

''I was arrogant, '' he says. Because he wanted to pin her down on
foreign-policy questions that he believed she was not addressing, ''I was so
intense and had done such a job of preparing and having my questions carefully
honed that I was a different kind of interviewer and didn't go with the flow.''

If a program is a disaster, Mr. Koppel has been known to admit it. One Friday
this past January, ''Nightline'' devoted itself to the problem of herpes and
children; when it was over, Mr. Koppel decided a corrective program on the same
subject had to be done. ''The show was bad and misleading,'' he says. ''I had
done a bad job. The doctor and I were not in communication. The show scared a
lot of people.'' In his introduction to the corrective program the following
Monday, Mr. Koppel said as much to his viewers: ''Those of you who didn't see
the broadcast, don't worry. You're probably better off. Those of you who did,
give us another chance. We're about to try again.''

For Mr. Koppel, control is crucial to his role of balancing several voices. He
will not permit a guest to sit next to him. Guests in the Washington studio are
placed in separate rooms in front of cameras. They cannot see Mr. Koppel, and
they can only hear him through an earpiece. ''If guest A sits with me, he has a
tremendous advantage over guest B sitting in Teheran,'' he says. ''Guest A can
tap me on the arm or use body language if he wants to talk. This way all guests
are on an equal footing. It also puts me at a tremendous advantage. I am
accustomed to the technology and most guests are not. In live programming, I'll
take any edge I can get.''

Mr. Koppel is ever-fearful of being dull. ''Nightline'' focus pieces sometimes
incorporate popular music; on this night's program, the report uses the languid
rock song ''In the Air Tonight'' by Phil Collins behind slow- motion scenes of
drug users, reminiscent of a music video. ''If we perpetuate the notion that we
are not afraid to be boring, we will do so for a short time,'' he says. ''We
make a conscious effort to be interesting, and sometimes that means flimflammery
to get people into the tent.''

After the program on the drug trade, Mr. Koppel, still sitting at his anchor
desk, appears satisfied with the course of his interview, which was less
predictable than he had anticipated. ''I changed course in the middle of the
show,'' he says. ''The D.E.A. guy said more than I thought he would. What he
said loud and clear is: 'Are we mad at the Mexicans!' And he made it clear that
the Colombians are good boys. I never thought he would single out a country like
that.''



Periodically over the past five years there has been speculation that Mr. Koppel
would eventually be elevated to the anchor of ABC's evening newscast, ''World
News Tonight.'' Mr. Koppel, who recently signed a new three-year contract for an
estimated $1 million a year, stops short of dismissing such a suggestion.
''Nightline,'' he says, ''is my dream job - until the next best thing comes
along, and I'm not sure what that will be. If Roone says, 'Ted, will you do
'World News Tonight,' I would not say I will not do it. But he has not asked.''

Were he to leave ''Nightline,'' Mr. Koppel fears that the program would
disappear. ''It has nothing to do with conceit,'' he says. ''An awful lot of our
affiliates would like that half- hour back to play reruns of 'M*A*S*H' without
guilt. If I left the show, a number of the stations would use that as an
excuse.''

Mr. Koppel disavows any interest in entering politics, although he says he
''might someday'' go into the foreign service. ''For most of us who have covered
foreign policy,'' he says, ''there is a certain curiosity about what life is
like on the other side of the line.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ted Koppel

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
A Plan onAgent Orange

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


The 200,000 veterans who claim that they were harmed by the herbicide Agent
Orange while in Vietnam had their first look last week at a master plan for
distributing the $200 million that the drug's manufacturers have agreed to pay
in settlement of the claims.

''The claims submitted reflect an enormous amount of suffering and despair,''
wrote Kenneth R. Feinberg, the Washington lawyer who prepared the report for
Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn. But under
his plan, only 5 percent of the claimants, the totally disabled and families of
deceased veterans, would be eligible for any cash awards, and no one would get
more than $25,000, nontaxable and to be paid out by the companies over 10 years.
In accord with suggestions by veterans that higher sums should be paid for
disability than for death, the death benefits would not go above $5,000.

In addition, two $30 million endowments would be set up to provide services to
families of children suffering from birth defects and to assist veterans who did
not qualify for cash awards.

In a departure from the traditional legal approach to compensation, claimants
would not have to prove that Agent Orange actually caused their injuries, only
that they had been exposed to the herbicide during the spraying from 196l to
1972 and that the injuries are real. The awards would be limited to those who
had been subject to the heaviest exposure.

Lawyers for the veterans, who dropped their lawsuit against the drug companies
last May in exchange for the settlement, are expected to take issue with some
aspects of the plan at a public hearing before Judge Weinstein Tuesday in
Federal District Court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEBT TO THE INDOCHINESE IS BECOMING A FISCAL DRAIN

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The fall of South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia to the Communists a decade ago
started one of the great refugee dramas of the century. Since 1975, about 1.4
million Indochinese have found new lives abroad, more than half of them in the
United States. ''Our nation's resettlement of over 725,000 Vietnamese, Lao and
Cambodians ranks as one of the largest, most dramatic humanitarian efforts in
history,'' Roger Winter, director of the United States Committee for Refugees,
said last week. President Reagan underscored that success in his State of the
Union address when he singled out the achievements of Jean Nyugen, who fled with
her family from Vietnam in 1975 and who will graduate from West Point in May.

Despite the pride, some voices in the Reagan Administration and in Congress are
once again asking whether the war debt has now been paid and if it is time to
close the doors on all but the most exceptional cases. The burden will never
disappear, they say, pointing to recent dislocations in Cambodia.

So far, however, these voices still seem to be drowned out by those who feel it
is imperative to keep the program despite its annual Federal costs of more than
$600 million and additional millions in local expenditures.

When the United States opened the doors to the Indochinese refugees in the
chaotic spring days of 1975, President Ford and Congress foresaw a quick relief
effort to rescue the thousands of people who had ties to Americans. In that
first year, for example, 125,000 Vietnamese who fled by land, boat and plane
made it to the United States. The number dropped drastically in 1976 and 1977,
and the forecast of a short-lived refugee program seemed correct.

But the flow of refugees began to rise again, reaching a peak of about 167,000
in 1980 when the so-called ''boat people'' from Vietnam, many of them with no
American ties, filled up camps in Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Hong
Kong. Since 1975, 467,000 Vietnamese have made it to the United States, along
with 146,100 Laotians and 114,800 Cambodians. Although the number of ''boat
people'' has dropped since 1980, there seems to be no end to the flow of
refugees out of Indochina into Thailand. Some 181,000 people are in Southeast
Asian camps waiting for resettlement, and in recent weeks, a quarter million
Cambodians, who had been living in border camps, crossed into Thailand to escape
Vietnamese forces moving to crush resistance groups. About a thousand Laotians a
month are crossing the Mekong river to Thailand, where they are often chased
away.

The continuing flow of refugees has raised problems for immigration officials in
Washington who are trying to find ways to reduce the costs of bringing them in
at a stable rate of 50,000 a year from Asia and 20,000 from other parts of the
world. This is in addition to the numbers who enter the United States under
regular immigration rules.

Initially, the Indochinese who were admitted to this country were military
officers, politicians and others with obvious ties to the United States, or
those with family already here. But the number fleeing from Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia into Thailand increasingly included migrants seeking security and
better conditions as well as those fleeing for political reasons.

At least one State Department official, who asked not to be named, said he
believed the United States has now paid its moral debt for its involvement on
the losing side in Indochina. He said that increasingly, state governments are
going to lobby for curbs on refugees, most of whom are living in California and
Texas, with large numbers also in Washington state, New York, Pennsylvania,
Virginia, Illinois and Minnesota.

Jerry M. Tinker, a Congressional staff specialist on refugees, wrote in a recent
report that, ''what started out between 1975 and 1981 as a genuine refugee flow
has slowly but clearly shifted to a migratory flow now composed of some
refugees, a growing number of family reunification cases and an ever larger
economic migrant component.'' Because of this, Mr. Tinker warned that unless
something is done to return the ''economic migrants'' to where they came from,
leaving the political refugees free to come to the United States and other
countries, a ''backlash'' to curtail the refugee program may emerge.

But despite the talk of bringing the curtain down on the Indochinese refugees,
the reality seems to be that the program will continue indefinitely. Last year,
Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced that the United States had offered
to take the estimated 10,000 to 15,000 political prisoners in Vietnamese
re-education camps and several thousand Amerasian children. ''We must be aware
of the costs of our refugee program,'' he told Congress, ''but we should not
forget its valuable contributions to the social and economic life of our
country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of Indochinese refugees entering the U.S. in thousands; Photo of
refugees from Laos in Seattle

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SOUL-SEARCHING CONTINUES FOR GRAHAM GREENE

BYLINE: By John Vinocur

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words


John Vinocur is the Paris bureau chief of The New York Times.







 GRAHAM GREENE IS 80 NOW. FOR HIS birthday last fall, the brewery his
great-grandfather founded in 1799 made a special edition of its light St.
Edmunds ale for him with a special label. He liked that, and the beery lunch in
the English countryside that went with it. The rest of the birthday was not so
terrific, nor is being 80. ''It's not more peaceful, it's not more certain,'' he
says.  The big advantage, he suggests, is that at 80 you are more likely these
days to beat out encountering your end in a nuclear war. The other side of the
problem, Greene goes on, is that ''I really don't want to survive myself'' - a
phrase that doesn't have anything to do with nukes, but with the body hanging
around while the mind departs.

His 90-year-old uncle, on his way to a meeting at the Admiralty to discuss
whether to introduce reindeer in Scotland, fell under a train in a wartime
London tube station. He survived. Then, at 91, he fell out of a tree. He
survived again. ''I don't want to live to be that old,'' Graham Greene says, and
there is every reason to suppose he means it.

He talks simply and economically. He thinks his books have been more honest than
his life, which has been truthful enough. In the 1930's, after his third novel,
a reviewer described him as an imitator of Joseph Conrad, using far too much
metaphor and patching his books with false poetic-prose. The review affected
Greene deeply, and he talks as if he had read it for the first time yesterday,
and wanted to make sure his conversation, like his writing, was stripped of
spangles and bows.

This sparseness, this sense of control, of distance, is very much a part of his
''new book'' - ''The Tenth Man,'' a story outline for an unmade film written
just after World War II, that is now being published as what Greene calls a
short novel. (An excerpt appears on the following page.) He thinks it goes
''along quite nicely,'' although it is a piece of work he had completely
forgotten, written, as it was, for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the gloom of 1944
London on what Greene remembers as an ''almost slave contract.''

Greene left England in the 1960's for Antibes and a mediocre apartment building
on a mediocre street. He is still there, sitting most mornings at his desk that
faces a yacht basin, an old fort, and the Mediterranean.

Both the light and the view are good, but they don't necessarily help. He felt
his last book, ''Getting to Know the General,'' about the late Panamanian
President Brig. Gen. Omar Torrijos was ''very unsatisfactory,'' too dispersed,
not clearly enough a memoir or an autobiography or a travel book.

It is late to be thinking of failure, but Greene insists it's a natural
situation for novelists. He likes a line from John Masefield - ''The long defeat
of doing nothing well.'' In another person, the combination of the writer's
enormous reputation and the flirtatious talk of being a flop would be
outrageous, but Greene manages it. After all these years, after all this time in
which some final wisdom might have washed ashore, the theme of his last novel,
''Monsignor Quixote,'' he points out, is just plain doubt.

He is not writing now, and that is no incidental problem. Greene mentions it,
and that he feels depressed. A visitor, uncomfortable with the dead weight of a
writer telling him he may not have anything left, says something about everybody
feeling a bit burned out, daily, weekly, monthly, whatever.

''No,'' Greene says, his voice even, controlled. ''I want to feel it but I don't
feel like it,'' he says about writing.

Does that bother you very much?

''Yes, it does. I'm afraid of living too long away from writing.''

The silences are strong. Greene continues. ''I once thought I was finished,
after 'A Burnt-Out Case.' It wasn't a pleasure to think, 'I've had it.' But I
haven't got much confidence in another one now.''

Greene looks up as he says this. His eyes are very pale blue and do not blink.
His mouth is expressionless. It is a still look, and it shuts the door gently on
the subject.

So he is waiting and doing other things. Since he has described writing as
something like squeezing a boil, the wait now is for the irritation to develop.
In the meanwhile, he writes letters. Or he reads - recently a book by H.G. Wells
on his love life, and another by Chapman Pincher on moles in the British secret
service. Or he makes entries into the journal he keeps of his dreams. There are
more than 800 pages and they are indexed by letter, like the phone book, so that
he can find a dream about the sea or a hotel or Khrushchev or Haiti.

''It passes the time when I'm not working,'' he says.

Talk is also a relief. With the door shut on troubles with writing, he seems to
want to spend a little time setting some loose bits of information about him in
order. It is not necessarily the most affecting side of his personality. He
speaks rather more kindly of Kim Philby, the Soviet spy he knew as a young man
and with whom he still corresponds (''he was a traitor for a cause he believed
in''), than of those who have somehow miscast what Graham Greene remembers doing
or saying. Greene notes that Paul Theroux, in his novel ''Picture Palace,''
overdid the British novelist's relationship with Fidel Castro; Auberon Waugh
wrote that he slept with a revolver next to his bed - pure invention, Greene
insists. Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the Colombian Nobel Prize winner for
literature, told Castro that Greene played Russian roulette in Vietnam; wrong
again.

''Garcia Marquez gets things wrong. He's a nice man but he gets things wrong.''

There was more. It had been made out that he didn't like the United States,
which he last visited in the 1960's, and that he once said he preferred to wind
up in Russia than in California. The nuance was that he didn't much like parts
of America, such as New York; San Francisco and San Antonio were O.K. He placed
President Reagan on the same level as Pope John Paul II, men he didn't care for
a bit. ''This Pope is a horror,'' he said, and Reagan, with the same false smile
as the Pope, well, he owed all his success to television.

As for Russia and California, ''it was meant to be an ironic remark. I would end
my days much quicker in Russia than in California, because the Russians take
writing seriously, so I would soon find myself in a gulag, which is in a way a
compliment to a writer. Whereas one might drag out one's years in California in
some backwater.''

While Greene spoke, he had been sitting in a deep armchair. He looked a little
melancholy. Then he moved to his desk with its papers and a small statuette in
rough stone sent to him by someone in Yugoslavia. Sitting near his notebooks, he
seemed elegant, a handsome man with a long face and a long body wearing a tweed
jacket in gray-blue. He spoke of a ''working vacation,'' maybe to Capri, where
things have always gone well for him, and his voice sounded lighter, less
monotone.

Suppose you couldn't write again, he was asked. Suppose it didn't happen again?

''It would worry me a lot,'' Graham Greene said. He paused a bit, and then said:
''I'm trying to see if I can get on with a book I abandoned 10 years ago in
order to write 'The Human Factor,' or it may have been 'The Honorary Consul.'
No, I think it was 'The Honorary Consul.' ''

And you're looking . . .

''I'm looking at it, but I'm not sure.''

The writer paused. He was closing the door gently again.

''I'm just seeing whether it will . . . whether it will come alive.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Graham Greene (page 39); photo of Graham Greene (page 39);
photo of Graham Greene; photo of Graham Greene (page 36)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NATIONAL SECURITY'S NEW INSIDERS

BYLINE: By Michael Wright;Michael Wright is an editor of The Week in Review
section of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 58, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3773 words


THERE IS SACEUR?'' demands a voice from the command post.  All hell is breaking
loose in the Balkans, the Persian Gulf is ablaze with burning tankers, and the
Supreme Allied Commander Europe - Saceur - is AWOL. He turns up, breathless, 10
minutes late, explaining that his pregnant wife had a false alarm.

It is crisis-simulation time at Johns Hopkins University's School of Advanced
International Studies. And once Saceur has taken his place at a crowded table
bedecked with miniature national flags of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the game resumes.

Here in the university ''war room'' four floors above Massachusetts Avenue, in
the heart of Washington's diplomatic quarter, the uniforms of the day include
pin-stripe suits and sweatshirts. In real life, the 18 players are a cross
section of the Washington scene. One is an assistant naval attache at the
Spanish Embassy. Another is an American Foreign Service officer soon to be
posted to Europe. A third covers the Defense Department for a news magazine.
Most of the rest are graduate students working for their Ph.D's. An instructor
and four students who helped draft the 26-page game plan preside at their
slightly elevated command post.

The player taking the role of the Greek Ambassador bristles when he hears that
American infantry units have been alerted for deployment from the United States
to the Persian Gulf. Greece needs those troops, he complains, in view of the
just-disclosed Bulgarian invasion of Yugoslavia. At the halfway break, the
''diplomats'' and ''generals'' huddle over coffee and chocolate-chip cookies,
trying to reach informal agreement on actions that would insure allied comity
and good grades. The control group concocts a ''destabilizing element'' for the
scenario: The Soviet Union is interfering with flights into West Berlin and
moving troops toward the German frontier. A little something to make the class
improvise in a hurry.

Almost any week, similar scenes take place in campus war rooms across the
country. For these are boom times for the national-security community - that
eminently American phenomenon that combines civilian expertise with government
dollars to produce a flow of studies and recommendations for the better use of
American military power.

In most other countries with substantial military forces, such planning is left
to the government's career bureaucracy. In the United States these days, it is
the 2,000 or so specialists









 of ''the community,'' as they like to style their esoteric brotherhood, who
largely determine such things as the number of nuclear warheads to be mounted on
missiles planned for the next decade or the kind of warships to be added to the
expanding American Navy. It is these craftsmen of national security whose crisis
simulations are largely responsible for this country's contingency plans for the
use of force - whether in a brush-fire war in the third world or in a military
conflict with the Soviet Union ranging from conventional hostilities to nuclear
exchange.



By the same token, many of these specialists concentrate on how to prevent
potential crises from billowing into war. As the Reagan Administration prepares
for a new round of arms-control negotiations with Moscow, the ''community''
braces for renewed activity in this field.

The membership of this national-security club is a roster of the professions.
The list includes physicists, historians, engineers, political scientists,
chemists, lawyers, retired military officers and assorted academics. In the
mid-1940's, they were numbered in the dozens. By the late 1970's, their numbers
and influence had grown to close to present proportions. Reviewing the 1984
Presidential campaign and the scores of Congressional races that featured
differences over defense priorities, a former national-security official in the
Carter Administration said, ''From start to finish, the community set the
parameters of the debate, whether the subject was arms control or the need for a
new manned strategic bomber like the B-1.'' With the impatience with outsiders
that seems endemic to the trade, the analyst added: ''These questions are too
complicated for either politicians or the public. They need help.''

Because much of their work is highly classified or impenetrably arcane, the
civilian experts once conducted most of their business in relative obscurity -
with such notable exceptions as the late Herman Kahn, the futurologist who
popularized the expression ''thinking about the unthinkable.'' Today, the field
is crowded, the competition for prized Government posts and university faculty
appointments intense. And so, like it or not, many of the masterminds of
national security devote much of their time to hustling.

Freelance analysts are regulars on network talk shows when arguments rage in
Congress over, for instance, the merits of artillery shells that blanket their
targets with nerve gas, or when some distant jungle or desert war heats up. In
the fall of 1983, the tides had barely washed away the tracks left by Marine
Corps tanks on Grenada's beaches before a platoon of civilian defense experts
fired off a volley of pieces for the Op-Ed pages of the major newspapers,
explaining what had really happened on that Caribbean speck.

With a new session of Congress under way, such controversial and costly projects
as the MX missile and the Star Wars strategic defense system are coming under
increased scrutiny by the community's polemicists. Some of the graduate students
who participate in war games like the ones at the Johns Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies can expect to be making their debuts soon as
drop-in authorities on the MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour or in the hallowed pages of
Foreign Affairs - or, if they are really lucky, to fill important-sounding posts
in the Pentagon and the White House's National Security Council.  BY MOST
RECKONings, the community's genesis came in 1946, when the Air Force began
recruiting specialists from university campuses and private research
laboratories. Among other things, they were to devise ways of integrating the
atomic bomb into American strategy. The study was named Project Rand (standing
for research and development); it soon evolved into the Rand Corporation, the
prestigious research center at Santa Monica, Calif. Rand remains by far the most
famous of the half-dozen big research centers that get much of their operating
funds and directions from the Defense Department.

Over the years, the community has played an influential role in the periodic
revision of Washington's military strategy. During the Eisenhower era, the
doctrine was one of ''massive retaliation'' against any Soviet incursion into
Western Europe. Under President Kennedy, the doctrine was refined into
''flexible response'': The United States would use nuclear weapons to repel a
Soviet invasion of Western Europe if conventional defenses proved inadequate.
Under Presidents Carter and Reagan, the doctrine of nuclear deterrence shifted
from targeting Soviet industrial cen ters to targeting Soviet missile forces and
command centers. The reasoning was that this made the American deterrent more
effective - and that, if it came to war nonetheless, it would reduce civilian
casualties on both sides and enable the United States to ''prevail.''

During the divisive Vietnam War years, the community's standing declined; so did
the popularity of national-security studies on college campuses. But within the
last decade, the community has been expanded by a new generation of experts,
including a smattering of young women. ''National security is now a
mass-produced phenomenon,'' says Gregg Herken, an assistant professor of history
at Yale University. ''In the late 1940's, everyone who knew anything about
nuclear strategy could have fit around a patio table at Rand on a sunny day. Now
they are all over the place.''

Many of the specialists have zeroed in on Washington. The capital has become
''the center of the universe for the community,'' in the words of Brent
Scowcroft, a retired Air Force general who recently headed a commission
appointed by President Reagan to recommend a basing plan for the MX missile.
Some of the more influential practitioners of the trade have been appointed to
positions in the White House, the State Department and the various intelligence
agencies. Other specialists work on Capitol Hill, helping key senators and
representatives decipher, promote or oppose the Administration's military and
foreign-affairs initiatives. Still others may be found in the scores of
nonprofit research centers that devote much of their time to national-security
issues. Across the Potomac River, in Virginia, clusters of profit-making
consulting firms have sprung up alongside the city's perimeter freeway.

The private organizations - such as the Heritage Foundation, the Brookings
Institution, Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International
Studies and the American Enterprise Institute - often provide forums and desk
space for community superstars who have been bumped from the Federal payroll by
the Administration of the moment. Some of these centers carry out contract
assignments for the Government, but most of them are privately endowed or
supported by contributions from foundations and individuals. Much of the time,
their studies end up stacked, unread, in offices around Washington, but
occasionally they influence the private debates within the executive branch and
the more public discussions in Congress.

Foreign diplomats keep an especially watchful eye on the research centers.
''Because of the frequent changes of Administration,'' says Enid Schoettle,
international-affairs program officer at the Ford Foundation, ''think-tank
reports are considered a preview of what might happen after the next election.
The author of a particular report might become an Assistant Secretary in the
State or Defense Departments.''

Consultants are hired by the Pentagon to undertake a wide range of studies -
how, for instance, a bomber could be made nearly invisible to radar, or how
quickly America's steel mills could be fired up for a drawn-out land war in
Europe, or how a nuclear exchange would affect the world's weather. The
consultants also provide their military clients with ammunition for the pitched
battles that take place within the Defense Department. Thus, a company might be
retained by the Navy to produce a thick report endorsing the service's proposal
for a new fighter-bomber as superior in design to an Air Force version.

With Congress looking for cuts in the defense budget, and with the rise of
criticism about the quality and necessity of some of the consulting work, the
Pentagon isn't as free with money as it once was. Nevertheless, business is
still good for the community, in Washington and elsewhere. There has been an
explosion of new, smaller companies. ''There are hundreds of three- and four-man
shops,'' says Thomas D. Bell Jr., president of the Hudson Institute, a private
research center founded by Herman Kahn that shifted its headquarters recently
from Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., to a university campus in Indianapolis. ''If you're
a talented think- tank analyst who has gone as far as you can go, there's a
tendency to branch out and go as far as you can go on your own.''

At the same time, military contractors, in their never- ending quest for new
business, are also establishing small research centers. Northrup Corporation two
years ago opened its Analysis Center in downtown Washington. Three well-
connected members of the community feed company headquarters with informed
guesses about the future hardware requirements of the American military - and of
prospective foreign customers.

Private philanthropies have been expanding their investments in defense-policy
education and research. The John M. Olin Foundation, which takes a hawkish view
of national security, has established a fellowship program at Harvard University
for study of the subject. In January, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation announced it would award $25 million in grants for war and peace
studies to specialists and research centers in the broad area of international
security. The more dovish Carnegie Corporation has announced that it would
commit up to $7 million to university and other research aimed at reducing the
risk of nuclear war. Here and there, individuals are getting into the act.
Thomas J. Watson Jr., the former head of I.B.M. who served as Ambassador to the
Soviet Union from 1979 to 1981, has established the Center for Foreign Policy
Development at Brown University, his alma mater.

Academic training and research centers have been established in such cities as
New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and Cambridge, Mass. From these centers,
professors and other national-security experts frequently travel to Washington
for consulting work. Their fees vary, but they can make as much as $15,000 for a
specific assignment - say, helping the Army select sites for the
recruit-training centers that would be needed in wartime, or writing a scholarly
paper on the difficulties of stopping a Russian tank attack against Western
Europe. University tenure permitting, academics often sign up for tours in one
or another of the Government's national-security centers. Many universities are
expanding or reviving national-security programs that fell into disfavor during
the Vietnam War. Some have launched new courses of study in this area - to the
dismay, in some cases, of longer-established history and political-science
departments competing for university money and faculty slots.

What is the attraction of this exotic trade? Red- white-and-blue patriotism
appears to have been the appeal for many veterans of the community, especially
those who have been at it since the 1940's and 1950's. The younger members'
motivation appears to be more complex. ''Many are simply attracted to coercion
and violence,'' says Robert E. Osgood, a member of the State Department's Policy
Planning Council, on leave from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies. ''There is also the appeal of the great technical
complexity - the grammar of the subject has its own esoteric appeal. It's a body
of knowledge that is very complicated, something other people don't know unless
they've taken their vows.''

There is also the glitter and glory of it all. ''Students have come to regard
this as fairly glamorous work; they see their instructors and faculty advisers
dropping everything to dash out and board a plane for Washington,'' says William
W. Kaufmann, who retired last summer as professor of political science at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Consultant to a long line of Defense
Secretaries in the 1960's and 1970's, Mr. Kaufmann has in his day dashed off on
several hundred such flights.

Many of those who joined up during the last 10 years are decidedly more
tough-minded and less troubled by memories of Vietnam. ''The concerns of the
community reflect the events of the time,'' says Samuel P. Huntington, a Harvard
professor and mentor of many of the newcomers. ''By 1973, you had the
flickerings of a new generation - detente was waning, the Soviet Union was on
the move in Africa and other parts of the world. The new generation is
aggressive, concerned about countering the Soviet threat, focusing on
conventional-warfare problems and strategies.''

Properly launched, a young defense analyst can go far quickly. Jed C. Snyder was
26 years old in the formative period of the Reagan Administration - and already
a special assistant to the director of one of the State Department's
national-security enclaves. Today, he is deputy director of the Washington-based
national-security division of the Hudson Institute. Another analyst, only two
years older than Snyder, has worked for the Central Intelligence Agency and a
defense consulting firm; one of his tasks in the latter job was to conjure up
the effects of a limited nuclear war in the Middle East. He now advises an
influential member of the House of Representatives. ''It's easy to get seduced
into the business,'' he says. ''It's an awful lot like chess. It's the ultimate
game.'' BOOM TIMES OR NO, the community of the 1980's is by no means free of
internal stresses. Roger C. Molander, a former National Security Council staff
member and founder of Ground Zero, a public-interest lobby that focuses on the
dangers of nuclear war, is highly critical of many of his fellow experts,
comparing them to a priesthood run amok. Mr. Molander, who now heads the
Roosevelt Center for American Policy Studies, a three-year- old Washington
research center, says: ''The community has demonized what it regards as the
threats to the United States. Throughout history, whether it was a tribe or a
city- state, those responsible for security affairs have always characterized
the guys over the hill as people who had three heads and worshipped tree stumps.
That's how many in the community regards much of the world today.''

Perhaps the most divisive issue among the experts is whether a nuclear war can
be kept ''limited'' and ''won'' in any meaningful sense. Some of the high-level
specialists in the Reagan Administration believe it can be; the Defense
Department's 1982 guidance paper on military doctrine says so explicitly. This
position has been attacked by those colleagues on the outside who regard it as a
product of right- wing ideology. ''The Administration's ideological tests have
kept a lot of good people out of government,'' says Mark Garrison, a former
deputy chief of mission at the American Embassy in Moscow and now director of
the Center for Foreign Policy Development at Brown. ''The few good people who
have made it to the inside have had to submerge their views or risk losing their
jobs.''

Although many of the younger recruits to the community tend to take the hawkish
side of the argument, this is not true of all of them. Many of the new members
are of the opinion that a nuclear war, once started on any level, would
inevitably grow into an all-out engagement; they share the widespread fear that,
despite the recent improvement in political atmospherics, Washington and Moscow
are sliding toward thermonuclear catastrophe. ''The cyclical concerns about the
dangers of nuclear war bring new people into the field,'' says Alexander L.
George, professor of international relations at Stanford. ''The death of the
SALT II treaty and the escalation of rhetoric by President Reagan has stimulated
the community, made it more appealing by intensifying those worries.'' It is one
of these younger doves - Randall Forsberg, head of the Institute for Defense and
Disarmament Studies in Brookline, Mass. - who is generally credited with having
started the nuclear-freeze movement.

Another issue is whether the abstract nature of the work has divorced the
experts' calculations from the real world. A number of authorities in the field,
especially former military officers, fret about the fact that few of the newer
breed, be they hawks or doves, have ever spent a day in uniform. ''Military
service can bring the sobering effect of experience to the analyst,'' says
Andrew J. Goodpaster, a retired Army general who heads the Institute for Defense
Analyses, a Federally funded research center across the Potomac from Washington.
''It makes a big difference to have commanded troops in combat and seen your
troops killed. It makes you less inclined to talk blithely of brush-fire and
limited wars.''

Apart from disagreement on the issues, there are the occupational risks of the
job itself. With each change in Administration there is a wholesale reshuffling
of positions, as specialists with private research centers are drawn into
government service and experts who served the preceding Administration become
subect to wholesale dismissals. ''It's a phenomenon that reflects the United
States' unique political system,'' says Prof. Lawrence Freedman of the
Department of War Studies, King's College, London. ''Just as Renaissance princes
wanted their own artists, American Presidents like to have their own
national-security advisers around them.''

This magnifies the pressures on the experts to compete for positions and promote
their ideas. ''To succeed, you have to able to market your product,'' says Barry
M. Blechman, assistant director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency under
President Carter, who is now with the Georgetown University Center for Strategic
and International Studies. ''If you're published in an obscure journal, almost
no one will notice. You have to do good work and know how to push it.''

Finally, the entire national-security industry is dependent to a large extent on
the level of Federal defense spending, and many of the experts are beginning to
confront the notion that the boom might not go on forever. ''Because of Federal
deficits, there are certain to be far fewer dollars for the military down the
road,'' says one Washington consultant. ''Among the for- profit firms, we'll
likely see a gradual wave of mergers and some shakeout.'' Even if the defense
budget remains substantial enough to provide steady employment, there are
worries about a glut of talent. ''I wonder if we aren't approaching the
situation lawyers faced five years ago,'' says a State Department analyst. ''We
may be near a time when there are too few things to be done by a community this
big.''

The worry that appears to be shared at the deepest level, however, goes beyond
job security, bridges ideologies and doctrines and is likely to be expressed
only after a cocktail or two. This is fear of the danger that, as technological
progress gives each side less and less time to react to a real or imagined
military threat, nuclear war could be set off accidentally or in a situation
demanding instant decisions.

''I suppose many of us end up with the same kinds of rationalizations,'' says
Christopher J. Makins, a former deputy director of the Trilateral Commission who
is now with a Washington- area defense consulting firm. ''That what you're doing
is essential because it serves to strengthen deterrence. Or that maybe war would
be more likely if you weren't on the job.'' He paused for a moment and added:
''You take a pill or whatever you're given to doing, and hope that you get a
good night's sleep.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of class

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDREN'S BOOKS;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


Additional titles of interest: LITTLE SISTER AND THE MONTH BROTHERS. By Beatrice
Schenk de Regniers.  Illustrated by Margot Tomes. Clarion. Paper, $4.95. (Ages 3
to 8) A paperback edition of a 1976 retelling of a Slavic folktale of the good-
natured Little Sister who is aided by the Month Brothers in meeting her
stepmother's and stepsister's outrageous demands.  THE VOYAGE OF THE LUCKY
DRAGON. By Jack Bennett. Paper, Treehouse/Prentice-Hall. $5.95. (Ages 12 and up)
The first paperback edition of a compelling 1981 Australian novel about the
postwar exile of a Vietnamese family. They leave Saigon and set sail on the
Lucky Dragon, a decrepit sailing boat. The ordeal at sea includes nautical
detail, near starvation and madness.  WE READ: A TO Z. Written and illustrated
by Donald Crews. Greenwillow. $11.50. (Ages 3 to 6) A reissue of a stunning
alphabet concept book using primary colors and simple shapes - ''Ee, equal: as
many black as yellow'' shows a checkerboard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing from ''Little Sister and the Month Brothers''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TO BECOME A WRITER OR, HAVE YOU EARNED THIS CLICHE?

BYLINE: By Lorrie Moore; Lorrie Moore teaches English at the University of
Wisconsin, Madison. Her first book, a short-story collection entitled ''Self
Help,'' will be published later this month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


FIRST, try to be something, anything, else. A movie star/astronaut. A movie
star/ missionary. A movie star/kindergarten teacher. President of the World.
Fail miserably. It is best if you fail at an early age - say, 14. Early,
critical disillusionment is necessary so that at 15 you can write long haiku
sequences about thwarted desire. It is a pond, a cherry blossom, a wind brushing
against sparrow wing leaving for mountain. Count the syllables. Show it to your
mom. She is tough and practical. She has a son in Vietnam and a husband who may
be having an affair. She believes in wearing brown because it hides spots.
She'll look briefly at your writing then back up at you with a face blank as a
doughnut. She'll say: ''How about emptying the dishwasher?'' Look away. Shove
the forks in the fork drawer. Accidentally break one of the freebie gas station
glasses. This is the required pain and suffering. This is only for starters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: In your high school English class look at Mr. Killian's face. Decide
faces are important. Write a villanelle about pores. Struggle. Write a sonnet.
Count the syllables: 9, 10, 11, 13. Decide to experiment with fiction. Here you
don't have to count syllables. Write a short story about an elderly man and
woman who accidentally shoot each other in the head, the result of an
inexplicable malfunction of a shotgun which appears mysteriously in their living
room one night. Give it to Mr. Killian as your final project. When you get it
back, he has written on it: ''Some of your images are quite nice, but you have
no sense of plot.'' When you are home, in the privacy of your own room, faintly
scrawl in pencil beneath his black- inked comments: ''Plots are for dead people,
pore- face.''
Drawings


Take all the baby-sitting jobs you can get. You are great with kids. They love
you. You tell them stories about old people who die idiot deaths. You sing them
songs like ''Blue Bells of Scotland,'' which is their favorite. And when they
are in their pajamas and have finally stopped pinching each other, when they are
fast asleep, you read every sex manual in the house, and wonder how on earth
anyone could ever do those things with someone they truly loved. Fall asleep in
a chair reading Mr. McMurphy's Playboy. When the McMurphys come home, they will
tap you on the shoulder, look at the magazine in your lap and grin. You will
want to die. They will ask you if Tracey took her medicine all right. Explain,
yes, she did, that you promised her a story if she would take it like a big girl
and that seemed to work out just fine. ''Oh, marvelous,'' they will exclaim.

Try to smile proudly.

Apply to college as a child psychology major.


As a child psychology major, you have some electives. You've always liked birds.
Sign up for something called ''The Ornithological Field Trip.'' It meets
Tuesdays and Thursdays at 2. When you arrive at Room 134 on the first day of
class, everyone is sitting around a seminar table talking about metaphors.
You've heard of these. After a short, excruciating while, raise your hand and
say diffidently, ''Excuse me, isn't this Bird-Watching 101?'' The class stops
and turns to look at you. They seem to all have one face - giant and blank as a
vandalized clock. Someone with a beard booms out, ''No, this is Creative
Writing.'' Say: ''Oh - right,'' as if perhaps you knew all along. Look down at
your schedule. Wonder how the hell you ended up here. The computer, apparently,
has made an error. You start to get up to leave and then don't. The lines at the
registrar



Lorrie Moore teaches English at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Her first
book, a short-story collection entitled ''Self-Help,'' will be published later
this month.  this week are huge. Perhaps you should stick with this mistake.
Perhaps your creative writing isn't all that bad. Perhaps it is fate. Perhaps
this is what your dad meant when he said, ''It's the age of computers, Francie,
it's the age of computers.''


Decide that you like college life. In your dorm you meet many nice people. Some
are smarter than you. And some, you notice, are dumber than you. You will
continue, unfortunately, to view the world in exactly these terms for the rest
of your life.


The assignment this week in creative writing is to narrate a violent happening.
Turn in a story about driving with your Uncle Gordon and another one about two
old people who are accidentally electrocuted when they go to turn on a badly
wired desk lamp. The teacher will hand them back to you with comments: ''Much of
your writing is smooth and energetic. You have, however, a ludicrous notion of
plot.'' Write another story about a man and a woman who, in the very first
paragraph, have their lower torsos accidentally blitzed away by dynamite. In the
second paragraph, with the insurance money, they buy a frozen yogurt stand
together. There are six more paragraphs. You read the whole thing out loud in
class. No one likes it. They say your sense of plot is outrageous and
incompetent. After class someone asks you if you are crazy.


Decide that perhaps you should stick to comedies. Start dating someone who is
funny, someone who has what in high school you called a ''really great sense of
humor'' and what now your creative writing class calls ''self-contempt giving
rise to comic form.'' Write down all of his jokes, but don't tell him you are
doing this. Make up anagrams of his old girlfriend's name and name all of your
socially handicapped characters with them. Tell him his old girlfriend is in all
of your stories and then watch how funny he can be, see what a really great
sense of humor he can have.  Your child psychology adviser tells you you are
neglecting courses in your major. What you spend the most time on should be what
you're majoring in. Say yes, you understand.


In creative writing seminars over the next two years, everyone continues to
smoke cigarettes and ask the same things: ''But does it work?'' ''Why should we
care about this character?'' ''Have you earned this cliche?'' These seem like
important questions.

On days when it is your turn, you look at the class hopefully as they scour your
mimeographs for a plot. They look back up at you, drag deeply and then smile in
a sweet sort of way.


You spend too much time slouched and demoralized. Your boyfriend suggests
bicycling. Your roommate suggests a new boyfriend. You are said to be
self-mutilating and losing weight, but you continue writing. The only happiness
you have is writing something new, in the middle of the night, armpits damp,
heart pounding, something no one has yet seen. You have only those brief,
fragile, untested moments of exhilaration when you know: you are a genius.
Understand what you must do. Switch majors. The kids in your nursery project
will be disappointed, but you have a calling, an urge, a delusion, an
unfortunate habit. You have, as your mother would say, fallen in with a bad
crowd.


Why write? Where does writing come from? These are questions to ask yourself.
They are like: Where does dust come from? Or: Why is there war? Or: If there's a
God, then why is my brother now a cripple?

These are questions that you keep in your wallet, like calling cards. These are
questions, your creative writing teacher says, that are good to address in your
journals but rarely in your fiction.

The writing professor this fall is stressing the Power of the Imagination. Which
means he doesn't want long descriptive stories about your camping trip last
July. He wants you to start in a realistic context but then to alter it. Like
recombinant DNA. He wants you to let your imagination sail, to let it grow
big-bellied in the wind. This is a quote from Shakespeare.  TELL your roommate
your great idea, your great exercise of imaginative power: a transformation of
Melville to contemporary life. It will be about monomania and the fish-eat-fish
world of life insurance in Rochester, N.Y. The first line will be ''Call me
Fishmeal,'' and it will feature a menopausal suburban husband named Richard, who
because he is so depressed all the time is called ''Mopey Dick'' by his witty
wife Elaine. Say to your roommate: ''Mopey Dick, get it?'' Your roommate looks
at you, her face blank as a large Kleenex. She comes up to you, like a buddy,
and puts an arm around your burdened shoulders. ''Listen, Francie,'' she says,
slow as speech therapy. ''Let's go out and get a big beer.''


The seminar doesn't like this one either. You suspect they are beginning to feel
sorry for you. They say: ''You have to think about what is happen

ing. Where is the story here?''

The next semester the writing professor is obsessed with writing from personal
experience. You must write from what you know, from what has happened to you. He
wants deaths, he wants camping trips. Think about what has happened to you. In
three years there have been three things: you lost your virginity; your parents
got divorced; and your brother came home from a forest 10 miles from the
Cambodian border with only half a thigh, a permanent smirk nestled into one
corner of his mouth.

About the first you write: ''It created a new space, which hurt and cried in a
voice that wasn't mine, 'I'm not the same anymore, but I'll be O.K.' ''

About the second you write an elaborate story of an old married couple who
stumble upon an unknown land mine in their kitchen and accidentally blow
themselves up. You call it: ''For Better or for Liverwurst.''

About the last you write nothing. There are no words for this. Your typewriter
hums. You can find no words.


At undergraduate cocktail parties, people say, ''Oh, you write? What do you
write about?'' Your roommate, who has consumed too much wine, too little cheese
and no crackers at all, blurts: ''Oh, my god, she always writes about her dumb
boyfriend.''

Later on in life you will learn that writers are merely open, helpless texts
with no real understanding of what they have written and therefore must
half-believe anything and everything that is said of them. You, however, have
not yet reached this stage of literary criticism. You stiffen and say, ''I do
not,'' the same way you said it when someone in the fourth grade accused you of
really liking oboe lessons and your parents really weren't just making you take
them.

Insist you are not very interested in any one subject at all, that you are
interested in the music of language, that you are interested in - in -
syllables, because they are the atoms of poetry, the cells of the mind, the
breath of the soul. Begin to feel woozy. Stare into your plastic wine cup.

''Syllables?'' you will hear someone ask, voice trailing off, as they glide
slowly toward the reassuring white of the dip.


Begin to wonder what you do write about. Or if you have anything to say. Or if
there even is such a thing as a thing to say. Limit these thoughts to no more
than 10 minutes a day, like sit- ups, they can make you thin.

You will read somewhere that all writing has to do with one's genitals. Don't
dwell on this. It will make you nervous.


Your mother will come visit you. She will look at the circles under your eyes
and hand you a brown book with a brown briefcase on the cover. It is entitled:
''How to Become a Business Executive.'' She has also brought the ''Names for
Baby'' encyclopedia you asked for; one of your characters, the aging
clown-schoolteacher, needs a new name. Your mother will shake her head and say:
''Francie, Francie, remember when you were going to be a child psychology
major?''

Say: ''Mom, I like to write.''

She'll say: ''Sure you like to write. Of course. Sure you like to write.''


Write a story about a confused music student and title it: ''Schubert Was the
One with the Glasses, Right?'' It's not a big hit, although your roommate likes
the part where the two violinists accidentally blow themselves up in a recital
room. ''I went out with a violinist once,'' she says, snapping her gum.


Thank god you are taking other courses. You can find sanctuary in 19th-century
ontological snags and invertebrate courting rituals. Certain globular mollusks
have what is called ''Sex by the Arm.'' The male octopus, for instance, loses
the end of one arm when placing it inside the female body during intercourse.
Marine biologists call it ''Seven Heaven.'' Be glad you know these things. Be
glad you are not just a writer. Apply to law school.


From here on in, many things can happen. But the main one will be this: You
decide not to go to law school after all, and, instead, you spend a good, big
chunk of your adult life telling people how you decided not to go to law school
after all. Somehow you end up writing again. Perhaps you go to graduate school.
Perhaps you work odd jobs and take writing courses at night. Perhaps you are
working and writing down all the clever remarks and intimate personal
confessions you hear during the day. Perhaps you are losing your pals, your
acquaintances, your balance.

You have broken up with your boyfriend. You now go out with men who, instead of
whispering ''I love you,'' shout: ''Do it to me, baby.'' This is good for your
writing.

Sooner or later you have a finished manuscript more or less. People look at it
in a vaguely troubled sort of way and say, ''I'll bet becoming a writer was
always a fantasy of yours, wasn't it?'' Your lips dry to salt. Say that of all
the fantasies possible in the world, you can't imagine being a writer even
making the top 20. Tell them you were going to be a child psychology major. ''I
bet,'' they always sigh, ''you'd be great with kids.'' Scowl fiercely. Tell them
you're a walking blade.


Quit classes. Quit jobs. Cash in old savings bonds. Now you have time like warts
on your hands. Slowly copy all of your friends' addresses into a new address
book.

Vacuum. Chew cough drops. Keep a folder full of fragments.

An eyelid darkening sideways.

World as conspiracy.

Possible plot? A woman gets on a bus.

Suppose you threw a love affair and nobody came.

At home drink a lot of coffee. At Howard Johnson's order the cole slaw. Consider
how it looks like the soggy confetti of a map: where you've been, where you're
going - ''You Are Here,'' says the red star on the back of the menu.

Occasionally a date with a face blank as a sheet of paper asks you whether
writers often become discouraged. Say that sometimes they do and sometimes they
do. Say it's a lot like having polio.

''Interesting,'' smiles your date, and then he looks down at his arm hairs and
starts to smooth them, all, always, in the same direction.B


From ''Self-Help,'' a collection of short stories by Lorrie Moore to be
published by Alfred A. Knopf. Copyright c 1985 by M. L. Moore.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPPLE THE SANDINISTAS

BYLINE: By Joshua Muravchik; Joshua Muravchik is author of a forthcoming book
about United States human rights policy.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 877 words


Shedding the pretense that United States aid to the Nicaraguan rebels could aim
at any goal other than the overthrow of the Sandinista Government, President
Reagan has significantly strengthened the case for aid. He has also helped us
focus on the heart of the matter: should the United States encourage the
overthrow of Communist governments where we can? To me, both the history of our
relations with the Soviet Union and the particular circumstances in Central
America argue strongly that we should.


Both sides of the debate have been clarified in recent weeks. House majority
leader Jim Wright took issue with the President: ''I don't think we have any
call to appoint ourselves as God's avenging angels and reform by force any
government with whom we disagree.'' Secretary of State George P. Shultz spoke
for the other side, noting that such opposition to aiding the ''contras'' is in
effect to accept the ''Brezhnev doctrine.'' It is, as Mr. Shultz aptly put it,
to accept the Kremlin's notion that ''What's mine is mine. What's yours is up
for grabs.''

The implications of this doctrine have grown more ominous since the American
policy of ''containment'' expired on the battlefields of Vietnam. In adopting
the containment policy, the United States decided to avoid challenging the
integrity of the Soviet empire - which then lay entirely under the shadow or the
feet of the Red Army - but to resist its expansion. As George F. Kennan, who
first formulated the policy, put it, we would ''confront the Russians with
unalterable counter-force at every point where they show signs of encroaching
upon the interests of a peaceful and stable world.''

The hope, said Mr. Kennan, was to ''increase enormously the strains under which
Soviet policy must oper- ate'' and thereby ''promote tendencies which must
eventually find their outlet in either the breakup or the gradual mellowing of
Soviet power.'' Some significant ''mellowing'' of the Soviet domestic system did
indeed occur after Stalin's death, but the Soviet Union's relentless drive to
expand its empire and to abet the seizure of power by Communists wherever
possible has outlived the policy of containment.  As a result, in the mid-1970's
the United States turned away from containment and toward detente, hoping, as
Henry A. Kissinger put it, ''to create a vested interest in mutual restraint.''
But even had it prospered, detente offered little hope for solving the problem
that containment aimed to solve: Soviet officials stated repeatedly that detente
did not obligate them to cease supporting efforts by Communists to seize power
where they did not already hold it. President Jimmy Carter tried his own version
of detente, more conciliatory than the Kissinger version, but its futility - its
uselessness in inhibiting Soviet expansion - became apparent even to Mr. Carter
himself with the invasion of Afghanistan.

Since then, American policy has grown more assertive and our arsenals are being
restocked. But there is no prospect of a return to containment. Even had we the
will, the balance of power makes it impossible for us to parry the Russians at
every point of their choosing.

Have we, then, no alternative but to resign ourselves to a gradual and
inexorable increase in the number of Communist countries - an increase that
could eventually shift the balance of power decisively against the United
States? Of course, this might take a very long time, but even in the short run
there may be devastating consequences. How can we accept asymmetrical rules that
allow countries to go from being non-Communist to Communist, but never the other
direction? Such asymmetry works to sap the morale of non-Communist forces and to
validate Communism's claim to be the wave of the future.  There is an
alternative. The network of Communist governments in the Soviet camp now extends
far beyond the shadow of the Red Army, into Africa and Central America. This
network can be attacked at its fringes, if there are indigenous forces willing
to do so, without the risk of provoking a military confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union. This offers the basis for a strategy that,
in the absence of containment, might still prevent the relentless accretion of
Soviet power. And the successful overthrow of Communism by indigenous forces in
even one country might do incalculable damage to Communism's historicist
mystique.  This argues strongly that giving the Nicaraguan rebels as much
support as they need is very much in the interest of the United States. But that
is not the only reason to aid the contras. The well-being of the Nicaraguan
people is also very much at issue here.  The Sandinistas have not yet turned
Nicaragua into a totalitarian state, but there is little doubt that this is
their goal. The repressive manipulation of food rationing, the creation of a
vast network of internal espionage and coercion, the militarization of society,
the vicious use of Government-organized mobs to assault dissidents - all are
chilling auguries of the brutal future that the Sandinistas have in store for
the people of Nicaragua. A fighting chance to spare themselves that future is at
least as much in their interests as the ouster of the Sandinistas is in ours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

10-YEAR SEARCH BRINGS CAMBODIAN BOY TO U.S.

BYLINE: By LISA WOLFE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


For more than a decade, Phat and Sokha Mau, Cambodians living in Queens, have
been piecing together bits of telegrams, accounts of telephone calls and the
scattered recollections of Cambodian refugees, all in the hope of finding the
son they left behind in a country now ravaged by war.

On Friday, 11-year-old Sophal Mau finally came home.

Sophal - whose whereabouts was confirmed in March 1983 and whose release was
negotiated by Representative Stephen Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat, on a trip to
Cambodia last December - left Phnom Penh for Bangkok last Thursday. In Bangkok
he was met by his father, who had never seen the child before.



'Many Children Died'

Although there are more than 100,000 Cambodian refugees in the United States,
State Department officials say Sophal may be the first legal emigrant from
Cambodia since 1975, when Pol Pot seized control of the country.

''I knew many children died and I was afraid he was one,'' said Phat Mau, who
arrived in New York in 1973 to work at the Cambodian Mission to the United
Nations, leaving two children and a pregnant wife in Phnom Penh.

When Mrs. Mau had given birth and decided it was time for her and the older
children to rejoin Mr. Mau, she left the newborn son, Sophal, in the care of his
grandmother. Mrs. Mau thought that in three years, when the foreign assignment
ended, the family would return to Cambodia and be reunited.

But the plan was smashed when Pol Pot came to power. People were killed,
communication was sealed and the Mau family could only wonder what had become of
Sophal. Was he one of the hundreds of thousands who were killed or driven from
the capital, or had he managed to escape?

And so Mr. Mau began a dogged 10- year search for the answer.

But the United States Government, which severed ties with Cambodia in 1975, had
no personnel in the country who might assist him. Like Cambodians around the
world searching for their lost ones, Mr. Mau's only hope was to cultivate a
network of government, relief-agency and refugee sources from whom he could
gather clues.

The effort was was made easier by the fact that in 1975 Mr. Mau began working at
the Lutheran Refugee and Immigration Service, a private resettlement agency.
This helped him accumulate contacts, he said.

Mr. Mau's first position was to assist refugees being resettled by way of
Kennedy International Airport. ''At the airport I would ask everyone did they
ever see my son or hear about him,'' said Mr. Mau, a former law professor who
speaks four languages.

Posted the Letters

The effort extended to Thailand. ''Oh, I sent letters and letters to my friends
in refugee camps telling them to look for my son,'' Mr. Mau said. ''Then they
posted the letters where everyone could see them.''

But despite these efforts, the late 1970's produced nothing but a string of
false leads and aborted hopes.

Sophal, in fact, was safe. After the death of his grandmother, he had been taken
in by a family of six who lived in a village called Stung Trang, which is in the
province of Kampang Cham, northeast of Phnom Penh.

It is still unclear how Sophal got to the family, but it is obvious from the
smile that crosses his delicate face just how much they came to mean to him.

According to Mr. Mau, members of the Khmer Rouge would sometimes enter the
village to sweep it clean of those, like Sophal, who did not belong there. The
family, Mr. Mau said, would assure the Khmer Rouge that Sophal was their own
son.

Indeed, Sophal thought they were his real family. ''I did not know I had family
in the United States,'' he said, his father translating his words.

As the boy took care of the village cows and gathered fruit for the family early
in the morning, Mr. Mau's diligent network was working its way closer to him.

In 1983, on a lead from a family friend who was living in Paris, Sophal was
finally tracked down by an aunt in Cambodia.

Yesterday, as Mr. Mau recalled the turning point of his search, he reached into
a manila folder bulging with notes, letters and telegrams in French, English and
Khmer and produced a telegram from the aunt. The message, dated March 25, 1983,
said she had brought Sophal to live with her in Phnom Penh.

''It is typical for the Cambodian grapevine to work this way in tracking someone
down,'' said a State Department official who specializes in refugee affairs.
''But usually the people are found along the Thai border, not like this, inside
the country.''

The ensuing struggle to get Sophal out of Cambodia was almost as difficult as
finding him.

James Godemann, coordinator for immigration services at the Lutheran Council,
said one of the few points that the Cambodian Foreign Ministry communicated
directly with New York in the decade of searching was that Sophal would need a
United States visa to leave the country.

This was hard to obtain, he said, because under American law, a person must be
seen by a United States Government official before he may be granted a visa. And
there were no official American personnel in Cambodia or Vietnam to fill this
requirement.

Little progress was made until December 1984, when officials from the Lutheran
Council in Washington heard that Representative Solarz, the chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, was planning a
trip to Southeast Asia. Mr. Mau met with a representative from Mr. Solarz's
office to explain his plight.

On Dec. 25, when Mr. Solarz met with Hun Sen, who was then Cambodia's Foreign
Minister, the Congressman handed him a letter of humanitarian parole that
Washington had issued on the boy's behalf.

The Congressman said the last 10 minutes of a two-hour meeting with the Foreign
Minister was devoted to talk of the boy. Mr. Solarz said Hun Sen, who said
Cambodia had been reluctant to release the boy because he might not be admitted
to the United States, consented on the spot to let the boy go.

Mr. Solarz, who called the decision to release Sophal ''a flicker of humanity
amidst horror'' that ''somewhat surprised'' him, said he did not think it
signaled any new policy on the part of Phnom Penh.

Mr. Mau said he received word three weeks ago through the Christian World
Service offices in Phnom Penh that Sophal would be permitted to leave Cambodia
on Feb. 28.

Dean Hancock, a Christian World Service official, accompanied Sophal to Bangkok,
where he was met by his father.

But Mr. Mau was unable to reach his family from Bangkok to give them his return
flight plans.

On Friday afternoon, when Mrs. Mau returned from the office where she works as a
typist, and when Sophal's brother, Sopha, 16, and sister Sontary, 13, returned
from school, the family reunion that greeted them was a partial surprise.

''About the best surprise I ever had,'' said Mrs. Mau, who spent yesterday
morning buying shirts, pants and a tie for Sophal.

''I'm going to teach him math,'' Sopha said. ''And my sister is going to teach
him English.''

''Our first lesson is tonight,'' said Sontary. ''I have the books I learned from
when I was little. I kept them for when my brother would come home.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sophal Mau with family; Photo of Sokha Mau with her newborn
son, Sophal, 11 years ago in Cambodia

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A JOBS STUDY REVEALS A PATTERN OF PROBLEMS AMONG VETERANS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Ron Suskind

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


A study of Vietnam veterans in New York City that will be the basis of a jobs
program has found that black and Hispanic veterans and those who saw heavy
combat are plagued by severe occupational, social and psychological problems.

''The importance of what we found,'' said Dr. Robert S. Laufer, a sociology
professor at Brooklyn College who led the research, ''is that veterans don't
just have serious and severe employment problems, that they have are much more
likely to have social and psychological problems as well.''

''The study,'' he said, ''will tell us how to design a program that addresses
deeper problems of the veteran.''

The study, conducted by the Ralph Bunche Institute of City University, is to be
released formally today by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission. The
commission, a panel appointed by Mayor Koch, is in charge of both building a
monument in lower Manhattan and devising the jobs program, which is to be
outlined today.

After a year of interviews and demographic analysis of 506 veterans in New York,
the researchers concluded that nearly 41 percent of the Vietnam veterans studied
have serious employment or financial problems, and that there is a ''consistent
relationship between race, ethnicity and combat level and these career
deficits.''

Beyond that, the study correlated employment problems with such underlying
influences as marital discord, alcohol and drug abuse, and flashbacks,
nightmares and painful memories resulting from the trauma of combat.

The level of combat was rated on a scale, based on such experiences as receiving
enemy fire, being wounded or seeing others killed or wounded, serving on
gunboats, river patrols, helicopter attack gunships or evacuation units, and
making advance patrols for landmines or enemy troops.

The study compared veterans who served in Vietnam, of which there are roughly
150,000 in New York City, with a similar demographic group of veterans from the
same era who did not serve in Vietnam. The average age of those interviewed was
36.

The study, based on interviews conducted in the spring and summer of 1984, made
these findings, among others:


- Veterans involved in heavy combat - roughly one-quarter of the total - were
unemployed at three times the rate of those involved in light combat.


- Of veterans who saw heavy fighting, 45 percent reported having at least four
symptoms of post-traumatic stress in the last year, such as nightmares,
sleeplessness, flashbacks and anxiety from recalling combat.


- Ten percent of the Vietnam veterans were unemployed, about 2 percent more than
the citywide rate last year, and an additional 5 percent had dropped out of the
labor force and were not looking for work. Of the Vietnam veterans in the labor
force, 25 percent had secondary or non-career jobs, which the report said were
''characterized by high turnover, low wages and a lack of job security.''


- While the unemployment rate among white veterans was 6 percent, the rate was
nearly three times that among black veterans, at 17 percent, and Hispanic
veterans, at 16 percent.


- The rate of divorce or separation for vet erans who saw heavy combat was 65
percent, as compared with 29 percent for those who saw light combat, and 39
percent for the Vietnam-era veterans who did not serve in Vietman.


- While heavier combat experience generally resulted in heavier use of drugs,
veterans who had used both marijuana and harder drugs, reported replacing drugs
with alcohol. Mr. Laufer attributed the shift to ''natural changes people make
as they grow older.''


- Twenty-one percent of veterans involved in heavy combat and 24 percent of
those involved in moderate combat were later arrested for criminal offenses,
while 15 percent of those with light combat experience were later arrested. This
compares with 11 percent for veteran who served elsewhere.

''We wanted to get a specific idea of what exactly were the employment
problems,'' said Peter P. Mahoney, deputy director of the commission. ''You
can't just treat the problem alone by giving a guy a job. In six months, he may
lose it.''



Emphasis on Minority Veterans

He said the program would concentrate on the ''two groups who seem to be most
significantly affected by unemployment and underemployment - minority veterans
in general and those who were involved in heavy combat in Vietnam.''

The program is to be run privately, under contract to the city, with a budget in
its first year of at least $500,000. Potential providers of counseling and
placement must submit to the commission a formal outline of the services they
could provide.

''We are encouraging the development of a consortium or coalition,'' Mr. Mahoney
said, because the requirements of the jobs program ''may be beyond the
capability of any one particular group.''

These groups might include veterans groups, community organizations, labor
unions, educational institutions and private companies, Mr. Mahoney said.



May 7 Dedication

The commission has already raised $800,000, much of it to pay for a monument
being built in Vietnam Veterans Memorial Plaza.

The plaza, formerly known as Jeanette Park, sits at the foot of Coenties Slip,
between Water and South Streets. Etched with excerpts from letters written home
by soldiers in Vietnam, the glass-brick monument is to be dedicated on May 7,
the 10th anniversary of the end of American combat involvement in Vietnam.

May 7 is also the deadline for the commission to raise $1 million from private
donors to qualify for a $1 million pledge made last week by Donald J. Trump, the
developer and a co-chairman of the memorial panel.

If the $2 million can be raised, Mr. Mahoney said it would be used for the jobs
program, as the cost of building the monument has already been met.

''After the first year we will evaluate the program,'' said Hames Noonan, a
member of the commission's executive committee, ''and, if the money is there,
strengthen and expand the parts that are working. If we demonstrate success the
program could be replicated in other parts of the country.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

5-PART SERIES ON 'TODAY' LOOKS AT VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: WHAT is Vietnam like today? A five


-part report on NBC's ''Today'' suggests that high spirits, good works and
incipient capitalism flourish. Does this mean the reports tilt toward America's
old adversaries? Well, yes and no, and if this is equivocal, so are the reports.
Don't dismiss them for that, however; they are fascinating pieces of work.

''Today,'' beginning at 7 A.M. on Channel 4, will show the reports, each about
five minutes long, today through Friday. They are done by Jon Alpert, a
freelance television journalist, whose reporting style makes him sound like a
game-show host. In fact, the style is perfectly valid, a legitimate way of
eliciting information. Many reporters sound that way when they are at work,
although on television we seldom get to hear them.


Thus in this morning's segment, Mr. Alpert visits a ''re-education'' camp where
479 former officers in the South Vietnamese Army are interned. ''How are they
treating you?'' Mr. Alpert asks the prisoners briskly, or ''Do you get enough to
eat?'' Answers vary, although by and large camp life seems cheerful. The
commandant smiles; prisoners have their own band.

Presumably, Mr. Alpert is at a model camp, freshly swept and scrubbed for his
visit. Does this matter? This critic doesn't think it does. Few pieces of
journalism, standing alone, give us the whole truth about a subject. Truth
unfolds only over a period of time, usually through many stories. Mr. Alpert's
reports are pieces in a mosaic.

In tomorrow's report, we see United States officials processing Vietnamese
emigrants at the airport in Ho Chi Minh City. Clearly, they want to leave. On
Wednesday, Mr. Alpert re-visits some of the same Vietnamese he interviewed in
the 1970's. Apparently, their lives are unchanged.

On Thursday, Mr. Alpert visits a restaurant that employs war orphans. They work
as cooks and waiters and use their salaries to pay for English lessons and
electric guitars. They are touching. On Friday, we get the most entertaining, as
well as least rewarding, report in the series: Mr. Alpert, more jovial than we
want him to be, visits another restaurant. This one serves bats, snakes and
armadillos.


The preview tapes supplied by NBC for the five reports were not fully edited.
Some material was repetitious; introductory remarks were missing. Yet, it was
clear that Mr. Alpert was reporting on a Vietnam that was neither as grim as
other journalists have said, nor as hopeful as apologists have suggested.

In part, this is because Mr. Alpert's reports deal mostly with people, not
policy. Government officials and old Army generals are absent. The Vietnamese we
see and hear (English seems to be the second language) smile invitingly for the
cameras. Often they mug. It is a useful reminder that people are much the same,
no matter where they live. Mr. Alpert is giving us a worthwhile look at a
country that for the most part is still shrouded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MEETING OF ANZUS ALLIANCE IS POSTPONED



BYLINE:
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


The United States, in its latest move to press New Zealand to lift a ban on
warships capable of carrying nuclear weapons, won agreement from Australia today
to postpone indefinitely any further meetings of the three-nation Anzus
alliance.

The 34-year-old alliance of Australia, New Zealand and the United States has
been shaken for the last month by a dispute between New Zealand and the United
States over nuclear policy.

Last month, Prime Minister David Lange of New Zealand, whose Labor Party swept
into power last July on an antinuclear policy, announced that he was barring a
scheduled port call by an American destroyer because Washington would not say
that the ship did not carry nuclear arms.

The United States, as a matter of policy, does not issue such statements, and it
has said that New Zealand's policy may damage not only the Anzus alliance but
other American security pacts.

Announcement in Australia

Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia announced in Canberra that the regularly
scheduled annual meeting of the Anzus treaty foreign ministers planned for
Canberra in July had been put off indefinitely.

''It was not an unfair description to say that as a tripartite agreement,''
Anzus is now ''a treaty in name only,'' Mr. Hawke said.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz was scheduled to attend the Anzus meeting,
along with Foreign Minister William G. Hayden of Australia, and Mr. Lange, who
is also the Foreign Minister of New Zealand.

American officials said Mr. Shultz had decided to stay away as a further show of
American irritation with Mr. Lange and to put more pressure on the New Zealand
Government.

Lange Regrets the Action

Mr. Lange, who was in Britain today, said he regretted the postponement of the
Anzus meeting because ''the important point about a longstanding alliance is
that the members must be able to talk out their differences.''

''Postponing the July meeting does nothing to help this,'' he said.

Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokesman, said today that the communique
issued last July by the Anzus alliance, at a time when the Conservative Party
was still in power in New Zealand, had affirmed that ''port and airfield access
remains essential to the continuing effectiveness of the alliance.''

''In that light,'' he said, ''there was mutual agreement by Australia and the
United States that unless New Zealand changed its position on port access, a
meeting would not be productive.''

Change in Position Sought

''Recent high-level discussions with the Government of New Zealand indicate that
it has not yet changed its position on port access and that it rejects the
essentiality of access, as reflected in the 1984 Anzus communique,'' Mr. Kalb
said. ''Accordingly, the United States endorses Australia's postponement of the
Anzus council meeting.''

Australian officials said Mr. Hawke, while he has criticized Mr. Lange, would
not have postponed the meeting unless Washington had indicated that Mr. Shultz
would not attend.

State Department officials said Mr. Shultz had not decided whether he might
still visit Canberra in July, when he plans to be in Asia for a meeting of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations in Malaysia.

Since Mr. Lange's decision to bar the port visit by the destroyer Buchanan, the
United States has canceled all Anzus exercises and those just between the United
States and New Zealand. Mr. Lange also announced last week that the United
States had decided to stop sharing with New Zealand certain categories of
intelligence information normally shown to allies.

Strong Reaction Continues

The reaction by the Reagan Administration toward New Zealand has been quite
harsh, considering the long history of close relations between the two
countries, whose troops fought together in the two world wars and in the Korean
and Vietnam wars.

''We are trying to turn the New Zealand decision around,'' a State Department
official said, ''and we cannot allow the impression to be created that we are
willing to overlook the port call question.

''We are not asking New Zealand to accept nuclear weapons,'' the official said.
''We only want him to allow the ships to call without our saying whether they
have nuclear weapons or not, just as we do in countries all around the world.''

Mr. Lange has charged that the United States is trying to bring about a
political change in New Zealand by frightening the electorate into voting the
Labor Party out of office. American officials contend that Mr. Lange might in a
year or two adopt a different policy on ships if the pressure is maintained.

Meanwhile, in Sydney, Australia, antinuclear protesters in a dozen small boats
tried to surround and halt two arriving United States destroyers today, but they
were driven off by the police, who rammed their vessels and then pushed them
away with grappling hooks.

The Associated Press reported that the protesters had yelled obscenities at
sailors aboard the destroyers, the Buchanan and the John Young. Two members of
the Greenpeace environmental group were arrested by the police after they had
cut across the bow of the Buchanan, the police said. Two other groups, the
Nuclear Disarmament Party and People for Nuclear Disarmament, also took part in
the protest.

The vessels are due to remain in Sydney until Friday, when they are to leave
with Australian warships to take part in a naval exercise.

A senior State Department official said the decision to cancel the Anzus meeting
did not mean the United States would not talk to New Zealand. Last week, he
said, while Mr. Lange was on a brief visit to Los Angeles, William A. Brown,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs, met with
him.

An aide to Mr. Lange is expected here this week to talk about trade matters, the
State Department official said. Resolutions have been introduced in Congress in
support of imposing economic sanctions on New Zealand.

New Zealand is also in jeopardy of losing its preferential treatment on lamb
exports here. Unless New Zealand ends its subsidies on lamb exports by March 31,
it may face countervailing tariffs, a State Department official said. An
American agreement allowing New Zealand favorable treatment on lamb it sends
here expires on March 31.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of sailboat

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Scraps Tour Of Refugee Camps

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: SONGKHLA, Thailand, March 4


Vietnam, saying it ''could not cope'' with all the foreigners asking to visit
Vietnam before the 10th anniversary of the capture of Saigon next month, has
called off a United Nations-sponsored press visit to refugee sites in Vietnam,
according to United Nations officials.

Leon Davico, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
said today that the trip to Vietnam had been planned since last September, when
the High Commissioner, Poul Hartling, was in Hanoi. It was to be a study seminar
for about 20 television, radio and newspaper reporters from Europe and the
United States.

Several news organizations have been denied visas for journalists trying to
report from Ho Chi Minh City, as Saigon is now called, before the anniversary
April 30.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

F.C.C. Bars Complaint Against CBS Broadcast

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


Two weeks after Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS was
settled out of court, the Federal Communications Commission today dismissed a
complaint by the American Legal Foundation that CBS News deliberately distorted
and falsified a documentary on enemy troop strength in Vietnam.

The foundation, which supported General Westmoreland, charged that the
broadcast, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' was edited to portray
that ''Westmoreland and other key military and Government personnel conspired to
deceive the President and the American people by placing an arbitrary ceiling on
enemy troop strength and by underestimating the infiltration of enemy forces
into South Vietnam.''

CBS, in an unsolicited response to the complaint, said the production contained
breaches of the network's own standards for news gathering. The commission staff
found, however, that the admission did not demonstrate that CBS attempted to
deliberately distort the broadcast.

The foundation has 30 days to appeal the decision.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXTRON TO SELL BELL HELICOPTER

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


Textron Inc. today put up for sale its Bell Helicopter subsidiary, a mainstay of
the conglomerate for two decades.

B.F. Dolan, president of Textron, which is based in Providence, R.I., said the
offer was part of an effort to raise $1 billion from divestitures to reduce debt
incurred in the $1.4 billion purchase in January of the Avco Corporation, a
major supplier to the military, based in Greenwich, Conn.

''Bell Helicopter has long been an integral part of Textron, and this has been a
difficult decision to make,'' Mr. Dolan said. ''We have decided to pursue the
sale of Bell because the sale would generate significant cash for debt
reduction.''

Spokesmen for Textron and Bell indicated that Textron had no buyers in mind and
that the company had retained Morgan Stanley & Company to assist in the sale.
Several financial analysts estimated that Bell might fetch about a half-billion
dollars, based on a sales level of $672 million in 1984.



A Loss of Military Contracts

Although Bell has been a major contributor to Textron's operating income, it has
lost important military contracts to competitors during the last decade.
Moreover, its commercial helicopter sales have suffered from the slump in the
oil industry, which normally would be a strong purchaser of aircraft for
exploration and offshore services.

Wall Street analysts said the proposed sale reflected Textron's overall
corporate strategy, rather than indicating a shakeout among helicopter
manufacturers. Today's announcement was seen as being consistent with last
month's offer by the company to sell Spencer Kellogg, a specialty chemicals
business in Buffalo.

Still, putting Bell up for sale took many by surprise. ''The news hit me like a
shock, because this was a flagship business for many years,'' said Stanley
Fishman, an analyst for Fahnestock & Company.

Bell, with 7,200 employees, accounted for 12 percent of Textron's earnings last
year, whereas it once provided as much as one-third. Last year, Bell's operating
income was $30.2 million.

Marty Reisch, a spokesman for Bell at its headquarters in Fort Worth, said that
about half of the company's business was military. This includes a ''small
run,'' he said, of AH-1 Huey Cobras for the Army, which began buying a vast
fleet of the helicopters during the Vietnam War. It also includes the first 22
AH-1Tx Super Cobras for the Marine Corps, he said, and 35 training helicopters
for the Navy.

Bell is also teamed with the Boeing Vertol Company, maker of heavy-lift
helicopters, to develop a tilt-rotor aircraft for the Joint Services Advanced
Vertical Lift, or JVX, program. Although JVX has been plagued by interservice
rivalries, the Pentagon foresees buying hundreds of the high- speed,
multipurpose planes in the 1990's. That offers the prospect of lucrative
business in a field that has seen no new aircraft designs for many years.

Since the Vietnam era, however, Bell has lost major military helicopter
contracts to Hughes Helicopters Inc., which became a subsidiary of the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation in 1983, and to the Sikorsky Aircraft division of the United
Technologies Corporation. Hughes builds the Army's Apache attack helicopters and
Sikorsky, the Black Hawk and Super Stallion aircraft.

Bell also suffered serious economic consequences after the Iranian revolution.
Before 1979, the company kept the Iranian Army flying and had more than 10,000
employees and dependents in Iran. In 1973, it won a $501 million contract to
supply 489 high-performance helicopters to the armed forces of the Shah of Iran,
with further awards for maintenance and training.

In discussing the proposed divestiture today, analysts tended to play down
Bell's internal problems and to emphasize Textron's need for cash. John Simon of
Seidler Amdec Securities Inc. in Los Angeles noted, for example, that Avco was a
major producer of helicopter engines. ''There is probably more money in building
helicopter engines than in helicopters,'' he said.

''With somebody who wants to be more patient, maybe the business will come back
again,'' Mr. Simon said of Bell's doldrums and the prospect of a new owner.
''When you've had it as long as Textron's had Bell, maybe you don't have the
stomach to do what's necessary.''

Bell Helicopter was acquired by Textron in 1960 and became Textron's largest
operating unit.

Mr. Dolan noted recently that he did not wish Textron to be dominated by any one
of its subsidiaries and that the purchase of Avco made the conglomerate less
dependent on Bell.

Last fall, the Chicago Pacific Corporation offered $1.6 billion for Textron. The
company fended off the offer, but some analysts said at the time that Textron
needed to slim down by selling some of its divisions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese on Attack In New Cambodia Battle

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, March 5


Vietnamese forces have broken a two-week lull on the battlefields of Cambodia
with an assault on two resistance camps, Thai military sources said today. The
Thais said the Vietnamese had also began their first ground attack on the
guerrillas of Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Forty to 50 Cambodian civilians were killed or wounded in the Vietnamese attack
at the Dongruk and Sanro Changan camps Monday and today, Thai military sources
said.

After the Vietnamese attack, 45,000 to 50,000 refugees at the camps were moved
about two miles deeper inside Thailand, a senior aid official said.

In another Vietnamese assault today, troops entered Thailand in the first ground
assault on the Tatum camp, the headquarters of forces loyal to Prince Sihanouk,
a Thai military source said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE, MODERNIZING ARMY, RETIRE OFFICERS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 5


The drive to professionalize China's armed forces took a step forward today with
the announcement that 47,000 officers, about a tenth of the officer corps, will
be retired before the end of 1986.

The announcement had political ramifications since the officers involved are
mostly men who joined Mao Zedong's guerrilla forces before the Communists seized
power in China in 1949. Although there has been an official retirement policy
for 25 years, the practice had been to allow those who took part in the
guerrilla struggle to remain in uniform until they died or voluntarily stepped
aside.

Deng Xiaoping, the 80-year-old army veteran who holds pre-eminent political
power, has made the remaking of the army one of his priorities. He wants to
replace the poorly educated peasant boys who made the revolution by younger,
better-trained men.

Aim Is to Curb Army Influence

Mr. Deng has political as well as military objectives. By clearing the officer
corps of revolutionary veterans, he hopes to curb the political influence
wielded by the army in the past, often in favor of the so-called leftist
policies Mr. Deng has discarded. He has also said that the army, which had a
woeful experience in the 1979 war against Vietnam, must be modernized.

The New China News Agency said the officers being retired were men who joined up
in the war against the Japanese occupation forces in the 1930's, or in the civil
war against the Nationalists between 1945 and 1949. Most of them had achieved
junior rank up to regimental level, the agency said, indicating that they were
mostly the equivalent of majors, or less.

The retirees were said to be part of a larger group of 70,000 to 80,000 officers
designated to retire in the next few years, the press agency said. Western
military attaches said this suggested that a decision had been taken to retire
officers as they reach the nominal retirement age of 60, except at higher
command levels. An example is the commander of the armed forces, Yang Dezhi, a
Deng appointee who is 75.

The move to purge the junior officer corps has been accompanied by pressure on
veteran senior officers, thousands of whom have been retired since 1980. Late
last year, Mr. Deng obtained the retirement of 40 officers on the command staff
who held ranks equivalent to lieutenant general and higher.

The halting progress in carrying out the retirement policy appears to reflect
resistance among those affected as well as constraints on Mr. Deng's own
political power. At times he has sounded testy on the subject, as when he struck
out in 1982 at officers whom he called ''undisciplined, arrogant, extravagant
and lazy.'' When he was purged twice during the Cultural Revolution, between
1966 and 1973 and again in 1976-77, Mr. Deng was under army guard in provincial
exile.

Better Pensions Offered

As compensation for retirement, there has been a drive to improve pensions and
other benefits. The New China News Agency said today that 30,000 apartments had
been built for retiring officers and that the Ministry of Civil Affairs, which
cares for the retirees, had appointed a special staff to look after their needs.
One point of strain has been an order that retiring officers vacate their army
quarters.

Similar policies have been applied among the nine million party workers in
civilian jobs. The Central Committee's Party Organization Department, in charge
of personnel, said recently that 900,000 party workers over the age of 60 had
retired, allowing 80,000 professionally competent middle-aged party workers to
be appointed to responsible posts.

Mr. Deng has laid stress on promoting men in their 30's and 40's, saying that it
is to them that China must look for leadership for the rest of the century. In
the armed forces, General Yang has stipulated that division commanders should be
about 45, with regimental commanders 40 or younger.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS ARGUE OVER AGENT ORANGE FUND

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


Dozens of Vietnam veterans, many of them showing their anger, filled a Federal
courtroom in Brooklyn yesterday to argue over how the $200 million fund for the
victims of Agent Orange should be divided.

It was the veterans' first chance to speak out on a court-ordered plan, filed
last week, for the distribution of the fund to up to 200,000 veterans or their
family members who claim to have been made ill by the herbicide. As expected,
opinion was sharply divided.

Some speakers called on Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court
to void the entire settlement, while others praised it as the only victory ever
won by veterans who link their injuries to exposure to the herbicide. Agent
Orange, which contains dioxin, believed to be a cancer-causing agent, was
sprayed widely in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.

Many of the veterans suggested modifications in the distribution plan, which was
prepared by a special court appointee, Kenneth R. Feinberg, a Washington lawyer.


Decision Expected Next Month

Judge Weinstein, who helped fashion the settlement of the class-action suit by
veterans against seven manufacturers of Agent Orange, said he would issue a
decision on the plan next month.

Emotions sometimes ran high. One agitated veteran, James Powers, seemingly
overcome by the news that a fellow veteran had fatally shot himself and his wife
and son Monday in Yonkers, shouted: ''Everyone has a book of matches. Burn
everything down!''

Mr. Powers, long-haired and bearded and dressed in an orange jacket, also
pointed at Judge Weinstein and warned, ''Somebody, sometime is going to get to
you.'' Then he added, ''That's not a threat.''

Judge Weinstein, seemingly unperturbed, repeated some of Mr. Powers's remarks
for the court reporter, who had missed them.

Another speaker, James Burdge Sr., of the Oakhurst, N.J., chapter of Vietnam
Veterans of America, demanded a 5 percent tax on the chemical companies to
finance a research hospital for ailments linked to Agent Orange. ''If this is
not approved,'' he said to applause, ''let the case be thrown out and go to
trial.''

Money From Chemical Concerns

Mr. Feinberg's plan proposes dividing the settlement fund - the original $180
million has, with interest, grown to more than $200 million - into three parts.
The money was put up by the chemical manufacturers in an out-of- court
settlement of the liability lawsuit last May 7.

The largest part, $130 million, would go for grants to some totally disabled
veterans and families of veterans who had died. Only about 5 percent of the
200,000 claimants would qualify for any grants under the plan; the largest
amount given in any case would be $25,000.

Two $30 million funds would be established for general veterans services and for
children with birth defects, with the remainder of the fund being spent for
administration. Claimants would not have to prove that Agent Orange caused their
ailments, only that they had been exposed to the herbicide and suffered some
health problems.

Among those who urged approval of the plan was Frank McCarthy of Vietnam
Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc. He suggested, however, that awards be
tailored to family income to give larger grants to needier veterans.

Appeal for Aid to Children

Diane Hackett, representing a group called the Agent Orange Children's Fund, had
been critical of the original settlement but appealed yesterday for money
allocated for children of veterans to go to her group to further its work.

''We have spent our entire lives picking up the pieces of disasters others have
caused,'' she said. ''Maybe all the babies who never made it out of the delivery
rooms will not have died in vain.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

YONKERS POSTAL WORKER KILLS HIS WIFE, A SON AND HIMSELF

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: YONKERS, March 5


A 33-year-old postal worker with psychological problems shot and killed his wife
and a son Sunday night and then wounded another son before killing himself in
their apartment here, the authorities said today.

The surviving child, who is 3 years old, ''treated his gunshot wound in the
chest with a Band-Aid,'' according to Capt. Owen McClain of the Yonkers Police
Department, then fed himself from the refrigerator and watched television for a
full day before the incident was discovered Monday night by a suspicious
neighbor.

The child, Jason Orgen, ''doesn't understand what happened,'' said Captain
McClain. ''He only told us that he couldn't wake his parents up.''

The child was in stable condition today at the Westchester County Medical Center
in Valhalla.

Unsupported Claims of Illness

The police identified the father as Jack Orgen of 365 Bronx River Road, his wife
as Darling, 30, and the older son as Jack Jr., 8. Mr. Orgen, a Vietnam veteran,
apparently thought he was suffering from the effects of Agent Orange
contamination, according to the police, but Al Mann, a spokesman for the
Veterans Administration, said there was no evidence for the claim.

Captain McClain said at a news conference that Mr. Orgen ''was suffering from
severe psychological problems from his stint in Vietnam; he was apparently
suffering from Agent Orange.'' Another police officer said that Mr. Orgen's
mother believed he was an Agent Orange victim.

Mr. Mann said there was no evidence of chloracne, the skin rash associated with
Agent Orange, when the veteran was admitted to the Bronx V. A. Hospital last
June. He was in and out of the hospital, the police said, with his most recent
release last Thursday.

'A Paranoid Disorder'

The admission report had said that ''he was suffering from a paranoid disorder,
methadone dependence and chronic active hepatitis,'' according to Mr. Mann.

''He told the admitting doctor last year that 'I came here because I couldn't
take it,' '' the spokesman said.

According to the report, Mr. Orgen also was upset over what he felt was the
impending breakup of his marriage, financial worries and a host of other
problems. He had served in Vietnam for 9 months of a 16-month tour, leaving with
an administrative discharge ''because he couldn't get along with people,'' Mr.
Mann said.

Dr. Louis Roh, the Westchester County deputy medical examiner, said Mr. Orgen
was suffering from cirrhosis of the liver ''but there was no evidence of skin
problems associated with Agent Orange - he was externally very healthy - and
there was no internal organ damage.''

Nelda Orgen, Mr. Orgen's mother, was reported by the police to have said her son
was among the more than 200,000 Vietnam veterans who have claimed compensation
from chemical companies as part of a $200 million settlement of lawsuits over
Agent Orange. Authorities involved in legal hearings over the claims were unable
to verify Mrs. Orgen's statement.

Captain McClain said Mr. Orgen had shot his wife three times, his son, John,
twice, and Jason once, before turning the gun on himself. He used a Beretta
.25-caliber handgun ''that would not make much noise,'' Captain McClain said.
Mr. Orgen had a license for the weapon.

Jason, the 3-year-old, ''was shot in the upper left chest - it was not a
ricochet - and he was conscious when we found him,'' Captain McClain said. ''The
child never said he was hurt, he never said he was shot, and he seemed to suffer
no pain.''

''He received what he considered a boo-boo, went into the bathroom and applied a
Band-Aid by himself. We asked him if he was shot or hurt by his father and he
said no. He didn't answer the doorbell or use the telephone because he'd always
been told by his parents not to.''

The child, who was found in the boys' bedroom watching television, ''will be
taken in by members of the family,'' the police officer said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 1985 International

A new way to aid Nicaraguan rebels is being considered by the White House,
according to a Reagan Administration official. He said that officials were
considering asking friendly Asian countries to channel assistance to the
anti-Sandinista insurgents. (Page A1, Column 1.)

Rights abuses by Nicaraguan rebels were sharply criticized in a report published
by a private human rights group, Americas Watch. The report also assailed abuses
by the Nicaraguan army but said there had been ''a sharp decline'' in the army's
violations since 1982. (A10:1-2.)

Moscow might multiply its force of offensive missiles in the hope that it could
saturate and overwhelm Washington's proposed land- and space- based missile
defense system, according to several experts. Interviews with specialists and a
review of their writings and public statements show a general belief that,
eventually at least, the Russians may also seek to build an offensive umbrella
against intercontinental missiles. (A1:3-4.)

South Korea liberalized its policy toward opposition politicians. The Government
announced a reinstatement of rights for the last 14 politicians from 811 who
were blacklisted in 1981. They include the leading opposition figure, Kim Dae
Jung. (A1:1-3.) National

A military budget ceiling that would slash $79 billion over three years from
President Reagan's budget was approved, 18 to 4, by the Senate Budget Committee
in its first effort to reduce Federal deficits. The measure was backed by all 10
Democrats on the committee and by eight Republicans, including the panel's
chairman, Pete V. Domenici. (A1:6.)

Action against General Dynamics was announced by Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger. He said he was suspending for 30 days a small part of the Pentagon's
payments to the company, the nation's biggest military contractor, while
officials examine its possibly improper billings. Mr. Weinberger also ordered a
review of billing procedures of all major military contractors. (A1:2.)

An emergency farm credit measure was approved by a 255-to-168 vote in the House
despite threats of a veto by President Reagan. The representatives accepted a
bill passed last week by the Senate that would provide advances on spring loans
to grain and cotton farmers and $100 million to help rural banks lower interest
rates on troubled farm loans. (A1:5.)

The financial status of farm banks has deteriorated seriously and will worsen, a
study by the Comptroller of the Currency said. (B11:4-6.)

Major drug arrests were announced by Federal officials in Miami. They said that
the Chief Minister of the Turks and Caicos Islands, Norman Saunders, and two top
aides had been seized by Federal undercover agents in Miami and charged with
plotting to use the islands, a British protectorate south of the Bahamas, as a
base to smuggle narcotics. (A1:4-6.)

Fifteen universities were accused by the National Science Board of circumventing
usual merit-review procedures and obtaining more than $100 million from Congress
over the last two years to build laboratory facilities. In several cases, the
board charged, the funds obtained ''were diverted from other scientific
activities that had been selected on the basis of their merit.'' (A14:1-2.)

Payola in the popular music industry has increased sharply. Record
manufacturers, industry sources say, are paying more than $50 million a year to
a small group of freelance promoters to highlight their records. According to
Rick Sklar, an industry consultant, some promoters make regular payments to key
station executives and thereby exercise total control over play lists.
(A14:3-5.) Metropolitan

Two top coroner's office employees were transferred out of the New York City
agency, the city Health Department said. The employees - Patricia H. Woods, the
office's administrative manager, and William Kelly, its inspector general - were
replaced by three workers from the Health Department, which oversees the
coroner's office. (B1:1-3.)

A Vietnam veteran apparently shot and killed his wife and elder son and then
wounded his younger son before killing himself in their apartment in Yonkers.
Officials said the surviving son, who is 3 years old, ''treated his gunshot
wound in the chest with a Band-Aid,'' then fed himself from a refrigerator and
watched television for a day before the slayings were discovered by a neighbor.
(B2:1-2.)

A decline in rental apartments in New York City makes renting an apartment more
difficult than at any time in the last decade, according to a major survey of
housing conditions. At the same time, the report said the number of conversions
to cooperatives and condominiums increased - more than 36,000 apartments in only
three years. (B7:1-3.)

Connecticut's biggest brass producer closed its doors, marking the end of an era
for Waterbury, which was hailed in the 19th century as America's ''Brass City.''
About 600 people were laid off. The company president, Lewis Segal, predicted
that the rest of the company would fold soon, putting 1,100 more people out of
work. Company officials attributed its troubles to cheap imports and three
strikes in the last six years. (B1:4-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING ;
Recognition

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 165 words


Representative John McCain, an Arizona Republican serving his second term in
Congress, may not be a household name to most Americans but is apparently
becoming one in Vietnam.

Mr. McCain, who spent six years in Vietnam as a prisoner of war, visited Hanoi
recently along with Walter Cronkite, who is working on a television special to
mark the 10th anniversary next month of the fall of Saigon. They dropped by the
Hanoi lake into which Mr. McCain tumbled when his Navy plane was shot down in
1967. There they found an impressive monument bearing the likeness of a
uniformed American and an inscription in Vietnamese saying that on Oct. 26,
1967, the People's Army had shot down ''the famous air pirate'' John McCain.

While the two men were inspecting the monument, several hundred Vietnamese
gathered nearby and began chanting, ''McCain, McCain, McCain.''

''I told Walter,'' Mr. McCain said, ''it's the only place we could go in the
world where I'd be more recognized than him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE;

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


HOWL OF THE 80's Allen Ginsberg was one of the poets of the 1950's and 60's
whose works represented and spoke to a social and cultural movement. He became a
celebrity, well known even outside his literary milieu. His acknowledged use of
psychedelic substances, his poetry and his anti-Vietnam War posture turned him
into a national figure.

This evening, he will be reading from his works at Pace College's Schimmel
Center for the Arts. The program, part of the Pace Poetry Series, begins at 7
P.M. Admission is free. The center is at Spruce Street and Park Row.
Information: 468-1637.



BEGINNINGS


Another significant factor in the sizzling 60's was Caffe Cino, on Cordelia
Street in Greenwich Village. Opening in 1958, it had no license to function as a
theater; it looked like an art gallery, deliberately, but it spawned new-styled
and significant American drama, dramatists and performers.

Among the playwrights whose works were first performed there were Lanford
Wilson, Sam Shepard, John Guare and Tom Eyen. Bernadette Peters, Harvey Keitel
and Neil Flanagan acted there. More than 225 original plays and revivals were
performed there; it was Off Off Broadway's first continuous theater.

In the Vincent Astor Gallery of the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center,
all of this is demonstrated in an exhibition, ''The Caffe Cino and Its Legacy,''
which opens today and runs through May 11. The bar, the stage and the wall
collage have been recreated, and original posters, scripts, memorabilia, menus,
correspondence, programs and photographs from the plays will be displayed. The
gallery is open Mondays and Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Tuesdays, Wednesdays
and Fridays, noon to 6 P.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: free.






PHOTOS OF VIETNAM


In the Vietnam War, at least 28 reporters and photographers died. One of these
was a Briton working for Life magazine, Larry Burrows. Mr. Burrows spent nine
years there and was killed in 1971 when the helicopter he and other journalist
were flying in was shot down over Laos.

Today, at the Laurence Miller Gallery, the exhibition ''Larry Burrows's Vietnam:
The American Intervention'' will open. The 18 color photographs in this
collection are from the photographer's first five years in Vietnam. The gallery,
at 38 East 57th Street, is open from 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. Admission: free.
Information: 319-1800.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THAI FORCES CLASH WITH VIETNAM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, March 6


Thai troops and aircraft attacked Vietnamese forces that had crossed the border
in an effort to surround the last major Cambodian resistance camp, the Thai Army
said today.

The Thais said they had driven the Vietnamese troops from one of three hills the
Vietnamese tried to seize and had killed 60 soldiers. The Vietnamese were
seeking high ground from which to attack the Tatum guerrilla base, which is
situated on a cliff and ringed with land mines.

Thai and rebel officials said the Vietnamese had captured two other Cambodian
guerrilla camps in a two-day drive and had assaulted the Tatum camp from all
sides behind artillery fire. They said the outer defense lines at the Tatum base
had held firm.

A senior Thai army officer reported continuing artillery and ground fire late
today, a day after the Vietnamese thrust touched off the most serious clash
between troops of the two countries since the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia
six years ago.

Rebel Group Led by Sihanouk

It was the first attack on Tatum, the headquarters of a rebel movement led by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk. Prince Sihanouk is allied with two other rebel groups
against the Cambodian Government of Heng Samrin, which the Vietnamese installed
in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, in January 1979.

(In Washington, the United States said it was speeding deliveries of military
equipment to Thailand because of the incursion. The State Department spokesman,
Bernard Kalb, said that a shipment expected to arrive early next month included
armored vehicles and artillery.

(''The United States strongly condemns these further Vietnamese violations of
Thai territory,'' Mr.  Kalb said.)

A major Vietnamese offensive last month overran the strongholds of the Khmer
Rouge, the Communist movement whose Government the Vietnamese overthrew.
Diplomats had thought the Vietnamese might spare Tatum in hopes of negotiating
with Prince Sihanouk, who is popular in Cambodia.

Maj. Gen. Naruedol Dejpradiyuth, a spokesman for the Thai Army, said about 60
Vietnamese had been killed in a Thai air and ground assault on the three
hilltops. The commander of the Thai armed forces, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, said 7
Thai soldiers had been killed, 34 wounded and 3 reported missing in the two days
of fighting. fe,uf30

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS;
THE PECCADILLOES OF ARMADILLOS

BYLINE: By Michael Norman

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J., Feb. 15


Ouiet, please. The scholar is about to begin. He is Dr. Angus Gillespie, a
purveyor of folklore and iconography who was seduced by bumper stickers and
swizzle sticks and South American legends lost in the mists of time.

His subject is the armadillo. On the face of it, the armadillo might not seem
like a fit inquiry for a Yale man who went on to receive a Ph.D. from the
University of Pennsylvania.

The animal is without intelligence. The natural response of an armadillo
startled by an oncoming automobile or truck is to leap straight up - victims
positioning themselves perfectly for the firing squad.

Armadillos make malodorous pets and have no redeeming social value. In short, to
study them, as Professor Gillespie has, is to give support to the critics of
higher education who, he says, believe that the aim of academics is to learn
more and more about less and less.

Nevertheless, an inquiry has been made, and he is ready to deliver his report.



The professor, whose base is the American studies department of Rutgers
University here, traces his interest in porkilotherms back to the summer of
1981, when he was on a summer fellowship to study folklore at the University of
Texas in Austin.

He had orginally intended to examine the architecture of icehouses, but that
presented a small problem during a hot summer in the Southwest.

''So I sort of had to shift gears,'' he began. ''I just happened to notice there
were an awful lot of armadillo collectibles at the university - T-shirts, sweat
shirts, pennants, bumper stickers, swizzle sticks and cocktail napkins - so much
so it appeared somehow to be an icon connected with Texas chic.

''Here was this unexplained icon. So naturally, I just started to pose the
question why is it so pervasive?

''The armadillo is difficult to classify. It's warm-blooded, sort of. It's body
temperature can range from 88 degrees to about 95 degrees, a porkilotherm. The
reason it works so well as an icon of Texas is that it cannot survive north of
Texas.

''It also has another unusual property. It's a cliche that most wildlife has
suffered under the advance of civilization. Not the armadillo. Its natural
enemy, the coyote, has been practically exterminated by farmers and ranchers.

''So you see it all over Texas, especially dead along the highways. There are a
lot of jokes associated with dead armadillos. For example, the archrival of the
University of Texas is Texas A & M. Longhorn students ask, 'How many Aggies
would it take to eat an armadillo?' The answer is three, one to eat it and two
to watch out for traffic.

''The present-day Texas fascination with the armadillo, anthropologically
speaking, is not new at all. There are South American legends and myths
concerning the armadillo, and the origins of those myths are lost in the mists
of time.

''Then along came the conquistadors, and they, too, were fascinated with the
armadillo. It seemed to them the armadillo was uniquely American. It took on all
kinds of iconographic significance. In the courts of Europe, it was represented
as a motif on silverware sets.

''The fascination continued into the 19th century. Charles Darwin was struck by
the similarity of the living armadillo and its ancient prehistoric ancestor, the
glyptodont, which was an armadillolike creature the size of a Volkswagen Beetle.

''It surfaced again as an item of interest during the Great Depression, when, of
course, in Texas, as elsewhere, people were poor and they turned to the
armadillo as a source of food. It became known as the Hoover Hog or the Texas
Turkey. But where the story really heats up is during the Vietnam War era, and
that story goes something like this.''



It is necessary to pause here for a moment to note certain facts. The professor
appears to be a man with a well-developed social conscience. He reads the
morning newspapers and is aware, he says, that there are serious economic and
cultural problems in the land, subjects, unlike the armadillo, that might be
better served by his skills.

His problem, of course, began in childhood. His father was a Navy doctor, and he
led a peripatetic life. Whenever the family would complain about a move, his
mother would say, ''Don't complain, look at all the interesting things going on
about you.'' He has looked so hard at so many things, he cannot break the habit.



Now back to the armadillo.

''Sympathy for antiwar protesters was minimal in Texas. Here was a culture of
bellicose rednecks. The protesters have a sense of being picked on, belittled
and, from time to time, assaulted.

''Remember now that armadillos were so prolific in Texas it was not unheard of
for people to use them for target practice. So the protesters made the equation.
They said the rednecks are picking on us just like they are picking on the
armadillos. And they adopted the little critter as a symbol.''



Now that he is through with armadillos, the professor intends to devote his time
to a study of the New Jersey Turnpike. His thesis is that the turnpike is ''not
an eyesore, but a great cosmic highway.''

He is convinced there is value in this pursuit, just as he was convinced that a
study of the armadillo ''demonstrates the worthwhileness of academic inquiry.''

His convictions are reinforced by some of his colleagues. The chairman of his
department, for example, a man who has studied rodeos and can give an
extemporaneous five-minute talk on the iconography of chocolate, demonstrated
his support of the armadillo study by passing on to Dr. Gillespie some lines
from Shel Silverstein: If you should ever choose To bathe an armadillo Use one
bar of soap, And a whole lot of hope And seventy-two pads of Brillo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dr. Angus Gillespie with a stuffed armadillo

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Orangemail: Why It Got Paid The case of Agent Orange, the herbicide sprayed over
Vietnam to protect American troops from ambush, has come full circle. The
manufacturers have put up $180 million to settle the claims of veterans alleging
injury. But the Federal court that is distributing the money plans to pay
veterans whether or not Agent Orange caused their illness.

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 531 words


Why not compensate only those injured by Agent Orange? Because no veteran is
known to have such injuries. ''It is totally uncertain whether any serious
adverse health effects could have been caused by the level of Agent Orange
exposure veterans might have received in Vietnam'': so concluded the court's
special master, Kenneth Feinberg, in the proposed settlement plan submitted to
Federal Judge Jack Weinstein last week.

Then why compensate anyone? Why didn't Judge Weinstein dismiss the case? Why did
the manufacturers put up all that money?

Come and meet orangemail.

Here's how it works: Hordes of personal-injury lawyers sign up alleged victims
of a toxic chemical, creating the prospect of such costly litigation that the
manufacturers are driven to settle, even if no connection between injury and
chemical can be proved. Having shaken down the companies, the lawyers then claim
so much for themselves that many victims are left with trivial payments. In the
analogous case of asbestos - a sure killer - the victims' lawyers have gobbled
up $164 million of the $400 million so far paid out.

Agent Orange is orangemail in its purest form. A thousand tort lawyers jumped on
the settlement bandwagon, even though the court found their case to be
substantially without merit.

Vietnam veterans deserve every compassion. Society has treated them shabbily.
The Yonkers vet who killed himself and his family this week expressed the
extremes of their despair. But whether some of them were injured by Agent Orange
is a narrower issue. Veterans did not blame Agent Orange for their illnesses
until 15 years after the spraying began, 6 years after it stopped. Cancer apart,
few known diseases take that long to strike.

The veterans' diseases are real, but their pattern of illness so far seems no
different from that of the general population - even in those most heavily
exposed, the pilots who did the spraying. Yet the makers of Agent Orange faced
the prospect of endless litigation, and the risk of losing many cases before
juries apt to put compassion ahead of dispassion.



Judge Weinstein and Special Master Feinberg have probably made the best of a
dismal situation. Once the chemical companies agreed to pay, the judge protected
the fund from the plaintiffs' attorneys. They didn't deserve their large fees,
he told them, because their case had no substantial merit. Under Mr. Feinberg's
plan, veterans or their families will be compensated if they had a severe
disability and if it was likely that they had a certain degree of exposure to
Agent Orange.

This remedy is bold and innovative. It promises to close a long-festering
grievance. The most severely disabled veterans win prompt, generous payments.
The chemical companies escape an endless tunnel of litigation.

Best of all, Judge Weinstein may also have fashioned a partial remedy against
orangemail in other cases, too: slashing the orangemailers' take. He set
lawyers' fees on the basis of how much each lawyer contributed to the case. But
the costs of justice need to be further reduced if the complex class- action
cases ahead are to be decided not on their cost but on the merits.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUAN REBELS SEEKING INQUIRY INTO ABUSE CHARGES

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


The Nicaraguan Democratic Force, the largest of the United States-backed rebel
groups seeking the overthrow of the Managua Government, called today for
additional investigations into allegations that its members had committed abuses
against unarmed civilians in Nicaragua.

Two reports issued this week asserted that Nicaraguan rebels had committed
extensive human rights abuses, including the rape, kidnapping, torture,
mutilation and murder of numerous unarmed civilians.

Testifying before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee today, Secretary of State
George P. Shultz said he was skeptical about the reports, adding that their
''scope and nature'' were at variance with the United States Government's
information.

Bosco Matamoros, the Nicaraguan Democratic Force's Washington representative,
said the organization would write this week to the Inter-American Human Rights
Commission of the Organizaton of American States asking for an investigation.

Reports Called a Mockery

He said his group would also ask Nicaragua's own human rights commission, an
independent body, to investigate. He invited observers from the United States
Congress to accompany rebel forces on patrol.

Mr. Matamoros called the reports a mockery, adding that ''they read like a comic
book.'' He said some abuses described in one report ''are in places where the
F.D.N. has never even operated.''

In his testimony today, Mr. Shultz said, ''I don't say there aren't any
problems.'' But he added: ''It always strikes me how, when there's a sense here
or in Nicaragua that we're coming up to a vote or a decision, that all sorts of
stuff starts appearing. You wonder how it happens.''

Another senior State Department official, commenting on the reports today, said,
''You can't have a major foreign policy initiative without glitches and
problems,'' adding that ''there were U.S. atrocities during World War II and
Vietnam.''

A third State Department official characterized the reports as ''a concerted
propaganda campaign by the Sandinista Government.'' And Mr. Shultz told the
subcommittee, ''The Sandinista Government has an almost unblemished record of
trying to mislead us about what's going on in Nicaragua.''

$14 Million in Aid Sought

The Administration is trying to persuade Congress to give final approval to $14
million in covert aid for the Nicaraguan rebels. In recent public statements,
President Reagan has called the rebels ''freedom fighters'' and ''our
brothers.''

Americas Watch, an independent, nonpolitical group that monitors human rights in
this hemisphere, issued the first report on Tuesday. It charged both the
Nicaraguan Government and the rebels with a wide range of abuses.

It said that abuses by Nicaraguan Government forces had shown a sharp decline
since 1982, but that rebel atrocities had continued apace into early 1985.

The second report was prepared by a New York lawyer, Reed Brody, and was made
public today. Mr. Brody took sworn affidavits from scores of Nicaraguan citizens
who said they had witnessed or been victims of abuses by rebels.

He undertook his investigation at the suggestion of a Washington law firm that
represents the Nicaraguan Government, and during much of his time in Managua he
stayed in Government-owned housing.

Many of the people Mr. Brody interviewed were independently interviewed by The
New York Times. They also told their stories to two attorneys representing the
offices of Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Connecticut, and of two
Washington public interest groups.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Say They Ousted Vietnamese From Hills

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 268 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 7


The Thai Army said today that it had driven Vietnamese troops from a line of
hills inside the border, repelling the largest single intrusion into Thai
territory in the six years since the Vietnamese invaded neighboring Cambodia.

The Thais, moving behind air strikes, ousted the Vietnamese from positions they
had taken for a planned attack on the last major Cambodian rebel base, Thai
military officers reported.

Thailand put long stretches of its border with Cambodia on full alert. The army
sent reinforcements to the area of the three-day battle.

Between 800 and 1,000 Vietnamese soldiers pushed into the hills about two miles
across the frontier in an attempt to gain the high ground in Thailand and
encircle the Tatum camp, which is perched on a cliff just inside Cambodia and
surrounded by land mines.

Basque Police Chief Dies In Car-Bomb Blast

VITORIA, Spain, March 7 (UPI) - The chief of the Basque region's police force
was killed in a bomb explosion today as he started his car at a roadside cafe.
Basque separatists were blamed.

The police chief, Lieut. Col. Juan Carlos Diaz Arkotxa, 52 years old, died at
Santiago Apostol hospital in the Basque capital of Vitoria 30 minutes after the
bomb tore apart his automobile at 9:25 A.M.

Officials said militants apparently planted the bomb under the car while Mr.
Diaz was having breakfast at the cafe a miles outside Vitoria and 100 yards from
the Police Academy.

The bomb exploded when Mr. Diaz put his keys in the ignition and tried to start
the car, the police said. He was rushed to the hospital but could not be saved.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Busy Stages at Public

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 153 words


Live theater will fill all but one of the five stages this weekend at the New
York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street (598- 7150.) In
the Newman Theater, Edna O'Brien's ''Virginia,'' with Kate Nelligan, is on
tonight at 8, tomorrow at 8 and Sunday at 3 and 8. ''Tracers,'' a play about the
Vietnam War, written and performed by a group of Vietnam veterans, will be in
the Susan Stein Shiva Theater tonight and tomorrow at 8 and Sunday at 3 and 8.
Edward Herrmann and Julie Covington star in the last performances of ''Tom and
Viv'' by Michael Hastings tonight and tomorrow at 8 and on Sunday at 3 and 8 in
LuEsther Hall. Albert Innaurato's ''Coming of Age in Soho'' can be seen tonight
at 8 and tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8. Tickets for ''Virginia'' are $20, for
the other plays, $15 and $18. Half-price tickets are available two hours before
the performances. Information: 598-7150.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWHOUSE PURCHASING THE NEW YORKER

BYLINE: By ERIC N. BERG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1414 words


The New Yorker magazine, a proudly independent arbiter of good taste in fine
fiction, reportage and humor for more than 60 years, agreed yesterday on a sale
to Samuel I. Newhouse Jr. for $142 million.

In an announcement from The New Yorker's offices in Manhattan, the magazine's
directors said they had voted unanimously to approve the offer of Mr. Newhouse,
whose publishing empire includes 26 newspapers, the Conde Nast magazines -
Vogue, House & Garden, Vanity Fair, Glamour, Gourmet, Self, and GQ - as well as
Random House, the book publishing company.

In announcing the proposed sale, the New Yorker's directors said the Newhouse
interests had guaranteed the continued independence of the magazine, and said
present editors would be retained. But many employees, including William Shawn,
The New Yorker's 77-year-old editor, objected strongly.



Seen as Virtually Assured

Even so, investment banking sources close to the transaction said the sale was
virtually assured.

As one measure of the editorial employees' concern, a staff member at The New
Yorker said yesterday that a group of employees, including Mr. Shawn, had met
with a New York lawyer to determine their rights. The lawyer, Peter Ryan of
Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, declined to comment.

In January, Mr. Newhouse paid $26 million to purchase 17 percent of The New
Yorker. Yesterday, the magazine's directors approved a proposal by Mr. Newhouse
to acquire the remaining 83 percent of the company for $142 million, a $14.1
million increase over Mr. Newhouse's original offer, made about a month ago.

The publisher agreed to raise his price from $180 a share to $200 a share after
The New Yorker's Wall Street adviser, The First Boston Corporation, encouraged
the magazine's directors to hold out for more, according to sources close to the
transaction.

The sale would mark the first time the publication has changed hands since its
founding in 1924 by Raoul Fleischmann of Fleischmann's yeast, whose son, Peter
F. Fleischmann, is chairman of The New Yorker.

In its early years, The New Yorker, under its first editor, Harold Ross,
published the first work of such writers as E.B. White, James Thurber and John
O'Hara. Under Mr. Shawn, the magazine also became known for long nonfiction
articles that concerned social issues: John Hersey's article reporting on the
aftermath at Hiroshima; Rachel Carson's study of pesticides, ''Silent Spring,''
and, more recently, Jonathan Schell's study of nuclear war, ''The Fate of the
Earth,'' and many more.

Other writers published in The New Yorker include J.D. Salinger, John Cheever,
Hannah Arendt, James Baldwin and John McPhee, the naturalist.

In addition, the magazine has long set standards with its cartoons. Its original
stable included such artists as Saul Steinberg and Charles Addams; a newer
breed, who delight at poking fun at the magazine's intellectual and trendy
readers, includes Ed Koren and William Hamilton.



'A Stand-Alone Basis'

Mindful of the magazine's tradition of excellence and independence, the
directors said in a prepared statement: ''The agreement provides that the
company will operate on a stand-alone basis as a separate company following the
merger, with continuation of present directors, officers and employees.''

The sale requires a two-thirds vote of The New Yorker's 850,591 shares. Mr.
Fleischmann has agreed to vote his 211,758 shares in favor, and Mr. Newhouse is
certain to vote his 144,600 shares for a combination. The swing vote will
probably be cast by Paine Webber Inc., which manages 144,600 New Yorker shares
on behalf of wealthy investors. Yesterday, William J. Reik, the money manager
for the Paine Webber holdings, indicated that he would vote for the sale, too.
''I'd have to say it's a pretty nice offer, unless I hear something better,''
Mr. Reik said.

First Boston declined to comment, but according to investment banking sources,
the Wall Street firm decided to seek a higher price after studying a number of
other sales of media companies. Recently, for example, Time Inc. agreed to
acquire Southern Living magazine for $480 million; the Gannett Company bought
The Register and Tribune Company, publisher of The Des Moines Register, for $200
million; Mortimer Zuckerman, a real estate executive, acquired U.S. News & World
Report for $168.5 million, and Rea Hederman, a retired newspaper editor,
purchased The New York Review of Books for about $5 million. All those
transactions resulted in rich premiums for the sellers.

Similar Gains ForeseenAnd if they approve a sale to Mr. Newhouse, The New
Yorker's stockholders can look forward to similar gains. Before Mr. Newhouse
approached the company last year, The New Yorker's shares were trading at around
$130. His $200-a-share bid, therefore, amounts to more than a 50 percent
premium. Basing their comments on this, as well as on the magazine's inability
to significantly increase its advertising revenue or 500,000-copy circulation in
recent years, analysts called the offer extremely generous.

''No matter how I play around with the figures, it's a high price,'' said R.
Joseph Fuchs, an analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Company. Added Bruce E. Thorp, an
analyst at Lynch, Jones & Ryan: ''The price definitely seems steep.''

Some analysts believe the price reflects Mr. Newhouse's confidence that he will
be able to increase The New Yorker's earnings by using production facilities and
supplies of his existing publications.

First Boston and others maintain that the price is appropriate, reflecting both
the magazine's affluent readers - a significant lure to advertisers - and its
reputation for editorial excellence. Although some maintain that the magazine
has slipped in recent years - producing seemingly pointless articles that go on
interminably - a view still prevails that The New Yorker is one of the few
periodicals left in the United States that provides a steady diet of good
reading.

Remarking on the emotions that the deal has stirred, , one expert in mergers and
acquisitions said: ''If this were a big oil company with known reserves, it
would be no problem. You just hold a wide-open auction. But you cannot auction a
magazine like The New Yorker. The New Yorker is its people and its reputation.
That cannot be auctioned.''



Amid Changes, a Stylish Constancy


''Its tenor will be one of gaiety, wit and satire,'' the original prospectus
said, and the new magazine would ''not be edited for the old lady in Dubuque.''

While it has passed through at least two incarnations since its founding six
decades ago, The New Yorker has remained constant in its dedication to an
urbane, dry humor, a nuturing of writers, and its tone of seeming unconcern -
some would say arrogance - about where and by whom the magazine is being read.

The style of The New Yorker, its writing, cartoons and layout, were the creation
of its founder, Harold Ross, who envisioned a publication primarily designed to
be clever and entertaining.

''If you can't be funny,'' Mr. Ross said to writers of his Talk of the Town,
''be interesting.''

The enterprise soon drew some of the nation's most stylish and thoughtful
writers. And in its first decades, many luminaries associated with the magazine,
such as Dorothy Parker, Robert Benchley, Alexander Woollcott and George S.
Kaufman, met at the Round Table in the Algonquin Hotel. The gatherings are
remembered, in almost legendary terms, for the participants' bon mots and
vibrant conversation.

During the Second World War, serious battlefront coverage was introduced to the
magazine, and with the succession of William Shawn after Mr. Ross's death in
1952, long, serious journalistic works became a regular feature.

And by the end of the 1960's, The New Yorker at times abandoned its detached
irony to express outrage about the Vietnam War, and later Watergate.

One symbol has remained, however. Every February a New Yorker edition sports the
same monocled dandy, Eustace Tilley, eyeing a butterfly, that appeared on its
first cover.

''We are fond of this drawing, the oldest in our collection, though we don't
claim to understand it,'' the Talk of the Town section said in its 60th
Anniversary issue last Feb. 25. ''Mr. Tilley, as he is known, is of another age
entirely - the late 18th Century, to judge by his outfit - and ''Why Mr. Harold
Ross chose an antique to grace his jazzy new magazine in 1925 we leave it to
others to decide.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Shawn; drawing; photo of Samuel Newhouse

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese Forces Attack Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 8


Chinese troops launched a fresh attack on Vietnam's positions along their common
border today, but the action appeared to fall short of the wider offensive that
Peking has threatened over Vietnam's actions in Cambodia.

The official New China News Agency announced that troops in the southwestern
province of Yunnan had ''hit back at Vietnamese armed provocation'' along the
frontier, ''clearing all Vietnamese invaders and their advancing strongholds.''

The two-paragraph report gave no details, beyond claiming that the Vietnamese
had caused ''great losses of lives and property'' by firing thousands of shells
into Yunnan over a 10-day period.

From that bare account it appeared that today's action fell into the pattern of
cautious Chinese military pressure on Vietnam in recent months. While Vietnamese
troops have been conducting their most successful offensive in six years against
Chinese-backed guerrillas in Cambodia, Peking has mounted a series of limited
strikes along its own frontier with Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA REBELS CLING TO LAST BORDER OUTPOST

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 439 words

DATELINE: SURIN, Thailand, March 8


Cambodian guerrillas defending their last major base on the Thai border
struggled today to hold off advancing Vietnamese troops, according to the chief
of Thailand's armed forces.

At the same time, Thai and Vietnamese forces continued to fight over control of
three hills inside Thailand near the border with Cambodia. Vietnam has tried to
take the hills to further its drive on the Cambodian resistance base called
Tatum. Tatum is the name of the nearest Thai village, a few miles over the
border.

The base, which is also known as Green Hill, is the last large guerrilla base in
Cambodian territory to be targeted by Vietnam, whose troops emptied a string of
other bases and civilian camps on the Thai-Cambodian border in the last four
months. Tatum is the headquarters of the faction loyal to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk.

Today a spokesman for Prince Sihanouk said there had been heavy shelling of the
camp this morning. He also acknowledged that some Vietnamese forces had
penetrated the camp's perimeter but had been pushed back.

Serious Symbolic Defeat

The loss of Tatum would be a serious symbolic defeat for both the Sihanouk
guerrillas and the larger resistance coalition, which includes the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front and the Khmer Rouge. Prince Sihanouk, a
former Cambodian head of state, is the coalition president. His faction, the
smallest of the three, would be the last to lose a headquarters inside Cambodia.
The United Nations recognizes the coalition as the Government of Cambodia

On the fighting between Thailand and Vietnam over the three strategic border
hills - known as Hill 324, Hill 361 and Hill 400 - there have been conflicting
reports this week about both action and casualties.

Today, meeting reporters at a recently constructed army outpost near the Thai
village of Ban Song, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, Thailand's Supreme Commander,
indicated that Thai forces had not secured the three hills, which the Vietnamese
assaulted on March 5.

The general said the Vietnamese were aware they were invading Thai territory,
and he categorized as ''a bunch of lies'' Vietnamese assertions - made last week
over loudspeakers for Thai soldiers to hear, he said - that Hanoi's troops were
unaware they were in Thailand and would withdraw.

There were also reports of fighting today farther south in the Phnom Malai area,
where the Khmer Rouge abandoned several outposts last month. According to Thai
military officials, about 200 Khmer Rouge soldiers were attacking Vietnamese
forces along a 16-mile stretch of a Vietnamese supply route into western
Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of rebels

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAVE OF CURRICULUM CHANGE SWEEPING AMERICAN COLLEGES

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2399 words


Students at Barnard College are studying more mathematics, professors at
Stanford University are dusting off their Greek and Roman texts and, in
Minnesota, Gustavus Adolphus College has thrown out its entire course catalogue
and started over.

These and hundreds of other institutions, from tiny liberal arts colleges to
huge state universities, are part of a new wave of curriculum reform that is
radically changing what college students will be learning in coming years.

In the last couple of years, hundreds of colleges, including virtually every
major liberal arts institution, have stepped up the number of mandated courses,
redesigned their general education programs and proclaimed that graduates must
now possess skills ranging from mathematical proficiency to computer literacy.
Hundreds more are in the process of doing so.

''What we have done, in essence, is to redefine our concept of what constitutes
an educated person,'' said Joseph C. Palamountain Jr., president of Skidmore
College in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. The college's new curriculum is constructed
around four areas, including one called ''science, society and human values,''
and includes more required courses in the arts, foreign languages and
non-Western culture.

At Gustavus Adolphus, faculty members were told four years ago to ''rejustify''
any course they wanted to continue teaching or, better still, design new ones. A
new core curriculum of required courses was drawn up and will be added to
student graduation requirements this fall.

''We had to restore some coherence to the curriculum,'' said David C. Johnson,
dean of the 2,300-student college. ''We had too many superficial survey courses.
Getting a degree was like filling in a Green Stamp book.''

Survey courses cover a wide range of material within a given subject, tending to
be more sweeping than deep.

The State University of New York at Stony Brook has a new curriculum based on
six themes, from ''understanding the natural world'' to ''technological
literacy.'' After a decade- long hiatus, Stanford University has revived its
''Western culture'' requirement.

Trinity College in Hartford, which only four years ago reaffirmed its commitment
to a free elective system, is working on a requirement that students take what
it calls ''clusters'' of three courses in related fields.

The University of Connecticut, which four years ago adopted a new set of course
requirements in the College of Arts and Sciences, is considering extending them
to nonliberal arts students as well. The faculty of the City College of New York
is to take up a similar proposal shortly.

Interest in curriculum change first stirred in the late-1970's when Harvard
College and others moved to restore some structure to curriculums that had been
denuded of requirements in the student rebellions of the previous decade. The
recent wave of change has dealt with structure to a degree. But in many cases it
has also resulted in a re- examination of content and an attempt to address in
the curriculum such issues as the impact of technology on society.

A 'Back-to-Basics' Move

Some college officials view the flurry of curriculum changes as the higher
education equivalent of the ''back-to- basics'' movement at the elementary and
secondary level. ''We're back to a classical approach to education,'' said Joan
Klingel, an assistant dean at the Colorado Springs campus of the University of
Colorado, which has the six- course humanities component of a new core
curriculum in place and is working on those for the social and natural sciences.

Other reasons cited for the changes range from internal faculty politics to
marketing and recruiting needs at a time when the number of 18-year-olds is
declining. Patricia P. Cormier, dean of academic affairs at Wilson College in
Pennsylvania, which has a stiff new general education program that takes up half
of a student's program, said, ''We need to be able to say exactly what a Wilson
College graduate knows and can do.''

Anxiety about the content of college teaching has recently attracted national
attention. Last month the Association of American Colleges issued a report
saying that American colleges and universities had allowed their curriculums to
slip into a state of ''disarray'' and ''incoherence.''

This theme has been echoed by William J. Bennett, the new Secretary of
Education. In November, while still chairman of the National Endowment for the
Humanities, he issued a report saying that American colleges and universities
were failing to give students ''an adequate education in the culture and
civilization of which they are members.'' Last month, after his first news
conference as Secretary, he charged that many American students were being
''ripped off'' by their colleges.

The content of college curriculums became a national issue in 1975 when Harvard
University began working on a new curriculum of general education courses
required of all students for graduation. At Harvard, students must take a
certain number of courses from a list reflecting six what the university calls
''modes of inquiry'' - literature and arts, historical study, social analysis,
moral reasoning, science and foreign cultures.

'Distribution Requirements'

Over the next few years, in part because of the tone set by Harvard, hundreds of
colleges took steps to restore traditional ''distribution requirements.'' Under
this approach, students are typically required to take a certain number of
courses in, say, the humanities, the social sciences and the natural sciences.

In retrospect, many academics now view what occurred in that period as more of a
political event than an intellectual one. That is, it was a restoration of
faculty control over curriculum content but was not accompanied at the time by a
fundamental rethinking of what this content should be.

''It was a reassertion of the faculty view of what an education ought to be,''
said Joel L. Fleishman, vice chancellor of Duke University. ''Students were no
longer saying that they know better than the faculty.''

Many academic officials, however, came to believe that the reimposition of
requirements governing what course students must take was insufficient and that
serious thought had to be given to the content as well as the structure of what
was being taught. ''Distribution requirements represent a mindless patching
together of courses that departments offer as introductions to their field,''
said Donald N. Levine, dean of the College at the University of Chicago. ''What
passes for fresh thought is really a political compromise.''

A case in point is Wesleyan University, which eliminated such requirements in
1969 and restored them in 1977 as informal ''expectations.'' Now the faculty of
the 2,800-student instituion is considering yet another change in the form of a
required general education program that would cover areas such as world history,
non-Western culture and the impact of technology on society. ''We were not sure
that we have had a clear enough rational for general studies,'' said Colin
Campbell, the president.

Themes in Curriculums

Several themes run through many of the new curriculum efforts, including more
attention to basic academic skills. Women's colleges, among them Bryn Mawr and
Barnard, have been among the most conspicuous in adding mathematics. New York
University, which adopted a new curriculum four years ago, is strengthening an
already strong writing program so that it would apply ''across the curriculum,''
not just in the English department.

This fall, students entering the University of Houston-University Park will fall
under a new 54-hour core curriculum that has a heavy writing component.

After two decades in which college faculties were gearing their courses more and
more toward foreign cultures, the study of Western traditions is making a
comeback. Stanford's Western Culture requirement, which had been part of the
curriculum for 35 years until it was abandoned in 1970, was restored for the
class of 1984.

Many institutions have moved toward the ''modes of inquiry'' approach of
Harvard. At the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, freshmen and
sophomores must now meet requirements in English composition, mathematics and
foreign languages and then take courses designed to cover five different
''perspectives,'' or ''ways of looking at the world,'' including the esthetic
and philosophical.

Upper-Class Requirements

The faculty at Chapel Hill has also extended general education to the
upper-class level. Juniors and seniors must pass an additional course in the
five ''perspectives.'' As part of this, the faculty has also developed 25
interdisciplinary what it calls ''capstone'' courses designed to ''integrate''
the knowledge they have acquired in various fields. The topics range from
''Rhetoric of the Presidency'' and ''Russian Perceptions of the West.''

Some academics see the new wave of curriculum requirements as a reflection of
quality problems at the elementary and secondary levels. ''You just can't assume
that students come with the solid background from high schools,'' said Ronald K.
Calgaard, the president of Trinity University in Texas.

Others put the blame squarely on colleges themselves. Frederick Rudolph, an
emeritus professor of history at Williams College, said there has been a
''diffusion of authority for what the curriculum is.'' He blamed pressure from
students for more freedom and on faculty members who had increasingly become
''specialists in esoteric fields and abandoned responsibility for the curriculum
as a whole.''

Other Issues Addressed

Another factor, Mr. Rudolph suggested, was that colleges have had other issues
on their agendas. ''At Williams curriculum has been neglected for 20 years while
we abolished fraternities, went coed, doubled the size of the college and
addressed needs of the physical plant, like a new gym, an art building, and a
music building,'' he said.

Outside pressure has also been a factor. Samuel R. Williamson Jr., provost at
Chapel Hill, cited ''employment surveys showing that companies want people who
can write and think.'' At the University of Kansas, Deanell Tacha, the vice
chancellor for academic affairs, said a proposed 46-credit requirement was
partly a response to ''tremendous public interest in educational reform at the
post-secondary level.''

Some administrators view the new curriculums as a way of preserving traditional
values under new conditions. J. Ronald Spencer, associate dean at Trinity
College in Hartford said that his institution's ''free elective'' course system
worked in a period when students were ''willing to take risks and explore areas
that were not as congenial.'' Now, he said, ''Students are more conservative and
hesitant to take courses where they don't have aptitude, so we have to find ways
to motivate them to do so.''

Ernest L. Boyer, the president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching, who is conducting a study of the content of college teaching,
suggested that the current curriculum debate reflects some broader societal
issues, from the aftermath of the Vietnam War to concern about nuclear warfare.

''As a nation we go through periods of ambivalence and disintegration about
values and purposes,'' he said. ''Then there is followup period in which we look
for cohesion. Reform movements followed World War I and World War II. The case
can be made that the search for general education on the college campus reflects
the larger national mood for integration after conflict and confrontation - a
national desire to reaffirm values and structures.'' Current efforts toward core
curriculums seem to be producing relatively little opposition from either
students of faculty members.

But some fundamental aspects of curriculum change continue to provoke
discussion, including that of whether colleges should have a common core of
courses that all students take. Carnegie-Mellon University has adopted this
approach as a means of promoting a sense of ''intellectual community'' among
students in different academic areas.

Brooklyn College has attracted national attention for a core curriculum that
includes, among other things, a course on great works of literature that starts
with Richard Wright's ''Native Son'' and Ralph Ellison's ''Invisible Man'' and
works backwards to the Greeks and Romans.

Other institutions, however, including Harvard, believe that this is not
necessary, and officials of large state universities usually say that they could
not produce enough faculty members to teach a course that everyone had to take.

The other big issue is how to handle the growing importance of technology.
Stanford University became the first institution to require all graduates to
take a course in the production and impact of technology. ''That is really new,
and it comes from an idea of what the educated person will need in the future,''
said Carolyn C. Lougee, associate dean of the School of Humanities and Sciences.

Union College at Schenectady, N.Y., has begun requiring every student to take
some course work in ''technology and its social applications'' as part of its
new ''liberal learning'' program and is now working on a new applied mathematics
course.John S. Morris, Union president, said, ''Society is begining to ask: what
is technology, and what is it doing to us.''

Some colleges, of course, have resisted the current trend toward more structured
curriculums. After a two- year study the faculty of Brown University recently
decided to stick with its virtually open-ended curriculum on the ground that
''forced enrollment in particular subjects often leds to minimal performance
rather than true and lasting knowledge of a subject.''

Officials of other colleges, such as Columbia and Princeton Universities, are
quick to note that they never abandoned structured curriculums and coherent
general education programs. Officials at these universities, as well as at
others, sometimes express amusement at the academic excitement swirling about
them.

''When it comes to curriculum, we've stood firmly in the 18th century all
along,'' said Ladell Payne, the president of Randolph-Macon College in Virginia.
''Now everybody else is returning to the 18th century and joining us.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Colin Campbell, president of Wesleyan University; Photo of
Joseph C. Palamountain Jr., president of Skidmore College; Photo of J. Ronald
Spencer, associate dean of Trinity College

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE THAI-CAMBODIAN BORDER: LIVING IN LIMBO

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1667 words

DATELINE: SURIN, Thailand, March 8


They call it The Border.

Nobody has to specify which border - although there are four in Thailand, none
of them completely peaceful - because this particular strip of sun- scorched
scrubland facing Cambodia is more than an international boundary: It has become
a separate world, a country within a country.

Life in the border area is dominated by armies: Thailand's, which controls its
roads and issues its access permits; Vietnam's, whose tanks and artillery
determine its moods, and a roster of irregular guerrilla bands, whose wars are
waged from its sanctuaries.

Yet village life goes on. Clusters of small, weathered wooden houses on stilts
are home to rural people classified as ''affected Thais.'' There are thought to
be nearly 200,000 of them along the hundred or so most vulnerable miles of
frontier, living lives punctuated by regular identity checks, intermittent
evacuations and occasional deaths in the rice fields, casualties of someone
else's war.

Today the Thai hamlet of Ban Puangduk became the latest village to come under
fire as the Vietnamese pressed an attack on the last major guerrilla base still
in Cambodian territory. Dozens of villagers grabbed their few possessions and
ran for cover in army positions.

A few miles away at Ban Song, where the Thai Army has thrown together a
temporary base, a woman named Bun Peng said she had heard the Vietnamese guns
and was glad the troops had come. ''I bring the soldiers mangos and coconuts and
sticky rice,'' she said. Sticky rice, sweetened with syrup, is a specialty of
northeast Thailand.

The people who most dominate the border region now, giving it both its
limbo-like atmosphere and its distinctive economy - a blanket of international
relief embroidered by makeshift free enterprise - are the refugees, hundreds of
thousands of them.

For five years, the camps peopled by Cambodian rebels and their civilian
followers were seasonal phenomena in Thailand.

They mushroomed in the winter dry season as Hanoi's troops bombarded villages in
rebel-controlled territory inside Cambodia. When the rains came in June or July
and mud slowed the Vietnamese Army, the Thai camps were abandoned and the
resistance - men, women and children, with chickens and pots and pans - trudged
back over the border into Cambodia to resume the war.

This year, Hanoi's troops did not strike at the long-contested border area and
then withdraw. Instead, they have moved into the recently evacuated Cambodian
rebel settlements, apparently to stay.

The administrator at one of the refugee sites was asked how long he thought his
20,000 Cambodian charges would remain this year.

''We're planning on this being permanent,'' he said.

''Sometimes we can hear the Vietnamese tanks rumbling over there,'' a Cambodian
woman said, pointing to the perimeter of the site. ''This year, I don't think we
will go back.''

Few Choices for the Refugees

The refugees have few choices. Thailand does not want them to settle here. Most
reject the Phnom Penh Government's offers of amnesty to return to Cambodia. Few
if any stand a chance of being offered a new life in a third country.

The outsider, Thai and foreigner alike, needs a ''passport'' to enter the border
area, with additional ''visas'' to get to its most remote and dangerous corners.

Journalists from around the world drive four hours from Bangkok to the border
town of Aranyaprathet, along the road that in another age linked the Thai
capital to Phnom Penh, to cover a Cambodian war that can now be reported from
only one side. A six-hour journey from the capital brings them to Surin, in
Thailand's northeast, near the area where the most recent fighting has occurred.

Others come to help the victims, turning up incongruously at times - a Dutch
nun, for example, leading a group of Japanese donors into the heart of a rebel
settlement to ask, to the accompanying thud of artillery shells, what the people
need most. English, filtered through a dozen accents, becomes the international
language of roadside noodle shops.

Maps Offer Little Guidance

Maps are not much use here, since place names change and the places themselves
appear and disappear with the ebb and flow of war.

The guerrilla armies define the unof ficial ''provinces'' of this world, as they
move back and forth across the border. South from Aranyprathet to the Gulf of
Siam is largely Khmer Rouge territory. To the north, as far as San Ro Changan,
the non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front is dominant. From
there, farther east and north to Surin, the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk
have their camps.

All around the area, the beneficiaries of dislocation flourish: spies,
smugglers, fixers, thugs and brigands.

The civilian followers of rebel armies, most of them recently driven from
strongholds inside Cambodia by a Vietnamese offensive, live in tent cities that
soon become villages of thatch and bamboo.

The bamboo, like almost everything that sustains life in the camps, is brought
in by the United Nations Border Relief Operation, a unit set up in 1983 to
oversee the distribution of World Food Program supplies and other social and
humanitarian assistance to this special region.

Many Agencies Provide Aid

International relief workers from a host of agencies - most visible among them
the International Committee of the Red Cross - and their Thai and Cambodian
colleagues form a kind of international civil administration, working with the
Thai Army and Interior Ministry.

Their ambulances and food trucks ply the single paved border road and the many
dirt tracks in unending processions. Tanker trucks bring in more than
three-quarters of a million gallons of water a day.

The ''internationals,'' their walkie- talkies crackling, are a hard-working,
mostly cheerful fraternity, meeting in impromptu groups for early breakfast at
Aranyaprathet's haphazard streetside cafes before heading out in their
respective, logo-stenciled vans for another day in the field.

At night they return from their spartan operating theaters, clinics or
''offices'' - usually a table and stool in a spot of shade - to Aranyaprathet's
friendly clutter for supper at the Bamboo bar or maybe a video or two.

Opportunity for Shopkeepers

The hostelries of that unkempt border ''capital'' are chary with even modest
luxuries. So shopkeepers, quick to see the needs, prominently display such items
as insect sprays, soap and toilet paper.

At Bang Poo, a relatively comfortable refugee camp that was once part of the
huge refugee holding center of Khao I Dang, the people of Rithisen, a big rebel
base that was overrun by the Vietnamese in December, are restless, said Thou
Thon, their Cambodian camp president.

Rithisen had been a well-run town with 62,000 people and a thriving black market
that raised money for the Khmer People's National Liberation Front while giving
the camp itself economic independence.

''You see they have good roofs, here,'' Mr. Thou Thon said, looking toward a sea
of small but substantial bamboo houses. ''But the space for life is narrow. We
are now behind a double fence. In Rithisen we never had to ask for water, for
wood, for vegetables. We met those needs ourselves. But here we have to ask, and
then wait.''

One Family's Tragedy

Small scenes of private grief highlight the despair.

In late February, at Site One, to which the inhabitants of the Ampil rebel camp
had been evacuated, Prum Sary, a man who had fled for his life more than once,
left his hut to save some of his few possessions from an approaching
thunderstorm. He was killed by a bolt of lightning. At his funeral a day later,
Buddhist monks chanted over his rough coffin, watched by expressionless
children.

For the family of Prum Sary and others in the camp, the life of flight is still
not over. Early last week, Vietnamese shelled their camp, where rudimentary
houses were beginning to be built; thousands of people had to flee yet again,
deeper inside Thailand.

For the Khmer Rouge, who ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 with a reign of terror
that left at least a million dead, this year is also different. For the first
time, they abandoned their mountain hideouts of Phnom Malai and Phum Thmei to
Vietnamese forces, scattered their troops in small units inside Cambodia and
sent their families in large numbers into Thailand.

The Khmer Rouge had been secretive and austere in opposition, barring outsiders
from their rebel settlements and prohibiting a black market in consumer goods
that would have eased living conditions in their camps.

A Freer Atmosphere

Now Khmer Rouge civilians, without the stern presence of their military
leadership, are living in relative freedom.

At Khao Ta Ngoc, about 30 miles south of Aranyprathet, a reporter and a
photographer wandered through their new camp, which houses nearly 40,000
displaced people, without hindrance or threat, talking at will with men and
women through a Khmer-speaking Thai interpreter. Children ran forward
cautiously, sometimes smiling and posing to have pictures taken. Young men of
fighting age, who denied they were soldiers though some were wearing the
Chinese-style uniforms of elite troops, came forward out of curiosity and
answered questions.

Ruk Jont, 35, sporting a new pair of jeans and saying he had been a Khmer Rouge
soldier for more than a decade, brushed aside questions about Pol Pot, the
guerrillas' leader. Instead, he conspicuously praised Prince Sihanouk as a
''hero of the Khmer people.''

Andy Pendleton, an American who worked with Khmer Rouge refugees on behalf of a
Baptist mission in 1980 and 1981 and is now a United Nations camp administrator
in a Liberation Front area, said that by Khmer Rouge standards, the civilian
population of Khao Ta Ngoc appeared to be ''running wild.''

''I've heard they've been partying, and even had a wedding,'' he said. ''That
would never have been allowed before.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Khmer Rouge refugees from Cambodia fleeing from Vietnamese
pursuers; Photo of relatives of Prum Sary mourning him at his funeral ; Map

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRODUCT LIABILITY: THE NEW MORASS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR JR.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2770 words


The A. H. Robins Company postponed its annual meeting, set for next month, until
the company determines how many millions of dollars it should set aside to pay
to women injured by its Dalkon Shield contraceptive device. The reserve could
reduce or wipe out the company's quarterly dividend.

Connaught Laboratories stopped filling orders for whooping cough vaccine, which
causes severe reactions in a few children, because it could not get liability
insurance at an acceptable rate. The halt aggravated a national shortage of the
vaccine.

The FMC Corporation passed up a chance to produce precision bearings for
helicopter rotors because the potential profit did not justify the liability
risk if the helicopters crashed, according to Robert H. Malott, FMC's chairman.


THESE are the sort of experiences that are fostering an image of a tort system
gone slightly

crazy - an impression promoted by American business in its attempt to get a bill
through Congress that would make it harder for individuals to win product
liability suits. The lobbying effort probably got a boost in December from the
widely publicized competition among American lawyers to sign up victims of the
gas leak disaster in Bhopal, India, for multimillion-dollar liability suits
against the Union Carbide Corporation.

Tales about people filing and winning seemingly far-fetched personal injury
cases - tort suits in legal jargon - circulate at cocktail parties and enliven
office talk. Some are apocryphal. Others are quite true, such as the one about
an overweight man who had a heart attack trying to start the engine of a
lawnmower. He won a $1.75 million jury award against Sears, Roebuck & Company,
which sold him the mower, on the ground that the starter rope was too hard to
pull.

''If it was real easy to pull the rope, they probably would have been subject to
liability because a child could have pulled it,'' says Victor E. Schwartz,
Washington counsel for a business coalition called the Product Liability
Alliance.

Consumer activists, trial lawyers and many judges do not share that sarcasm.
They view the vast expansion of the liability of American business in recent
years as an effective way to compensate the injured and to force American
companies to make product safety a priority. The path-breaking decisions in
liability cases, issued mainly by state courts over the last 20 years, draw the
applause of such consumer activists as Ralph Nader, who says that even now, ''95
percent of those who have been injured by defective vehicles and products never
get justice.''

Guido Calabresi, a professor at Yale Law School who will become its dean on July
1, adds that those who ''create the risk ought to bear the cost of it.'' If
injuries caused by dangerous products become a cost of doing business for a
producer, he said, there will be an incentive to make safer products to avoid
liability. And the true costs to society of unavoidably dangerous products will
appropriately be included in the form of higher prices paid by everyone who uses
the products, he said.

As such theories have won adherents in the judiciary, tort law, once a legal
backwater over which few executives lost sleep, has become a major headache for
many businesses, and a path to bankruptcy for a few. The threat of liability is
an uninvited guest at product planning meetings, introducing uncertainty into
cost-and-price projections for new merchandise.

''As a lawyer and as a businessman, it's awfully difficult to project or
forecast for your client,'' said John F. Schmutz, senior vice president and
general counsel at E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company. ''You tend to shy away
from things that really would benefit society if you didn't shy away from
them.''

In addition, Mr. Schwartz of the Product Liability Alliance argues that
liability rules vary so greatly from one state to another that companies
shipping products nationwide ''don't know what the rules are.''

The problem has united American business behind a bill sponsored by
Representative Robert W. Kasten Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, that would
substitute a uniform Federal law for many of the liability rules that have
evolved from state court decisions. The most controversial provision would
require plaintiffs to prove negligence to win damages in cases involving
''design defects,'' such as gas tanks that tend to explode in rear- end
collisions. But consumer activists, organized labor and the lawyers who
prosecute liability cases, earning contingency fees if they win, are strongly
opposed to the bill, and its chances of passage are uncertain. Their opposition
has prevented passage of earlier Kasten bills.


THE rapid growth of product liability cases is one aspect of a

trend that has made torts into the most dynamic field of American law. The
judicial activism that has begun to slacken in constitutional law continues
strong in personal injury suits. The effects are wide-ranging. Doctors are sued
for malpractice. Local governments find themselves the defendants in tort suits
when people trip on cracked sidewalks. Party- givers are sued when guests drive
away drunk and get into smashups. And manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers
are sued when someone is harmed by a product they made, handled or sold.

Just last week:


* A Federal Court jury was hearing evidence on whether the morning sickness drug
Benedectin caused birth defects. The trial involves more than 1,000 suits. If
the verdict is yes, it could ultimately cost Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, the
drug's maker, hundreds of millions of dollars.


* A trial began in a California state court in San Francisco over who will pay
billions of dollars in injury claims filed by more than 25,000 people exposed to
asbestos. The case pits five asbestos companies against more than 50 insurance
companies, and the insurance companies against each other. To accommodate
lawyers from more than 55 companies, the trial is being held in a 1,000-seat
former high school auditorium.

New avenues in product liability surface constantly. Next month, Melvin Belli,
who has won the sobriquet ''king of torts,'' will begin to plead the case of the
late John Galbraith, a Californian who suffered from cancer and emphysema. Such
suits against American tobacco companies, as well as their advertising agencies,
could grow in number.

For many businesses - especially the chemical, petroleum and pharmaceutical
industries - the most ominous prospects are posed by what are called ''toxic
torts,'' suits brought by thousands of people who suspect their sicknesses or
their children's birth defects were caused by exposure, often years or decades
previously, to drugs or to toxic substances such as asbestos.

The many billions of dollars in claims for respiratory illnesses allegedly
caused by asbestos, and other suits for the cost of removing it from buildings,
have driven the Manville Corporation and two other manufacturers into bankruptcy
court. And with litigation mounting over illnesses allegedly caused by proximity
to toxic waste dumps, workplace exposure to benzene, formaldehyde, pesticides
and other chemicals and drugs, asbestos may be only the tip of a toxic torts
iceberg. The Justice Department says the total asbestos liabilities could exceed
$40 billion, with claims rising above 100,000, as more people get asbestosis or
cancer.

The proliferating number of tort cases is making product liability insurance a
major cost problem for business, especially for small companies. After rising in
the mid-1970's and then stabilizing or even declining, rates are going up
sharply this year. And the number of recorded jury verdicts awarding $1 million
or more to plaintiffs in personal injury suits has soared from one - the first -
in 1962 to 8 in 1970, 26 in 1975, 134 in 1980 and 360 in 1983, the last year for
which complete figures are available, according to Jury Verdict Research Inc.,
of Solon, Ohio.

Most business lobbyists acknowledge that tort liability has not yet become a
major financial drain or bottom-line concern for the vast majority of American
companies. But some face huge liabilities. A.H. Robins, for example, had
committed $259 million as of Sept. 30 to settle about 7,700 claims of women who
said its Dalkon Shield intrauterine device had caused infertility, involuntary
abortions and pelvic disease.

With at least 3,600 more claims pending, the company and its outside auditors
and lawyers have been unable to agree on the size of a reserve to cover
litigation costs. Because the charge against 1984 earnings has not been set,
results for the year have not been reported. This prompted last week's
announcement that the annual meeting, scheduled for April 23, had been postponed
indefinitely.

The company has been paying quarterly dividends of 19 cents a share. But no
first-quarter dividend could legally be paid if the loss reserve were set high
enough to wipe out the estimated $367 million in stockholder equity.

Robins has also been accused of going to extremes in seeking to minimize its
liability. A former in-house lawyer accused the company last year of destroying
internal documents to conceal evidence that it had known the Dalkon Shield could
be hazardous. And a Federal appeals court found in February that a key expert
witness for the company had perjured himself ''with complicity of counsel.'' The
company has denied the charges.


TORT law has a dual purpose: to

compensate injured victims and

deter unreasonably dangerous or negligent behavior by business and others. This
often involves striking a balance between fostering productive activity and
protecting safety.

The law traditionally struck this balance by requiring a plaintiff to prove,
rather clearly, that the negligence or fault of a specific defendant was the
''proximate'' cause of an injury. Even some business leaders acknowledge that
this approach sometimes left deserving plaintiffs without compensation.

''As products and manufacturing processes became more and more complex, a
negligence-based concept of liability imposed an onerous burden on an injured
victim seeking compensation,'' forcing him or her to prove, for example, ''what
part of a product failed,'' FMC's Mr. Malott, who is also head of the Business
Roundtable's Task Force on Product Liability, said in a 1983 article in the
Harvard Business Review.

''Thus,'' his article said, ''there was a need - concerned lawyers, judges, and
scholars agreed - for legal grounds other than negligence on which injured
individuals could recover damages for injuries or loss.''

Judges became increasingly bold in contriving such grounds, and legal scholars,
such as Professor Calabresi of Yale, provided them with rationales for doing so,
based on economic efficiency as well as compassion. They reasoned that the cost
of injuries involving dangerous products should be borne by the manufacturers,
who are in the best position to minimize the risks and to spread the cost
through insurance.

After decades of gradual erosion, common law barriers to tort plaintiffs began
to tumble in the 1960's, most conspicuously in state court decisions that
imposed strict liability for injuries caused by dangerous products. The supreme
courts of California and New Jersey have led the way, and juries became
increasingly generous in awarding damages. The United States Supreme Court,
which lacks jurisdiction over state law issues, has stayed on the sidelines.

In toxic tort cases, some judges and juries, faced with the difficulty of either
proving or disproving whether an illness was caused by a toxic substance, have
accepted highly debatable statistical evidence and scientific theories as a
basis for imposing liability. For example, in a test case last May, a Federal
judge in Utah ordered the Government to pay $2.4 million in damages to the
families of nine people who died of cancer after being exposed to fallout from
nuclear tests more than 20 years ago. The scientific evidence as to whether
radiation had caused the cancers was inconclusive. The judge in effect held the
radiation guilty until proven innocent, and said the Government had negligently
failed to warn residents of the possible hazard at the time of the tests.
Thousands of similar atomic radiation claims are pending.

In a somewhat similar case, seven manufacturers of Agent Orange agreed last May
to pay $180 million to settle a class action by Vietnam veterans allegedly
harmed by the defoliant. Some 200,000 claims have been filed for a share of the
fund.

Later, Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Manhattan, who had pushed for
a settlement, questioned whether the case should have been brought at all. He
said ''no factual connection of any substance'' had been shown between the
diseases and Agent Orange. Now he is weighing a proposed plan to distribute the
money without requiring the claimants to prove Agent Orange caused their
maladies.


IN Mr. Malott's opinion, things have

gotten out of hand, causing ''an almost unfathomable expansion of the scope of
liability, with exorbitant costs to society.'' And some Administration officials
decry what Michael J. Horowitz, general counsel of the Office of Management and
Budget, calls ''the radicalization of tort law'' by liberal activists seeking
''a judicially imposed insurance scheme.''

Such criticisms of the evolving tort system are viewed by Mr. Nader as a
campaign by powerful economic interests to deny redress to injured people and
snuff out efforts by progressive judges to inject some fairness and compassion
into the law. The deck has traditionally been stacked against injured people
seeking reasonable compensation, he said, adding that for every pro-plaintiff
judge looking for ways to award compensation there is a pro-business judge
looking for ways to deny it.

The worst feature of the Kasten bill, in the view of of Mr. Nader and other
opponents, is the provision that would require plaintiffs to prove negligence in
cases involving defects in the design of products, wiping out some state rules
that hold a company liable in such cases. ''The real rationale of strict
liability is that people cannot always prove negligence even when it's there,''
says Jay Angoff of Congress Watch, a consumer advocacy group.


THE most vigorous opponents of

the Kasten bill are the plaintiffs'

trial lawyers who bring the product liability suits against companies and have a
direct financial stake in the continuation of the current system. They typically
get one-third of any award.

Mr. Nader defends the trial lawyers against business people who deride them as
self-seeking ambulance- chasers: ''Never underestimate the deterrent effect of
having thousands of plaintiffs' lawyers all over the country who have a vested
interest in holding those doctors' and corporations' feet to the fire,'' he
said.

Still, lawyers might get much less if a system were devised that made it easier
for clients to win reasonable compensation without extensive litigation. In 1983
the Rand Corporation estimated that 63 cents of every dollar spent on asbestos
litigation went to the opposing attorneys and for legal costs, leaving only 37
cents to victims.

A move is afoot in Congress to do something about this. Senators Slade Gorton,
Republican of Washington, and Christopher Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, are
developing proposals to guarantee swift, but limited, compensation to people
injured by unsafe products who might otherwise have no redress under the Kasten
bill or who prefer to avoid litigation. The compensation would be limited to
actual costs, such as medical expenses and lost wages, and would not include
compensation for pain and suffering or punitive damages. The liability of
defendants who were not negligent would thus be limited, and the risks, delays
and costs of litigation might be avoided.

Proponents say this approach would be good not only for injured victims but for
businesses. The major losers, one Senate aide said, would be the lawyers who
earn contingency fees under the current system.

Mr. Nader and the trial lawyers have a different view. He says that the
proposals being considered would shortchange injured people and serve as a
''scaffolding'' on which business lobbyists could later add special interest
amendments.

Business lobbyists do not much like the idea of such a compensation system
either. They would prefer the Kasten bill the way it is now, with a plaintiff
required to prove corporate fault to collect. But they acknowledge that they
might have to give something up to get something.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHEN REASON FLEES

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


BOSTON

General Washington and his men, on an expedition in Tory territory, came upon a
wedding party. ''Fire when ready,'' Washington ordered, ''and be sure not to
miss the bride.'' - Parson Weems, ''The Life of George Washington,'' as revised
by Ronald Reagan.


The Nicaraguan ''contras'' are

the ''moral equal of our Founding Fathers,'' President Reagan says. They are
''our brothers.'' They are ''freedom fighters struggling for liberty and
democracy.''

The day after Christmas 1984, those ''freedom fighters'' attacked a wedding
party that was on the way home from church in the Nicaraguan countryside. They
killed six people, including the bride. Why did they do that? Numerous reports
on their activities make the answer clear: Their strategy is to terrorize the
population.

The latest reports were published last week. One, by Americas Watch, a respected
human rights group based in New York, dealt with abuses by both the Nicaraguan
Army and the contras. The former have sharply declined since 1982, it found, but
the latter are continuing and systematic.

There are gruesome stories in the Americas Watch report, corroborated by U.S.
lawyers in interviews. The contras have regularly murdered unarmed civilians,
including women and children ''who were fleeing.'' They have kidnapped and raped
civilians. They have tortured, mutilated and executed prisoners. They have made
''deliberate use of terror.''

So there is a staggering gap between President Reagan's rhetoric and the reality
of the contras' character. And the same kind of departure from reality is
evident in the Reagan Administration's demonology about the Sandinista
Government.

Nicaragua, Mr. Reagan says, is a ''totalitarian Communist state.'' It has fallen
''behind the Iron Curtain,'' says Secretary of State Shultz. No one who knows
the Soviet Union could believe such nonsense. Opposition parties won 30 percent
of the vote in the Nicaraguan election last year despite U.S. efforts to have
them boycotted. The church and some labor unions are open opponents of the
regime. It is largely a private-enterprise economy.  A third area of unreason is
the Reagan Administration's military strategy in Nicaragua. The President is
pressing Congress urgently to authorize aid to the contras so they can make the
Sandinistas cry ''uncle.'' But Gen. Paul F. Gorman, retiring commander of U.S.
forces in Central America and a hawk on the subject, says the contras are
incapable of overthrowing the Government in ''the foreseeable future.'' When
political leaders depart as sharply from reality as President Reagan has on
Nicaragua, when reason flees, it is important to try to understand why. As
Shakespeare put it, ''Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.'' An
ideological fixation drives Mr. Reagan's policy on Nicaragua, I am convinced. He
came to office determined to overcome what conservatives call the Vietnam
syndrome, an unwillingness by this country to use its military power. To do that
he must have an opportunity to use American muscle. Nicaragua is the chosen
place.  As always when ideology is in the saddle, inconvenient facts are pushed
aside - and so are counterproductive results. Thus we see an American President
inventing a Nicaragua that is not there, and supporting terrorism in the name of
freedom. We see the policy pursued with frightening rigidity, in the teeth of
political and military realities. And we see it helping the hard men among the
Sandinistas.  The policy is unrealistic in still another sense. It runs against
the deep instincts of the American people. A Washington Post-ABC News poll last
month asked whether we should try to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government. The
result was 12 percent yes, 70 percent no.  Given the irrational nature of the
Reagan policy, it is stunning to realize that Democrats are relatively subdued
in their criticism of it. Here is a policy based on fantasies, a policy carried
out by murderers, a policy leading this country into a Central American
quagmire, a policy unwelcome to the public. Where are the voices of leadership
making it the great issue it should be, the dominant issue before this country?
The United States is not threatened by Nicaragua, a country of fewer than three
million people, desperately poor after years of dictatorship and war. It is
threatened, in its deepest nature, by a policy that allies America with
terrorism.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Docudramas Are Safer

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 231 words


Than Documentaries

To the Editor:

If Abby Mann felt he had so substantial a factual case to challenge the
conviction of Wayne Williams (''Why TV Movie About Atlanta Child Murders Had to
Be Made,'' letter, March 1), why didn't he produce a straightforward television
documentary instead of a docudrama? He makes a convincing case on paper.

The reason ''The Atlanta Child Murders'' became entertainment probably has more
to do with network attitudes toward documentaries than with Abby Mann. Dramatic
television is a lot more exciting than real life, easier to produce, gets vastly
higher ratings and is far simpler to defend from a ''journalistic perspective.''
You can be sure that if ''Vietnam: The Uncounted Enemy'' had been a docudrama,
there would have been no multimillion-dollar lawsuit. You can also bet that next
time it will be.

Documentary television is dying on the vine. What has become of ''CBS Reports,''
''NBC White Paper'' or ''ABC Close-up''? Those units, which once produced some
of the finest television offered in this country, have been reduced to almost
nothing. The networks have assembled some of the finest journalists and
documentary film makers available, and seem content to let them sit idle while
they go about melding fact and fiction for profit.

MICHAEL ROSENBLUM Brooklyn, March 1, 1985

The writer is a Channel 13 producer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RESERVES MOVE TO THE FOREFRONT OF DEFENSE

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Nearly 15 years ago, when James H. Webb Jr. was commanding a Marine Corps rifle
company in Vietnam, he and his men regarded the National Guard and reserve
armories back home as cozy havens where draft dodgers played cards and grew beer
bellies.

These days, Mr. Webb, who last year became Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Reserve Affairs, regards those armories as essential. ''Now, the United States
Army cannot go to war - cannot go to war - without using the guard and
reserves,'' said Mr. Webb.

Thanks to serious official attention in the 1970's, accompanied by a doubling of
their budgets in the past five years, the reserves have grown in size - and in
quality, it is widely agreed. Under pressure from Congress, the military has
come to rely more on the reserves to move its supplies, maintain its planes and
vehicles, transport its troops and tend its wounded.

Air Force reservists were called to help lift American medical students out of
Grenada during the 1983 invasion. Reservists taxi American troops and trainers
around Central America. Reserve units were heavily represented among the
soldiers who shivered through winter war games in Alaska and West Germany in
January.

The Pentagon has also increased the number of Army Reserve units that would be
thrown in with active soldiers in the first few months of fighting. A Government
commission once estimated that after the draft ended in 1973 there would be one
reservist for every four active troops. In fact, the ranks of weekend warriors
hit a postwar record of 1,046,000 last year and now account for fully a third of
American military strength.

Inviting Savings

The rehabilitation of the reserves has been noticed on Capitol Hill. As Congress
casts about for ways to cut the Pentagon budget, some lawmakers, including House
Armed Services Committee chairman Les Aspin, see potential savings in shifting
more of the military's responsibilities to the reserves and cutting back on the
costlier active forces. The loosely knit group of Congressional strategy buffs
who call themselves military reformers are strong advocates of greater
dependence on the reserves, especially to man the planes and ships that would
deliver ground troops to battle.

''Force mix,'' meaning the balance of active and reserve forces, has become
''the current buzz word of the military reform caucus,'' says Mr. Webb.

The savings seem inviting. An Army infantry reserve battalion may cost a fourth
the amount of an active unit. An aviation reserve unit, because of the higher
cost of maintaining airplanes, may cost 80 percent of a comparable Air Force
unit. That is not a bad buy considering that reserve pilots, who usually fly
commercial jets during the week, often outshoot active squadrons in target
practice.

One sign of the reserves' ascendancy is Mr. Webb. The 39-year-old Naval Academy
graduate, writer (of the well-received Vietnam novel ''Fields of Fire'') and
lawyer is the first to fill the high-ranking reserve post created by Congress
last year to give the reserve forces more clout.

The reserves have had growing pains, however. They still rely largely on
hand-me- down equipment, although the castoffs are mixed with a few advanced M-1
tanks and F-16 fighter planes. The reserves still complain of shortages of
ammunition, radios and training simulators.

Martin Binkin, a manpower expert at the Brookings Institution, is not optimistic
about the prospects for pushing much more responsibility into the reserves. He
said he worries about the bureaucratic resistance to integrating reserve and
active units, and the inherent limitations of making weekend warriors into
combat-ready infantrymen and tank drivers. ''I myself am not comfortable with
the trend in Congress toward putting more of our eggs in the reserve basket,''
he said.

Another difficulty may be getting the volunteers in the first place. Already,
the Pentagon estimates shortages of medical reservists are so severe that
three-fourths of the American casualties would not be adequately treated in the
first two months of a war.

With a reviving economy, recruiting and retention problems seem to be spreading.
Last month the Defense Department reported that its two biggest reserve outfits
- the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard - pulled in only 77 percent of
their goals for new recruits last year. Dropout rates are on the rise.

Mr. Webb said the reserves are in part a victim of their own recovery. Some men
and women join expecting a life of lazy weekends, and find themselves slogging
through maneuvers in the Alaska tundra. ''There is a legitimate question as to
how many more people you can ask to do this,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of National Guard Mountain Battalion member

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAL NORTH AMERICA, EH?



BYLINE:
By Andrew H. Malcolm. Illustrated. 385 pp. New York: Times Books. $17.95.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2420 words


''THE CANADIANS,'' by Andrew H. Malcolm, is not a pretty-picture book, all
wilderness parks and icicles, nor is it a travel guide, all restaurants. Instead
it's an ambitious, enthusiastic and wide-ranging study of a country recently
thought, even by those who live there, to be unambitious, unenthusiastic and
narrow-ranging. The results will surprise many, especially the Canadians
themselves.

Before writing this book, Mr. Malcolm spent four years in Canada as chief of the
Toronto bureau of The New York Times. Instead of sitting comfortably in the
Toronto-Montreal-Ottawa triangle, as he could easily have done, he traveled the
land by car, train, plane, dog sled and canoe, and numerous other modes of
transportation, including foot. He talked with people, listened to things, read
wads of material and looked out the windows. He collected statistics and
uncovered unlikely tidbits of fact. (Mary Pickford was One of Them, though he
unaccountably missed Walt Disney; Canadians like eight kinds of topping per
pizza, Americans stick to three; and many more.) His energy and curiosity are
infectious; so is his sometimes wonky angle of vision. The reader page-turns
swiftly, eager to discover just what hunk of geography, oddity of diction,
old-time anecdote, corporate buy out, Indian legend or historical anomaly will
next catch his peripatetic and serendipitous eye.

At the outset, one wonders in one's dour Canadian way just what kept him
beavering away at this project, like some baseball-card collector run amok.
There is an answer: Mr. Malcolm has Canadian roots (pronounced rooots rather
than ruhts, up there in the Great White North), and his voyages were partly
voyages of self- rediscovery. Some of the more personal and more charming and/or
sentimental bits, in the section called ''My Canada,'' concern his Canadian
parents and grandparents. One also wonders how he thought he was going to
bludgeon or sucker Americans into reading about a place they've usually pictured
as that fuzzy gray hinterland where the bad weather comes from, or the blank
hole in outer space that swallowed up Cousin Jake during the Vietnam War. Well,
Mr. Malcolm's got the answer to that one, too: paranoia. The Canadians are
taking over.



Don't breathe a word, but regiments of Canadian entrepreneurs, carefully
disguising their company names and products as American ones, are sneaking
south, flanked by platoons of pointy-penciled accountants and red-eyed, quietly
vicious corporate lawyers armored in British-cut three-piece suits. New York is
crumbling under the onslaught and the maple-leaf peril has almost done for
Dallas. (What ghastly blight does this portend? Socialized medicine? Anti-litter
campaigns? Safety on the streets? Unlikely, for Canadians are masters of
camouflage.) ''Economically,'' says Mr. Malcolm, ''Canada, the old colonial
pussycat, doormat to foreigners plundering resources and profits, is fast
becoming a voracious tiger, especially within the North American economic
scene.'' This will be news to just about everyone. Nevertheless, the section
entitled ''The Economy'' is the longest in the book, chock-full of specifics,
and will, I expect, become de rigueur reading for American business executives
who have any dealings at all with their Canadian counterparts, as well as for
Canadian executives wishing to see whether their cover has been blown. (Rogers
Cable? Pizza Pizza? Hardee's? The May Company? Is nothing sacred?)

The economy is one of Mr. Malcolm's strong suits.  Another is the geography. He
is very good on the overwhelming size and forbidding nature of the land,
translating it into easily grasped images - how many Pennsylvanias would fit in
here or there, how many Frances it would take to fill the northern forest area
(six), what it looks like north of the tree line and what the arctic
colder-than-cold actually does to you. He obviously relished his northern
forays, and was privileged in his guides and companions there, who included the
wonderful Indian dog-sledder Snowbird and Dr. Joseph MacInnis, the remarkable
Arctic deep-sea diver, in quest of the ships from the doomed Franklin
expedition, which perished in its attempt to find the Northwest Passage in the
19th century, subject of many a Canadian poem and song. (Though Mr. Malcolm
unaccountably missed this.) On the subject of the physical landscape and even
the human one, Mr. Malcolm is rhapsodic: ''I thought Canadians had the cleanest
air in the world, the most abundant pure fresh water, the largest woods, the
cleanest, safest, most attractive cities, the cheapest gasoline, the most
reliable, convenient city services, the most imaginative museum and park
systems, the greatest array of towering mountains, the most exciting, untamed
frontier in their Far North, and the most varied selection of outdoor activities
within a very few miles of the cities.

''Canadians reading those lines,'' he continues, ''will feel a sharp sense of
unease and start to think of all the 'buts' to qualify the praise. It is
instinctive.'' Which brings us to Mr. Malcolm's attempts to puzzle out the
Canadian national character. This sort of exercise, like generalizations about
race and sex, is fraught with peril, but we all do it anyway, so one can't fault
him for having a few shots at it, and indeed taking a few. But Canadians are
recalcitrantly various, and for every ''typical'' Canadian attitude there are
hosts of exceptions. Also, Canada, like any country, is a palimps est, an
overlay of classes and generations, and Mr. Malcolm does not always flag these
distinctions clearly. That said, it's true that Canadians are - as Mr. Malcolm
points out - prone to understatement, to trashing their own successes to keep
their heads from swelling - who do you think you are, eh? - to grumbling, and to
opening savings accounts. In earlier immigration patterns, the United States got
the Irish, Canada got the Scots. Praise an American, he'll agree with you;
praise a Canadian, he'll think you're trying to sell him something. But Canadian
subenthusiasm is no more to be taken totally at face value than is American
drum- majorettishness. One has to translate: ''stupendous,'' in Americanese, is
roughly the equivalent of ''not bad at all.'' It's partly, though only partly, a
matter of social convention, like ''Y'all hurry back, hear?'' On the whole, the
Canadian mind-set is skeptical-ironic, the American idealistic-optimistic. Which
means that Canadians are less easily inspired, but also less easily
disappointed. Americans cheer you when you're up there, Canadians rally round
with the cakes and pies when you're down. (After gloating a bit first, of
course.)

Mr. Malcolm looked for the ''national identity,'' and he did not quite find it;
but maybe he was looking in the wrong places. Instead of trying for what
Canadians worship, he might have tried for what they make fun of. Political
cartooning, satiric radio and television shows like ''SCTV Network'' and comedy
groups like the Royal Canadian Air Farce, stand-up comics and Joe Clark jokes
are more typical of them than are halos on their politicians or saints'- lives
versions of their history. When they do elect heroes, these may well be groups
rather than individuals. Some examples? The winners of the first
Canadian-Russian hockey tournament (not a dry eye in the pub, eh?); the Canadian
Army in the First and Second World Wars, noted for their value as shock troops
(''The Brits fought to the very last Canadian, eh?''); those who built the
trans-Canada railroads, against great odds and with many deaths; the entire
Franklin expedition; the Jesuit missionaries of the 17th century; the coureurs
de bois; and, especially in Quebec, the Patriotes of the 1837 rebellion. I base
the popularity of these groups on the numbers of books, poems and songs they
have inspired, and on the market saturation of popular-history works on them, by
writers such as Pierre Berton and Farley Mowat. A hundred thousand hardbacks
with four readers each, routine for such epics, translates into a readership of
one Canadian in 62. To do the same in the States, you'd have to sell a million.
Canada, despite its ''regionalism,'' which Mr. Malcolm seems to view with some
distaste, is in many ways a more integrated country than the States. Why not?
It's smaller. (Who could get most of the professional prose writers in the
States into one meeting room every year, as the Canadians do? Who would want
to?) Canadians also vote more (80 percent) and feel less powerless vis- a-vis
their own Government than do people in the States. After all, the Government is
just old Dief or old Pierre or old Joe or old Brian, and who does he think he
is?


THROUGH no fault of Mr. Malcolm's there have been several changes since ''The
Canadians'' was finished. One was the 1984 Olympics, at which Canada
outperformed the United States per capita, thus rendering obsolete some of the
comments on laziness and lack of competitiveness. Another was the withdrawal of
the Canadian membership from the United Auto Workers, not for nationalistic
reasons but because they felt they weren't getting value for dollars. A third
was the recent federal election. The Ottawa- you-love-to-hate changed hands,
and, with a huge cross-country all-provinces Tory majority, Canada is no longer
a country with no national political parties. It looks as though Mr. Malcolm's
worries about the metric system and undue coddling will soon no longer apply;
indeed, although it's spending tens of millions on (guess what) new military
uniforms - well, what can you do if you don't have the actual bombs, eh? - the
new Government is disemboweling environmental programs, to considerable outrage,
and gutting the Government-financed Canadian Broadcasting Corporation; the sole
national arts-funding body, the Canada Council; and the entire cultural sector -
tourist magnet, four-to-one dollar generator, bigger seller per capita than
spectator sports, and employer of the largest number of workers in Canada. You'd
think they'd have got rid of the money-losing Candu Reactor instead. But Mr.
Malcolm could have predicted it; it's the kick-success, cushion-failure syndrome
he spots on almost the very first page.

Despite the astuteness, thoroughness and general worthiness of ''The
Canadians,'' I have a few quibbles. Must Mr. Malcolm use the word half- breed?
How could he have missed the 1837 rebellion, the failure of which caused the
exodus of one citizen in 12? Though he spotted the tremendous cultural explosion
of the last 20 years, he missed some of the highlights (no Margaret Laurence,
Marian Engel, Anne Hebert or Marie-Claire Blais in literature, no Stan Rogers or
Pauline Julienne in singing?) How come there are so few Quebecois in the
''People'' section, and only one woman? (A female Mountie, wouldn't you know,
eh?) In fact, women get short shrift from Mr. Malcolm, despite their relative
prominence in the arts and public life. You'd think it was all Sergeant Prestons
up there, with hardly a Rose Marie in sight. He might at least have asked a few
Canadian women what they think of Canadian men as compared with, for instance,
Australian or American ones. The answers might have surprised him.

There are a couple of other biases lurking in the muskeg. Some have to do with
the value of laissez- faire capitalism as opposed to planned Government
spending: keep your eye on words like ''interference'' and ''coddling.'' (Though
with such a ''weak federal system,'' you'd wonder how the Canadians could go in
for all this heavy-handedness.) What's sauce for the goose, some Canadians might
reply, is not necessarily sauce for the goosee. Also, Mr. Malcolm tends to
rabbit on about Canadian surliness toward the Yanks in a manner reminiscent of a
male liberal at a feminist meeting: he's friendly, so why are they fussing? It's
true that Canadians are often like itchy underwear on this subject and that it's
bad manners to confuse an individual with a nation; but in such an unequal
relationship there are bound to be resentments, some of them trivial. Maybe it
would have added some perspective to have compared Canada with countries other
than the United States. Like it or not, the States is bulging with people and is
an empire, and Canada is neither. It often has more in common with other small
postcolonial countries such as Australia, the West Indian nations and the United
States itself, circa 1785 to 1840.

All that grumpily said, ''The Canadians'' remains a major achievement in its
field. For many Americans, it will be a helpful, timely and tightly packed
introduction. A large number of Canadians will read it too. It says some things
that will aggravate them, but also many that are true and useful and should be
heeded, particularly the sermons on valuing what you've got before you blow the
works. Ultimately, ''The Canadians'' is both a plea for mutual understanding -
we're all in this bedrock together - and a big step in that direction.

Not bad at all, eh?B

WHO'S MINDING THE STORE Canadians don't have all that many common heroes to put
on postage stamps, but they do have their resources. So there are beautiful
stamps honoring such things as nickel. Without resources, there seemed little
good reason to enter Canada's hostile immensity. Without resources or a strong
profitable market for them, many isolated Canadian communities have shriveled up
and died, crumbling monuments to that resource and the scars it left on the land
and the people. And if the promise of gold in the streets has failed to
materialize time after time after time throughout Canada's history, that only
fed an innate national cynicism and a deep suspicion that every apparent
opportunity was also laden with the certain specter of failure. According to an
apt routine by the Royal Canadian Air Farce comedy group, ''Some people look at
things as they are and say, 'Why?' A Canadian looks at things as they might be
and says, 'No way!' '' No way has seemed a safer way.  Canada, for example,
never paid any attention to its Yukon (and modern-day Yukoners would claim it
still doesn't) until the shiny prospect of some yellow metal in its ground and
streams ignited a historic stampede of 100,000 souls that became the great
Klondike, actually an American gold rush on Canadian territory. To this day
Americans still constitute 80 percent of those visiting Canada's Yukon. - From
''The Canadians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Canada; Photo of A. H. Malcolm

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GETTING A SOLID GRIP ON ENGLISH

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH FIELD

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 10, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words

DATELINE: WHEN Sidi Abeidna, a 23


year-old student from Africa, stepped off a bus at the White Plains Hotel a
little more than a year ago, he could barely speak or read English. ''I found
someone to call Manhattanville,'' Mr. Abeidna said, recalling the day, ''and
they sent somebody to pick me up. I was waiting in the hallway of the hotel, but
I didn't know who to look for. I only found out because he was smiling.''

Mr. Abeidna's language skills have improved greatly after three semesters at the
college's English Language Institute. On a test he took in December to measure
his understanding of English, he scored in the upper levels. Good enough,
according to Marilyn Rymniak, the institute's director, to enable him to apply
for admission to the college as a regular student. He is now a freshman.

''Some come to the institute to improve their English for academic work at
Manhattanville and elsewhere,'' Mrs. Rymniak explained, referring to the
institute's 59 foreign students, ''while others need to brush up their
conversational skills for business, social or other purposes.''

''When they begin the program,'' she continued, ''some of the students can say
only a few words or sentences in English, but when they finish their courses
many are really quite fluent.''

Mrs. Rymniak described the improvement in ability as the difference between
having ''survival skills in the language and being proficient to the point of
being able to use the language for study or business.''

The institute was originally founded at the college by New York University as
part of its language- training program. It was taken over by Manhattanville four
years ago, according to Sister Ruth Dowd, dean of special programs, in a move
that reflected the college's ongoing ''interest in working with foreign students
and its commitment to international programming in general.''

Mrs. Rymniak, who before coming to Manhattanville last July ran a similar
program at the University of California at Irvine, said full-time students at
the institute took six courses, or 20 hours of instruction a week for 16 weeks.
The courses are designed for different levels of skill and cover areas such as
grammar, reading, writing, listening comprehension, vocabulary development and
conversation. All students are tested before placement in the courses, and
programs are individualized to meet students' needs.

''For example,'' Mrs. Rymniak said, ''our Japanese students often come to the
institute strong in the literacy skills - reading, writing and grammar - but
very weak in the verbal skills: listening and conversation. As a result, I might
put them in high- level classes for their reading and composition and low-level
classes for their conversation. In this way they get what they need and do not
waste time within the program.'' She said most students spent at least a year at
the institute, with two years being the maximum stay.

Along with the language courses, students can take elective courses (free of
charge) designed to enhance their listening skills and understanding of American
culture. Among the courses are American history, American literature, the media
in America and American film.

Mrs. Rymniak - who speaks six languages and whose background includes several
degrees and graduate work in linguistics, foreign languages and international
education - said classes at the institute were small (typically 10 to 12
students, sometimes fewer). All are conducted exclusively in English by
instructors experienced in teaching English as a second language. In addition,
she noted that ''many of our instructors have traveled extensively and are
familiar with the various cultures and languages of the world.''

''This is important,'' she said, ''because our students come from 25 foreign
countries and bring widely diverse attitudes, interests and backgrounds to the
institute and their discussions in class.''

As an example of the diversity, she cited several students who had recently
attended the institute or are now enrolled. These included a Japanese banker, a
housewife from Brazil, a premedical student from Peru, two nephews of the French
couture designer Givenchy, an engineering student from Colombia and a refugee
from Vietnam, now living in Purchase.

Mrs. Rymniak said an international student adviser, Sharron Toulouse, helped
ease the transition of students to this country and the institute and worked
with them on housing and visa problems. In addition, Mrs. Toulouse plans special
activities for them - field trips, recreational outings and international
evenings through which they are encouraged to share ideas and information about
their countries and customs.

Mrs. Rymniak said that many students heard about the language program through
friends and relatives in this country or as a result of being assigned to work
in the United States by companies here and abroad. Predicting that the
''corporate community'' would probably be the greatest catalyst for the
institute's future growth, she said: ''As more and more executives are being
sent over here to work, they are realizing the level of English they need to
develop their business has to be much higher. The result is an increasing demand
for English-language training in sometimes specialized areas within many
multinational companies.''

To accommodate the companies, Mrs. Rymniak, who has worked in the past with
concerns as International Business Machines, Xerox and Credit Suisse, said the
institute would design in-house courses to meet their particular needs, do
private tutoring or conduct classes on campus for several corporations in the
area.

Immediate plans call for an International Visitors Center, to open at the
institute in April, that will provide information to the growing international
population in Westchester.The information will be free of charge and, according
to Mrs. Rymniak, cover everything from ''how to go about doing their shopping to
an explanation of the educational systems, services and organizations available
to them.'' In addition, an intensive four-week summer seminar combining
English-language training with some instruction in American management
techniques and economics is planned for international businessmen.

There will also be a summer youth camp offering English classes, athletic
activities and recreational outings to teen-agers 14 through 17 years old from
other countries.

As benefits of attending the institute, participants cited improved language
skills and a greater understanding and appreciation of other countries and
cultures. ''You can read a lot of books about a country,'' said Luis Traslavina,
a Colombian student planning to attend business school next fall, ''but it's
very different to talk with the people. In my case I knew something about the
Japanese and the way they live, but, after being at the institute, I know much
more. Now I can understand their philosophy of life and, for example, the way
they see love.''

For more information about the institute, call 694-2200, ext. 517.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Louis Translavina with Veronica Luma and other foreign
students; Photo of Sharon Toulouse

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IT TAKES A HEAP OF HORROR

BYLINE: By Beverly Lowry

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words


FAMILIAR GROUND

By Elizabeth Cox.  220 pp. New York: Atheneum. $14.95.


IT'S a shame, but undoubtedly true - Southernness has become a literary burden.
Readers

feel swamped. Don't they already know everything they need to about the rural
American South? Even writers from down there start to worry. Yet what can they
do, go back and be born somewhere else?

Here is the opening paragraph of Elizabeth Cox's first novel, ''Familiar
Ground'': ''Jacob came to Sweetwater, Tennessee, by train. It was autumn and he
felt unhoused in spirit, but he always felt that way in autumn. What brought
Jacob back to Sweetwater was a letter from a woman who must be close to a
hundred years old and a newspaper clipping that (though he had not read it in
years) Jacob found he still knew almost by heart.''

Elizabeth Cox is no coward. This is an opening paragraph packed with information
- time, place, emotional state, motivation, means of transport, in only three
sentences. And she is making a bold announcement straight away, that this is
going to be a Southern novel. Miss Cox teaches writing and has had short stories
published in some of our best literary journals. She knows full well what she is
doing.

Jacob Bechner, the novel's main character, is 60 years old. He has not been back
to his hometown in seven years. Summoned by the letter he carries, he returns to
find Sweetwater little changed. Many of the people he knew as a boy are still
alive and still hold the same positions in town. Hunting season begins soon
after Jacob's arrival. The ceremonies surrounding this event seem permanently
fixed. There is a dance before the men leave and much ruckus. The men go off in
high spirits, accompanied by a cook whose biscuits and cobblers are her claim to
glory. None of this is new to Jacob; he's been there before. So have we. The
rituals are all the same, and Miss Cox does well by them.

But terrible things have happened to Jacob Bechner's family. By page 10 we have
learned that his son died at age 12, that his sister's husband has been
wheelchair-bound for more than 40 years and that Jacob himself is haunted by his
older brother Drue's death - either by gunshot or fire - which he secretly
witnessed. Jacob was 19 at the time, Drue, 23. The official ruling was that Drue
burned to death. But Jacob was there and he is certain he heard a gun go off. In
the years since, Jacob has said nothing about being at his brother's house that
night. Not even his wife, Molly, knows that Jacob thinks he might have shot his
own brother.



But then, secrets are the heart of this novel - the effect of family injuries on
those who witnessed their infliction, the need not to share intimacies yet the
need within the same soul to share them. Before he went to his brother's house
that night, Jacob knew that his life would never be the same. ''It all happened
within a few moments: Jacob entering his brother's house, hearing a shot, and
even before he heard it his infallible intuition announced Something will happen
here or I will be changed. Incumbent upon him was some nameless happening.''

It takes a while to find out what the letter from the 100-year-old woman is
about; it takes even longer for the plot to move Jacob from his sister's house
to the aged and dying woman. Within her memory is information that will help him
to make peace with his past, which, after a brush with death, he finally does.

That in seven years Sweetwater has remained



Beverly Lowry's most recent novel is ''Daddy's Girl.'' essentially unchanged may
seem a mighty large bite to ask a reader to swallow, yet there are towns not
only in the South but throughout the country in which shockingly little is new.
As towns remain the same, so do the families that live in them. The authenticity
of ''Familiar Ground'' depends on the author's ability to convey this sense of
stasis well, which she does.

Even so, Miss Cox overextends herself. The family and the town must in some way
reflect each other, and while the damage done, not only to the Bechners but to
the other citizens of Sweetwater as well, is not overstated in terms of
believability, the injuries are simply too numerous and too brutal for the
structure of the novel to bear. It is difficult for a book that is hardly more
than 200 pages to support so many deaths and tragedies. There are fires and
mutilation, rape, the burning alive of a rampaging circus elephant, sodomy, even
a description by Jacob's surviving son of the horrors he has witnessed in
Vietnam.

Still, there are wonderful moments when the full measure of human loss is felt.
People in ''Familiar Ground'' wake up in the night calling out the names of lost
loved ones, mothers, sisters, children - especially children. In one
particularly poignant scene, Soldier, Sweetwater's mental deficient, sits at the
station watching the town's one train come and go. ''He spends his life
marveling (without knowing he has marveled) at what he has lost. He wonders
where his life is, feeling at some point it was shifted. . . . Sometimes he says
out loud, not to anyone, but out loud, 'Please don't make me remember that.' ''


IN an essay called ''A Sketch of the Past,'' Virginia Woolf describes what she
calls ''moments

of being,'' when a person suddenly is able to see

from behind ''the cotton wool of everyday life,'' a ''token of some real thing
behind appearances''; when in the midst of a most ordinary day, a revelatory
glimpse of the pattern beneath is allowed. Miss Cox calls these moments flashes
of intuition, when a character suddenly understands that ''this is what I have
come to hear.''

In ''Familiar Ground,'' Jacob Bechner has perhaps a few too many of these
moments of being, and the author has perhaps depended too heavily on a physical
battering of her characters to get her point across. But her cause is just. She
has written about basic human conflicts and needs as experienced by one man
looking for ''a clearing in the trees,'' where loss might be absorbed and
deliverance bestowed. Lesser themes are written about and published weekly.
Given all that, Miss Cox is a welcome addition. We can only hope that her
obvious Southernness will not bog down her future, as it is the only past she
has.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Required Reading;
Promises, Promises

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


Following is an excerpt from ''Presidents and Promises'' by Jeff Fishel,
professor of government and co-director of the Center for Congressional and
Presidential Studies at American University:

Ironically, given the quadrennial scholarly and popular hoopla, it is unclear
whther it makes much difference who becomes President; unclear, that is, because
the final choice so often seems unrelated to the policies and programs actually
pursued by the people who are skillful, lucky or energetic enough to win office.

To be sure, elections usually have screened out dangerous neurotics and
ideological fanatics. These consequences should not be dismissed as unimportant
or trivial. Many observers, with sophisticated theoretical flourishes, see these
two features as the premier contributions of a viable Presidential selection and
election process. If we could be sure elections prevented the ascendancy to
power of errant personality or ideological types, and they accomplished little
else, voting would be a sensible and essential attribute of modern democratic
politics.

But on matters of public policy, on the fundamental issue of establishing clear
and coherent national agendas through the electoral process, does it matter
whether a Democrat or Republican is elected President? In the 1980's,
indifference mounts, cynicism abounds.

How justified is this cynicism? Ronald Reagan, for example, was consistently
accused of ''sliding toward the center,'' of ''making more reversals than any
Republican of recent memory.'' Likewise, Jimmy Carter was damned for ''failing
to adhere to the basic tenets of the Democratic Party's platform on which he ran
in 1976'' of ''promising more and doing less than any President in modern
history.''

Richard M. Nixon spent a lifetime building a political career by denouncing the
''Red menace,'' but then opened a bridge to Communist China and orchestrated a
policy of detente with the Soviet Union. Lyndon B. Johnson promised over and
over again in the 1964 elections that ''we don't want our American boys to do
the fighting for Asian boys (and) we don't want to get tied down to a land war
in Asia,'' then promptly accelerated America's role in Vietnam, sending more
than 500,000 soldiers into that tragic war. John F. Kennedy promised to abolish
racial discrimination in federally aided housing ''by a stroke of the
Presidential pen,'' then took 18 months in office to issue a timid executive
order covering very little of the country's housing. Even Franklin D. Roosevelt,
who presided over the most sweeping changes in public policy of this century,
ran in 1932 on a platform promising a balanced budget and unremitting efforts to
remove Government from ''America's free enterprise system.''

Can this list of candidate promises and Presidential (mis)behavior be multiplied
endlessly?

Surprisingly, the answer is no. Well, mainly no, with a variety of ''maybes''
scattered here and there - enough to keep the question and findings lively,
subject to continuing dispute and debate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Lawyer Is Named Head Of Home Group Inc.

BYLINE: By Kennth N. Gilpin and Todd S. Purdum

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


Marshall Manley has been named president of Home Group Inc., a subsidiary of the
City Investing Company. Mr. Manley, 44, has been co-managing partner of the law
firm of Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley & Casey since 1978.

''I have been a lawyer for City Investing, the Home Group or Home Insurance
since 1968,'' he said in an interview. Mr. Manley replaces C.R. Huang, who
resigned as president of Home Group and chairman and president of its principal
subsidiary, the Home Insurance Company. No reason was given for his resignation.
Steven H. Newman, 42, was elected president of the insurance unit. Mr. Manley
will serve as its chairman.

According to Mr. Manley, his selection was the result of a number of changes at
Home Group that may require his legal background. As a result of the voluntary
tax-free liquidation of City Investing, Home Group will either be sold to a
third party or spun off to the shareholders, he said. Home Group consists of a
number of insurance companies. Home Insurance, with assets of $5.5 billion, is
the 17th-largest property and casualty company in the country.

''My most immediate plans are to make sure the company is responsive to the
changing insurance market and the changing environment,'' said Mr. Manley. ''By
changing environment I mean a court system where awards are being made that are
significantly out of line with damages,'' he said, alluding to recent
settlements of cases involving Agent Orange, a herbicide used in Vietnam.
''People constantly look to insurance companies to handle these cases.''

Mr. Manley is a graduate of Brooklyn College and New York University law school.
He worked for the law firm of McKenna, Figging & Finch in Los Angeles and
Manatt, Phelps, Rothenberg, Manley & Tunney, also in Los Angeles, where he was a
senior partner from 1973 to 1978.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
WATCH THAT MANDATE

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


Like other modern winners of landslide re-election, President Reagan may have
overreached himself as a result - in his case, by seeking drastic cuts in or the
outright elimination of Federal programs popular in middle-class America.

In that effort, Mr.  Reagan has run squarely into the Senate Budget Committee.
Although controlled by his own party, the committee not only voted to reduce Mr.
Reagan's military budget by about $11 billion; it also refused to accept roughly
$21 billion in domestic spending cuts sought by Mr. Reagan - including the
elimination of subsidies for mass transit, Amtrak, urban and community
development grants and reductions in student loans and Medicaid. The committee
also rejected increased fees for Medicare recipients and deadlocked on a
proposition to eliminate cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients
in 1986.

These and other budget actions will have to be fought out again in other
committees and on the Senate floor; but the second-ranking Republican on the
committee, William Armstrong of Colorado, said unhappily that the Budget
Committee's work represented ''the unraveling of any serious effort to balance
the budget.'' Pete Domenici of New Mexico, the chairman, agreed.

Mr. Reagan's spokesman, Larry Speakes, said that the President was prepared to
''go to the people'' to continue the fight. Another White House source said Mr.
Reagan had been ''liberated'' by his landslide re-election last year, and
''wants to push his program through himself.'' Still another claimed that Mr.
Reagan ''never quite believed his popularity before the election . . . now he
has it and he's going to push for it.''

That's the kind of mood, however election returns may seem to justify it, that's
led other Presidents into serious miscalculation:

* Franklin Roosevelt, after carrying everything but Maine and Vermont in 1936,
embarked on his ill- fated ''court-packing'' plan.

* Lyndon Johnson, winning what was at the time the highest popular vote
percentage in history, tried to have both the Great Society and a creeping war
in Vietnam, without raising taxes.

* Richard Nixon, had he not crushed George McGovern so completely in 1972, might
have followed a wiser course than ''stonewalling'' the Watergate scandals in
1973 and 1974.  Mr. Reagan, whose political instincts and leadership by now can
hardly be doubted, may fare better than those earlier Presidents. But there's a
danger signal for him in another statement by Larry Speakes: ''We believe that
the 1984 election was a mandate to reduce government without raising taxes.''
The President did promise in his campaign that taxes would be raised only over
his dead body; and his re- election can reasonably be taken as an endorsement of
his known desire to reduce the size of the Federal Government. But even cursory
review of 1984 will disclose that Mr. Reagan's prime, reiterated theme was that
things were going well under his leadership (''America is back!'') and would go
even better in the future.  He downplayed the deficit, claiming in debate with
Walter Mondale that economic growth would take care of it, and he certainly
never promised to kill aid to mass transit or to cut school lunches or to
curtail student loans or to reduce aid to libraries or to eliminate the Small
Business Administration and farm support programs.  So the danger in that
Speakes statement is its suggestion that Mr. Reagan's landslide has persuaded
him that he has a mandate to do anything he wants to do, including reducing the
deficit by means that any of those who voted for him never contemplated and
never heard Mr. Reagan propose. A ''mandate'' is tricky - but all too easy for a
landslide winner - to claim.  Mr. Reagan certainly carried the Farm Belt handily
- but did that give him a mandate to kill farm support programs? He's finding
out from his recent farm-bill veto that it didn't. He ''has lost a lot of
support out here,'' said Gov. Terry Branstad of Iowa, a Republican. ''That veto
was received with great disappointment and outrage.'' The Democrats, with
unusual wisdom, let the veto, which they couldn't override anyway, stand as the
last action on the matter. Farm-state Republicans will hear about it in 1986.
As for taking his case to the people, even the Great Communicator may learn that
a lot of Americans think things are going too well for them to have to worry
much about the deficit, particularly if that means personal sacrifice. Ronald
Reagan himself told them so in 1984, which is not the least reason he carried 49
states. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBELS DRIVEN FROM BASE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 11


Vietnamese troops breached the defenses of the last major Cambodian rebel base
today, forcing the guerrillas to regroup inside Thailand, according to a
resistance spokesman.

The collapse of the base would give the Vietnamese control over all important
rebel strongholds in Cambodia. In an unusually long dry-season offensive,
Vietnamese troops and their Cambodian allies have been pressing since last
November to empty the guerrilla camps.

More than a quarter of a million civilian followers of the guerrillas have fled
into Thailand since the drive on the camps began.

Based at least in part on their occupation of so-called liberated zones inside
Cambodia, a three-part resistance coalition has claimed to be the legitimate
government of Cambodia. The coalition, made up of the followers of Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of state, the non-Communist Khmer
People's National Liberation Front and the Communist Khmer Rouge, holds
Cambodia's seat in the United Nations.

The base that was overrun today, just inside Cambodia opposite the Thai village
of Tatum, has been under siege for a week. Tonight Truong Mealy, a spokesman for
the guerrillas loyal to Prince Sihanouk, said in a telephone interview that
Vietnamese artillery attacks began before dawn.

Use of Chemical Charged

Asked if the guerrillas had withdrawn, Mr. Mealy said they were merely
''regrouping to avoid the artillery bombardment.'' He also said that the
Vietnamese had been using ''some kind of chemical substance'' in their attacks
and that it had been necessary to move the rebels out of range of the attacks.

The spokesman said the guerrillas had suffered symptoms of ''suffocation,
dizziness and vomiting'' as the Vietnamese guns assailed their stronghold. He
said the International Committee of the Red Cross would be asked to examine the
evacuated guerrillas.

Charges have been made in the past that the Vietnamese have used some kind of
chemical or biological agent in Cambodia. No evidence has ever been produced to
confirm the charges, however.

The spokesman for Prince Sihanouk's faction announced today that Gen. King Men,
the second in command of the Tatum base, also known as Green Hill, had been
killed Friday in a direct Vietnamese artillery hit on his bunker in the camp.
Supporters of Prince Sihanouk said today that the Prince was preparing to attend
a memorial service for General King Men in Surin, in northeast Thailand, on
Tuesday.

Three Hills Under Attack

It remains unclear tonight whether the Vietnamese have retained, or regained,
control of one or more of three hills inside Thailand that they tried to seize
last week in order to facilitate an assault on Tatum.

Last Friday Thailand's Supreme Commander, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, told reporters
that Thai troops were in control of the hills. However, attempts to take
reporters to Hill 361, the central vantage point of the three, collapsed under a
Vietnamese artillery barrage.

Over the weekend, General Arthit left on a visit to France and the United
States. Information on army movements and casualties has been scarce in his
absence, but there have been unconfirmed reports that Thailand may have suffered
substantial losses in the last few days of heavy Vietnamese shelling, and that
Thai troops may have withdrawn from one or two of the three hills.

General Arthit, who was due to retire this year but has requested an extension
of his term as Supreme Commander, was expected to meet in the United States with
Queen Sirikit of Thailand, who is on a tour promoting Thai arts and crafts.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Vietnamachtsman's Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 156 words

DATELINE: LOCUST VALLEY, L.I., March 11


The father of a yachtsman who has been held prisoner in Vietnam for eight months
said today that he had been told the case would be brought before the Vietnamese
Prime Minister.

William H. Mathers, whose son, William M. Mathers, attended Long Island schools,
said that Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, had
discussed the case Sunday with the Vietnamese representative at the United
Nations.

The representative, Hoang Bich Son, said he would discuss the Mathers case with
Prime Minister Pham Van Dong when he returns to Hanoi Tuesday. He said he would
report back to Representative Torricelli sometime during the week, a spokesman
for the Congressman, Michael Hill, said today.

The younger Mr. Mathers sold a dock-building company he operated in Singapore
for 14 years and was on his way to Hong Kong to sell his 88-foot schooner when
he was captured July 22 in the Red China Sea, his father said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS SAID TO SEEK MEMBERSHIP IN INTELSAT

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


The Soviet Union and Intelsat, the international satellite communications
consortium, have reached a tentative information-exchange agreement that is
expected to lead to Soviet membership, an Intelsat official said today.

Joseph N. Pelton, director of strategic policy for the 109-nation consortium,
said the agreement was worked out in Moscow two weeks ago during a visit there
by Intelsat's executive director, Richard R. Colino.

Mr. Pelton said that the agreement was awaiting the signature of Vasily A.
Shamshin, the Soviet Minister of Posts and Telecommunications, and that formal
approval was expected soon, perhaps by the end of the week.



Nonprofit Cooperative

Intelsat, a nonprofit cooperative open to all nations, provides two-thirds of
the world's telephone service, almost all international television transmission,
most telex service and many kinds of data transmission. It was established in
1964 and is based in Washington.

The consortium's members include Yugoslavia, Vietnam, China and Nicaragua. The
Soviet Union is a customer of the system, and as such is entitled to attend
meetings where traffic and frequency information is discussed, but it is not
given information from technical, planning and board meetings that is available
to full members.

The United States has no authority to prevent the Soviet Union from joining the
organization or to restrict the flow of Intelsat technical information to
Moscow. But Intelsat officials acknowledged the possibility that the Defense,
Commerce and State Departments might have concerns about the transfer of
American high-technology goods or information to the Soviet Union.



Olympic Coverage

Mr. Pelton said that the Soviet Union had expressed interest in becoming more
involved in Intelsat at various times over the last two decades, but that it
appeared to have begun serious consideration during the 1980 Olympic Games in
Moscow.

''They began paying very serious attention to Intelsat when they found they had
to come to us to obtain global coverage for the Games,'' Mr. Pelton said.

Since the mid-1970's the Soviet Union has maintained its own satellite system,
Intersputnik, through which Eastern bloc countries can lease capacity on
Soviet-operated satellites.

Industry sources suggested that the long-term Soviet goal may be to merge the
Intersputnik and Intelsat systems.

In recent years, Moscow has attempted to encourage Western interest in its
satellite facilities by arranging attractive terms for Western customers. In
1984, for example, Cable News Network arranged to receive a transmission through
Intersputnik of the Friendship 84 Games, which Moscow sponsored after
withdrawing from the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.

No Formal Commitment

Mr. Pelton said the proposed agreement did not involve a formal Soviet
commitment to become a member of Intelsat. But he said the agreement ''looks
toward the possibility of increased cooperation and implies that if this works
out successfully, the Soviet Union might join the consortium.''

Mr. Pelton said the main area of Soviet interest in Intelsat was broadcasting
rather than telephone communications and computers.

The United States is the largest user of Intelsat. The consortium also provides
the hot-line service between Washington and Moscow.

The Soviet Union's interest in more involvement with Intelsat comes as the
Reagan Administration is promoting policies aimed at allowing privately owned
American satellite systems into international communications, which would lead
to a smaller United States role in the consortium.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LIST OF FOREIGN OFFICIALS WHO WILL ATTEND THE FUNERAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 12


Following are officials who were designated to represent their countries and
international organizations at the funeral Wednesday of Konstantin U. Chernenko.
The list is based on information from the governments and organizations and
Tass, the official Soviet press agency.



Afghanistan: President Babrak Karmal

Algeria: Mohammed Cherif Messaadia, member of the National Liberation Front
Politburo

Austria: President Rudolf Kirchschl"ager

Bangladesh: Sultan Ahmed, Deputy

Chief Martial Law Administrator

Britain: Prime Minister Margaret

Thatcher

Bulgaria: Todor Zhivkov, Chairman of

the State Council

Canada: Prime Minister Brian Mulroney

China: Li Peng, Deputy Prime Minister

Cuba: Vice President Raul Castro

Czechoslovakia: President Gustav

Husak

Denmark: Foreign Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen and Prince Georg

East Germany: President Erich Honecker

Egypt: Subhi Abdul Hakim, head of the

Consultative Council

Ethiopia: Lieut. Col. Mengistu Haile

Mariam, Chairman of the Military

Council

Finland: President Mauno Koivisto

France: President Fran,cois Mitterrand

Greece: Foreign Minister Ioannis

Haralambopoulos

Hungary: Janos Kadar, Communist

Party leader

India: Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi

Indonesia: Mohamad Choesin, Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Iraq: Izzat Ibrahim, Deputy Chairman

of the Revolutionary Command

Council

Ireland: President Patrick Hillery

Italy: President Sandro Pertini

Japan: Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone

Malaysia: Abdul Kadir Sheik Fadzir,

Deputy Foreign Minister

Mexico: Interior Minister Manuel Bartlett Diaz

Mongolia: Jambiin Batmonh, General

Secretary of the People's Revolutionary Party

Nepal: Communication Minister Rudra

Prasad Giri

Netherlands: Foreign Minister Hans

van den Broek

Nicaragua: President Daniel Ortega

Saavedra

North Korea: Prime Minister Kang

Song San

Norway: Crown Prince Harald and

Prime Minister Kare Willoch

Pakistan: President Mohammad Zia ul-

Haq

Poland: Prime Minister Wojciech Jaruzelski

Rumania: President Nicolae Ceausescu

Southern Yemen: Ali Nasser Mohammed al-Hassani, General Secretary of the Yemen
Socialist Party

Spain: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez

Sweden: Prime Minister Olof Palme

and Prince Bertil

Syria: Abdullah al-Ahmar, Under Secretary of the Baath Arab Socialist

Party

Turkey: Prime Minister Turgut Ozal

United Nations: Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar

United States: Vice President Bush

Uruguay: Lacarte Muro, international

representative in Geneva

Vatican: Giovanni Battista

Marini Bett olo of the Pontifical Academy

Vietnam: Pham Van Dong, Chairman

of the Council of Ministers

West Germany: Chancellor Helmut

Kohl

Yugoslavia: President Veselin Djuranovic

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FRIENDS AND FOES JUDGE HOLTZMAN PERFORMANCE

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2511 words


Four years ago, when Elizabeth Holtzman decided to run for Brooklyn District
Attorney, some people wondered how she would reconcile a liberal philosophy with
the realities of what is known as a law-and-order job.

This year, Miss Holtzman, who is 43 years old, expects to seek re-election as
the District Attorney, a position to which she brought legislative skills
learned in Congress but in which her administrative training in the overburdened
criminal-justice system has been on the job.

''You can't just look at the prosecution of each individual case,'' Miss
Holtzman said in an interview. ''You also have to be an advocate for the
improvement of the system, to be imaginative, experimental.

''Yet you also can't be like Emerson, looking through the puddles and paying
attention to the sky.''

Indeed, Miss Holtzman's reputation as a prosecutor is most likely to be a
reflection of her performance in the ''puddles'' of the system, where justice is
administered day to day.

A Review of Her Record

As she ponders an uncertain political future beyond 1985, friends and foes are
reviewing her record running the nation's third-largest District Attorney's
office. They are also assessing the extent to which her liberal philosophy and
her personality have been shaped by the job and have affected her performance.

During her three years as a prosecutor, Miss Holtzman has won high marks for
sensitivity to victims' rights and for opening her door to the borough's black
and Hispanic communities. She broke a color barrier by naming black prosecutors
to the Homicide Bureau, and she created a separate unit to deal with complaints
about the police, a decision that pleased representatives of minority groups and
angered the police officer's union.

Miss Holtzman announced that she would seize automobiles belonging to drunken
drivers by invoking a law empowering prosecutors to confiscate the
''instrumentalities'' of crime. And she introduced computers into Brooklyn's
courtrooms to provide judges and prosecutors with timely records on defendants.

Under a program begun two years ago to provide meaningful penalties for fare
beaters and other nonviolent offenders on the subway system - when the
alternative often was no punishment at all - 2,358 persons have scrubbed 1,941
subway cars of graffiti, usually working one Saturday each.

Sentences to Aid Elderly

''We've been sentencing people to maintenance work in hospitals, cleaning up
parks, working in senior centers,'' she recalled in her office in Brooklyn's
Municipal Building. ''I was a little apprehensive about the senior centers, but
one person said after that experience how could he ever run up to an elderly
person and hit them and steal their money?''

She prodded state lawmakers to eliminate the requirement for corroboration in
sex-abuse cases involving children, to permit children in such cases to testify
to grand juries by videotape, to close a loophole in the rape statute that made
the victim's fear of physical injury a condition for conviction, and to provide
the legal tools for prosecutors to pursue people who strip automobiles for spare
parts and operate so-called ''chop shops.''

''I was impressed,'' said Robert J. Johnston Jr., the Police Department's chief
of operations, who as the Brooklyn borough commander worked with Miss Holtzman.
''Her staff was as cooperative as they could be without compromising their
individuality. They were very responsive to what I as a police commander
needed.''

''She has shown a lively sense of innovation,'' said Kenneth Conboy, Mayor
Koch's criminal-justice coordinator. ''She has, by and large, become more
comfortable in dealing with other actors in the system and is more effective now
than when she became District Attorney.''

Miss Holtzman has her share of detractors too - many of them, in fact, though
perhaps more than her fair share, some supporters say.

High Standards

They suggest that gaffes by her office have got more notice that they might have
because Miss Holtzman was being measured against the high standards she publicly
had set for herself and against a flurry of self- congratulatory statements that
belittled the record of her predecessor.

Within months of taking office, for instance, Miss Holtzman announced that her
office had reduced a case backlog, without mentioning the role plea-bargaining
had played.

Administrative Judge Leonard E. Yoswein of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn
accuses the office of charging defendants with more serious crimes than can be
proved - a strategy that clogs court calendars, he said.

He acknowledges, however, that the practice did not originate with Miss Holtzman
and that it is likely to result in a plea bargain that subjects the defendant to
a more severe penalty than otherwise would have been possible.

Judge Yoswein also complains, ''They don't have enough competent trial people.''



The Beatty Case

In 1983, an appeals court dismissed a contempt-of-court citation against former
State Senator Vander L. Beatty because of what Miss Holtzman's office conceded
were ''several instances of carelessness with respect to documents.'' Mr. Beatty
was convicted of forgery and conspiracy, however.

Also in 1983, rape charges against a Brooklyn man, and attempted assault and
weapons-possession charges against another man were dismissed by judges who
ruled that the District Attorney's office had violated the state's speedy-trial
law. In both cases, the charges were restored on appeal.

''She's a highly motivated, very idealistic and careful person,'' said Richard
Emery, a staff attorney with the New York Civil Liberties Union. ''She has some
very good people, but the morale is quite low because they perceive her as being
more concerned with her press relations and testifying on various
criminal-justice issues than what's going on back home in her office.''

In 1981, before Miss Holtzman became District Attorney, the rate of felony
convictions as a proportion of all felony dispositions in Brooklyn was 80.3
percent, compared to the citywide average of 80.4 percent. By 1983, when the
citywide average was 84.1 percent, Brooklyn's felony conviction rate had climbed
to 85.8 percent, according to the State Division of Criminal Justice Services,
which is still compiling 1984 figures.

In 1981, the proportion of convicted felons sentenced by judges to state prison
was 54.6 percent in Brooklyn and 53.1 percent citywide. By 1983, that percentage
had dropped to 51.2 percent citywide and to 50 percent in Brooklyn - lower than
in the other four boroughs.

In 1982, 144 cases were dismissed in Brooklyn for failure to prosecute within
six months, compared with 44 in Manhattan. One year later, 46 such cases were
thrown out in Brooklyn as were 47 in Manhattan. Last year, 18 were dismissed in
Brooklyn.

In the first six months of 1984, Brooklyn led the other boroughs in the
percentage of cases - just under 60 percent - in which defendants were convicted
of the same charges for which they had been indicted.

Auto Thefts Are Down

Miss Holtzman claims the second- lowest dismissal rate in the city, the highest
rate of convictions in trials by jury and an increase in the number of
defendants sentenced to state prison.

Between May 1, 1980, and April 30, 1982, there were 75 indictments for felony
auto theft by the Brooklyn District Attorney, 50 convictions and 38 jail
sentences. Miss Holtzman made auto theft a priority and for the comparable two
years ending last April, according to her office, there were 472 indictments,
306 convictions and 237 jail sentences. Reported auto thefts have been dropping
citywide, but more so in Brooklyn.

There is, however, no objective measurement of justice. Statistics are often
subject to different interpretations.

How someone is perceived often is as much a reflection of personality as
performance, which, many people say, works to Miss Holtzman's detriment.

Some say the perceptions are colored by the fact that she is a woman in the
male-dominated criminal-justice fraternity. In any case, the perceptions can
fundamentally affect her ability to enlist other players in the system on behalf
of her constituents.

''I do things in a very different way,'' Miss Holtzman explained, drawing
concentric squares on a legal pad. ''I want to see change. I didn't take this
job to let the problems persist. Sure, I don't have to worry about legislation -
that's up to Albany. The fact the court system doesn't work - that's their
problem. But that would be the philosophy of despair.''

During her eight years in the House, Miss Holtzman was known as an unabashed
liberal and civil libertarian - if not a model of moderation then, nonetheless,
considered by many to be an effective lawmaker.

A Senate Bid

In 1980, she became the first woman nominated by New York Democrats to run for
the United States Senate. She lost to Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican. A year
later, she beat the party organization's candidate to become District Attorney.

Miss Holtzman now attributes her 1980 defeat on her ''failure to realize how few
people really knew me as a person and maybe my anticipating that groups that
misunderstood me never would understand me, which is wrong.''

''I don't want to shrink from calling myself a liberal,'' she said. ''I do have
very deeply held convictions. But liberals have ceded the arena to
conservatives. If you start with the premise that liberals believe in government
that works for the benefit of people, then liberals have more of a stake in
effective government.''

Since she has become a prosecutor, Miss Holtzman said, ''the changes haven't
been so much whether I'm for or against wiretapping or mandatory sentencing, but
how different it is to be sitting in a job where, individually, I have to make
close to life-and-death decisions.

''That, I think, is the big difference between Liz Holtzman of the U.S. Congress
and Liz Holtzman the District Attorney,'' she said.



Jury Selection

As the District Attorney, Miss Holtzman confronted some of the consequences of
her political philosophy.

She elevated her first decision as a prosecutor from a procedural matter to a
litmus test of civil rights. A court had reversed a conviction obtained under
her predecessor because an assistant prosecutor had used his peremptory
challenges during jury selection to exclude blacks. Miss Holtzman decided
against an appeal.

''If any group feels they can't participate,'' she said, ''there will always be
a sense that justice is not done.''

Similarly, Miss Holtzman's implacability about capital punishment conformed to a
philosophical caricature.

''People have a right to be outraged, but it won't solve what they are concerned
about,'' she said. ''I see in a more practical way, as a prosecutor, what I
would say are the bad consequences of the imposition of the death penalty. Some
of the homicide cases are very close cases. I think there's a strong possibility
you would get more acquittals if there were a death penalty.''

However, Miss Holtzman said, ''if a death penalty existed in the state I would
not refuse to enforce it.''

Other positions have been tempered by her personal and professional evolution.

''I'm convinced she has an attitude which would be tough on criminals,'' said
Mayor Koch. ''I'm not sure that would have been true in earlier years.''

Mugged in an Elevator

In 1982, her parents were robbed at knifepoint in the bedroom of their Brooklyn
home. Months later, a suspect was arrested and pleaded guilty to a lesser
charge. After graduating from Harvard Law School, Miss Holtzman herself was
mugged in the elevator of a Manhattan office building.

''It's impossible to say that those experiences didn't have any effect,'' she
said. ''But I didn't come to be D.A. with any predisposition for the criminal.
Some people felt that a liberal, a woman, couldn't be a good district attorney,
that somehow I would be for the criminal, for crime, and that a woman, too,
would be too soft, would be compassionate for the criminal. I never was for
crime.''

''In Congress, I was not in favor of mandating sentencing, but since I've been
here I've seen the importance of it,'' she added. ''When I came here one of the
things that concerned me very much was the leniency of sentences in some cases.
Mandatory sentences are an important protection in terms of assuring there will
be a just sentence - at least, there's a floor.''

Another anathema to Representative Holtzman was wiretapping. But in 1982, after
an investigation of fraud allegations in a congressional race had stalled,
District Attorney Holtzman agreed to sign a wiretap request. A campaign worker's
home telephone was tapped, and the evidence was instrumental in convicting
former State Senator Beatty.

''We knew we had basically exhausted other means of obtaining the information,''
Miss Holtzman recalled. ''The wiretap was critical to the establishment of
Vander Beatty's guilt.

''In Congress,'' she said, ''I was much more skeptical about wiretapping used
without stringent safeguards. My suspicions about it grew out of the context of
the generation in which I grew up: the Vietnam War, the C.I.A., Operation Chaos,
and being in the South during the civil-rights movement.''

These days she also views the so- called insanity defense differently.

In 1982, Miss Holtzman rejected the claim that a defendant was suffering from
pre-menstrual syndrome at the time she assaulted her daughter. (The District
Attorney's office did, however, accept a defense of post-Vietnam stress disorder
from an accused robber only to learn later that he had never been to Vietnam.)

''I decided my own view is the burden of proof ought to be shifted from the
prosecution to the defense,'' she said.

Nonetheless, Miss Holtzman said that such ''philosophical questions are almost a
luxury.'' Most issues she has faced in the criminal-justice system, she said,
''have more to do with basic common sense.''

''You're up against a whole system that's barely operational - some say out of
control,'' she said. ''Even making our office perfect, and we haven't done that,
would be like having a rowboat with all the modern technology in the middle of a
typhoon.

''My expectations were a little bit higher than what I found,'' she said, ''and
I might have been a little too impatient about seeing the results of things. I
think if I made mistakes it's only in the area of anticipating results too soon.
Obviously, it would also have been helpful if I had been more familiar with the
system than I was. But the challenge about this job is that it requires all
kinds of new talents you never knew you had.

''I haven't mastered it,'' Miss Holtzman said. ''That would be presumptuous. But
I think I'm doing as good a job as any other district attorney in the city and
one of the best in the country. I'm prepared to be judged by a higher
standard.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Elizabeth Holtzman with Zachary W. Carter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Busy, Even on His Birthday

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


In preparation for his 50th birthday

party, the Rev. David Kirk had hoped to get to sleep early.

But things rarely work according to plan at Emmaus House, a Harlem shelter for
homeless men, women and children over which Father Kirk serenely presides. He
was up most of the night comforting a Vietnam veteran who was suffering from
flashbacks of the war.

''Despite all this perpetual crisis, I still love it,'' he told the 75 guests
who gathered in a friend's loft in SoHo to celebrate his birthday. ''I always
get back more than I give.''

Members of the Emmaus House community - former drug addicts, alcoholics,
battered women and people who were considered misfits in other places - stood up
and spoke of how, when no one else would take them in, Father Kirk, of the
Eastern Rite, did.

''If you can make it to the front door, you're home free,'' said Rayfield
Johnson, a former drug addict who was recovering from tuberculosis and pneumonia
when he arrived at Emmaus House, at 160 West 120th Street, several months ago.

There were two huge chocolate birthday cakes, one of which went uneaten. Father
Kirk sent it to Grand Central Terminal, where more of the homeless and hungry
were waiting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
12 Killed in Fiery Crash Of Army Helicopter

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 150 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C., March 13


An Army UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter crashed and burned today at Fort Bragg,
killing all 12 people on board.

The helicopter, with a four-man crew and eight paratroopers on a routine
exercise, plunged into a wooded area near a paratroop drop zone at the western
edge of the base, officials said.

''We can confirm there are 12 deceased service members,'' said Maj. Thomas
Hogan, a Fort Bragg spokesman. ''There are no survivors. They were all in the
helicopter when they died.''

The crash was the second involving a Black Hawk, a new generation of air assault
helicopters, in less than three weeks. The Black Hawk was introduced in 1984,
replacing the UH-1 Huey of the Vietnam War.

Officials began an investigation to determine the cause of the crash.

A spokesman said the Army had 555 Black Hawks and the aircraft built by the
Sikorsky Company of Stratford, Conn., had a good safety record.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EMBASSY PROTESTER CALLS CHARGES 'SELECTIVE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


A woman facing criminal charges for protesting peacefully outside the Soviet
Embassy here says she is a victim of ''selective prosecution'' because her case
is being pursued while those against hundreds of protesters arrested outside the
South African Embassy have been dropped.

The woman, Vanna Om Strinko, a native of Cambodia living in Columbus, Ohio,
argued in court papers that the charge against her should be thrown out because
the Government should not be able to discriminate between protesters for reasons
of political expediency.

The papers were filed Monday in her behalf by the Washington Legal Foundation, a
conservative group. It publicized them today along with a subpoena asking Joseph
E. diGenova, the United States Attorney here, to explain his reasons for the
difference in treatment.

More than 1,000 protesters against South Africa's system of racial separation
have been arrested outside its embassy since November under a law that bars
demonstrations within 500 feet of an embassy. None of those arrested, including
prominent civil rights leaders, elected officials and entertainers, have been
prosecuted.

Mrs. Strinko, who is charged with violating the same District of Columbia
misdemeanor by standing on the sidewalk outside the Soviet Embassy, faces a
March 28 trial date. The maximum possible penalty is 60 days in jail and a $100
fine.

Seeking 'Prosecutive Merit'

Her lawyers said in court papers that ''the Government finds it politically
expedient to prosecute a solitary anti- Soviet protester, but politically
unacceptable to prosecute the hundreds of prominent celebrities protesting
against South Africa's apartheid policy.''

Constance Belfiore, a spokesman for Mr. diGenova, said today that the charges
against those arrested outside the South African Embassy ''lacked prosecutive
merit,'' although the police had acted properly in making the arrests.

She said each case was examined for ''prosecutive merit.'' But she declined to
elaborate or to cite any distinction between Mrs. Strinko's case and those of
the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the singer Harry Belafonte, members of Congress and
hundreds of others arrested outside the South African Embassy.

Paul D. Kamenar, one of Mrs. Strinko's attorneys, asserted today that the reason
Mr. diGenova had not prosecuted anti-apartheid protesters who had ''routinely
and systematically violated'' the law was that their views ''are popular in this
district and that those being arrested but not prosecuted are also popular,
powerful and liberal in their views.''

An Undelivered Petition

He said Mrs. Strinko, whose ''conservative'' views were less popular locally,
''is being prosecuted for doing exactly the same thing by protesting in front of
the Soviet Embassy.''

Mrs. Strinko was arrested Jan. 28 for standing on the sidewalk in front of the
embassy after unsuccessfully attempting to deliver a petition ''protesting
Soviet sponsored occupation of her country by Vietnam,'' Mr. Kamenar said.

Her court papers stressed a statement in January by Inez Smith Reid, the
District of Columbia corporation counsel, explaining why she would not pursue
charges against several demonstrators who had been arrested for crossing a
police barricade near the South African Embassy.

The statement said ''it would be untenable'' to prosecute people for
demonstrating against ''the gross injustices which result from the South African
policy of apartheid.''

The corporation counsel, a locally appointed official, shares jurisdiction over
such matters with the United States Attorney.

Mr. Kamenar said his client was a former employee of the United States Embassy
in Cambodia who was evacuated in 1975, a few days before the Khmer Rouge
takeover, and is now a United States citizen.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Boston Publishing Co. Is Sold by Time-Life

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


The Boston Publishing Company, founded in 1979 and purchased in 1983 by
Time-Life Books, has been purchased anew by Robert J. George and Robert Manning.

Mr. George, the company founder, is the president of Boston Publishing. Mr.
Manning, an Assistant Secretary of State under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson
and editor in chief of the Atlantic Monthly for 14 years, has been editor in
chief of Boston Publishing since joining the company in 1981.

Boston Publishing is best known for the 20-volume historical series ''The
Vietnam Experience,'' which Time- Life will continue to sell. It is also
completing ''Above and Beyond,'' a one-volume history of the Medal of Honor,
scheduled for publication by Time-Life late this year.

Boston Publishing plans to publish other books and multivolume series in
history, biography, politics and public affairs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-INTELSAT PACT RAISES CONCERNS



BYLINE:
By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


The Soviet Union wants to become a major force in the development and use of
communications satellites for television broadcasting, high-speed data
transmission and other telecommunication services, American officials and other
analysts said today.

They made their comments in response to the tentative agreement reached between
Moscow and the 109- nation International Telecommunications Satellite
Organization on an exchange of information. The agreement, which was disclosed
Tuesday, is expected to lead to Soviet membership in the communications network,
which was founded by the United States 21 years ago.

But the American officials said the relationship could cause ''problems'' if
Moscow tries to use it to acquire advanced technology that is barred by American
export regulations.

''Some of the Intelsat technology is controlled,'' or barred to Communist
countries, said William Schneider Jr., Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science and Technology. ''If the agreement calls for transferring
manufacturing technology for spacecraft or for high-performance solid-state
devices, we would have a problem.''



Details Unavailable

He and other American officials said the United States did not yet have details
of the accord, even though Intelsat officials said it might be signed as early
as the end of this week. The agreement was said to have been worked out in
Moscow two weeks ago.

David J. Markey, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and
Information, said, ''Maybe they found that their technology is not doing the job
for them and they need more capacity.''

The Soviet Union has been a user of the Intelsat system for many years. The
United States-Soviet hot line uses a link provided by Intelsat. An Intelsat
ground terminal has already been established in the Soviet Union.

As customers, the Russians are entitled to attend meetings where communications
traffic and frequency information is discussed. But Moscow is not given
information from technical, planning and board meetings that is available to
members, which include Vietnam, Yugoslavia, China and Nicaragua.

There are no special qualifications for membership in Intelsat, unlike other
organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and GATT,
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

American officials said that a safeguard system has been worked out within the
organization under which contracts and other documents related to advanced
technology are available only to a relatively small group of representatives
from non- Communist countries.

An Intelsat spokesman, Sandra Lauffer, said that ''every member gets the
technical information they need to work with the system.'' She added that
technology-transfer questions beyond that point ''are referred to individual
contractors, who are governed by the export control regulations of their
country.''

Many analysts said the Russians are interested in more advanced technology to
strengthen their own Intersputnik system, a satellite communications network of
14 members established in 1969.

The tentative agreement with Intelsat permits the sharing of information by the
two satellite systems. One result might be that Moscow would use the Intelsat
system more extensively for its own telecommunications and broadcasting
purposes.

''The new agreement is in line with the Russians' longstanding tradition of
borrowing Western technology, or stealing it, whichever is the most
appropriate,'' said Mikhail Tsypkin, a fellow at the Russian Research Center at
Harvard.

According to a report prepared for the United States Information Agency by
George Jacobs & Associates, consulting radio engineers, the Russians have a
strong interest in extending television reception over parts of the country that
cannot now receive it.

Intersputnik provides the Soviet Union with several political and propaganda
advantages, which could be strengthened by the agreement with Intelsat, analysts
said.

For example, Intersputnik coordinates radio and television news, as well as
broader political information and cultural policies, among Warsaw Pact
broadcasters and their allies.

Moscow has considered with joining certain other international organizations
such as the GATT, which oversees the world's trading rules.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPY LEAK RULED TO APPLY TO DISCLOSURES TO PRESS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


A Federal district judge in Baltimore has ruled that officials who make
unauthorized disclosures of military or intelligence secrets can be prosecuted
under laws barring espionage and theft of Government property.

The pretrial decision by Judge Joseph H. Young, which became publicly available
today, marked the first time a judge definitively ruled that those laws were
violated by unauthorized disclosures to reporters.

Judge Young's 24-page opinion denied a motion to dismiss criminal charges
against Samuel Loring Morison, a naval intelligence analyst accused of giving a
British military magazine three intelligence satellite photographs of a Soviet
aircraft carrier under construction.

Judge Young had told lawyers in the case that he planned to deny the motion. The
opinion giving the basis for his decision, dated Tuesday, was made public today.


'Danger Is Just as Great'

Judge Young's opinion said that although the case ''does not involve a foreign
agent or the classic spy scenario,'' this made no difference because ''the
danger to the United States is just as great when this information is released
to the press as when it is released to an agent of a foreign government.''

He said the ''plain language'' of the espionage laws supported the Government's
position that one who ''willfully transmits photographs relating to the national
defense to someone who is known by the defendant not to be entitled to receive''
them is guilty, ''no matter how laudable his motives.''

The judge said that the Government need not prove the defendant had any ''evil
purpose'' or ''intent to injure the United States'' under the two sections of
the espionage laws of World War I vintage.

Intentions No Defense, He Says

''Good intentions,'' such as fostering public discussion of security issues,
would be no defense, Judge Young said. At most, he indicated, the prosecution
would have to prove the information was closely held and potentially damaging to
the United States or potentially helpful to any foreign nation.

The judge noted that Mr. Morison had signed an agreement not to transmit
information or documents to outsiders, but he did not say that such an agreement
was essential to the prosecution.

An interagency Reagan Administration group said in 1982 that the espionage laws
''could also be used to prosecute a journalist who knowingly receives and
publishes classified documents or information.'' But no such prosecution has
ever been brought, and Judge Young did not reach the issue.

Morton H. Halperin of the American Civil Liberties Union's National Security
Project said of Judge Young's ruling: ''If this opinion is upheld, we have an
official secrets act in this country. Any Government employee who gives any
classified information to any newspaper will have broken the law and any
newspaper that publishes it will also have broken the law.

''The statute as interpreted would prevent much of current public debate on
national security issues.''

Mr. Morison, 40 years old, cannot appeal this ruling unless he is convicted at a
trial. Judge Young this week set trial to begin July 15. Mr. Morison faces a
maxiumum of 40 years in prison and a $40,000 fine if convicted on all four
counts.

Mr. Morison, grandson of the naval historian Samuel Eliot Morison, worked with
the Navy's consent as part-time editor of Jane's Fighting Ships, a British
publication, while he was a civilian employee of the Navy with a top-secret
security clearance.

Other Charges Involved

Aside from providing secret photographs to Jane's Defense Weekly, an affiliated
publication, he is charged with theft and illegal possession of naval
intelligence reports about an explosion at a Soviet naval base.

He has pleaded not guilty but has neither admitted nor denied taking the actions
charged in the indictment.

The photographs were distributed by Jane's Defense Weekly to The Associated
Press, which distributed them to American news media.  The New York Times
printed a photo Aug. 8. The Government takes the position that the pictures are
still secret.

One Other Similar Case

The only previous espionage prosecution involving a disclosure to the press,
rather than to a foreign agent, was that of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo,
who were accused of making copies of the Vietnam War history that became the
Pentagon Papers.

The New York Times and other newspapers published portions of these documents in
1971 but have never said where they were obtained.

Federal District Judge Matthew W.  Byrne Jr.  in Los Angeles dismissed the
charges against Mr. Ellsberg and Mr. Russo in 1973 on the ground of Government
misconduct. He had reserved a final ruling on whether the espionage and theft
laws applied.

Mr. Morison's lawyers have argued that Congress did not intend the espionage and
theft laws to apply to disclosures to the press. For Judge Young to do so, they
said, would amount to judicial enactment of an ''official secrets act'' that
Congress has repeatedly avoided lest it stifle public debate on military issues.

The defense lawyers, including Mark H. Lynch of the American Civil Liberties
Union, also said it would be unconstitutional to use the broad, vaguely worded
espionage and theft laws to punish disclosures to the press.

They said the Government had great latitude to discipline or dismiss employees
who misused classified information, but that Congress had chosen not to make it
a crime.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Samuel Loring Morison

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-Minnesota Governor Dies

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 320 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, March 14


Elmer A. Benson, a lifelong critic of capitalism who served one term as Governor
in the 1930's, died Wednesday. He was 89.

Gov. Rudy Perpich ordered flags flown at half staff on all state buildings until
sundown Sunday. Funeral services for Mr. Benson are to be held that day in the
Appleton grade school auditorium.

Mr. Benson earned his living as a banker and was State Banking Commissioner at
one time. When asked once how his wealth squared with his views of capitalism,
he replied: ''It worked for me. But look at all the thousands of people it
hasn't worked for.''

Mr. Benson won the gubernatorial race on the Farmer-Labor Party ticket in a
landslide in 1936. But he was turned out of office in 1938 by the largest margin
ever, losing to Harold E. Stassen, the Republican.

Mr. Benson split with his party in 1948, backing Henry A. Wallace, the
Progressive Party candidate for President.

In an interview after President Reagan took office, Mr. Benson was asked about
trends in American politics. He assailed a fellow Minnesotan, Hubert H.
Humphrey, who publicly supported American involvement in Vietnam while Vice
President in the 1960's.

''Humphrey was a war criminal,'' Mr. Benson said. ''He was the chief ballyhoo
artist for the war. I remember him saying, 'This is America's greatest moment,
and I'm sure glad to be part of it.' ''

Mr. Benson also said some Americans were overly critical of the Soviet Union.

''Communists are decent people, too,'' he said. ''We don't have a monopoly on
decency. They've done a pretty good job, from what I understand in the Soviet
Union, in educating people.''

''Stalin did some things that were pretty rough,'' Mr. Benson conceded. ''But
maybe, just maybe, if he hadn't done it, maybe the nation would have been taken
over by the worst enemies of mankind: the Nazis.''

Mr. Benson is survived by his wife, Frances, a son, Tom, and a daughter, Lois.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GORBACHEV HINTS TO OPENING TO CHINA

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 15


Chinese and Western diplomats were cautiously hopeful today about improved
relations between Moscow and Peking, after remarks by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the
new Soviet leader, to a visiting Chinese delegation.

In a Kremlin meeting Thursday, Mr. Gorbachev ''reaffirmed that the Soviet side
would like to have a serious improvement of relations with the People's Republic
of China and that it considers this quite possible, provided there is
reciprocity,'' according to the official press agency Tass.

The phrase is one he also used in his acceptance speech Monday just after he was
named Soviet leader. Only the United States and China were mentioned by name in
that speech.

One Western diplomat said this is a formula Mr. Gorbachev has used in the past.
The diplomat added that, although the phrase had a positive ring to it, it was
unclear whether Mr. Gorbachev meant that he intended to take concrete steps to
improve relations.

Treatment of Remarks Differs

Soviet leaders made similarly upbeat remarks when Chinese delegations visited
for the last two funerals of Soviet leaders, those of Leonid I. Brezhnev in
November 1982 and Yuri V. Andropov in February 1984.

Although the Chinese press has played up Mr. Gorbachev's remarks, the Soviet
press so far has put no special emphasis on Soviet-Chinese relations. Diplomats
in Moscow said they were waiting to see whether the Kremlin would send further
signals.

This week Deputy Prime Minister Li Peng led a delegation to Moscow for the
funeral on Wednesday of Mr. Gorbachev's predecessor, Konstantin U. Chernenko.
The Chinese delegation, like many other delegations, met with him briefly
Thursday.

Mr. Gorbachev also suggested that Peking and Moscow ''heighten the level'' of
their dialogue, a phrase that Chinese diplomats said sounded encouraging, but
remained unclear to them today.

Mr. Li responded by expressing the hope that ''major improvement would be made
in Chinese-Soviet relations,'' according to the official New China News Agency.

Gorbachev Called 'Comrade'

Diplomats noted that Mr. Li also gave Mr. Gorbachev greetings from Hu Yaobang,
General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party. In Peking, they said, a
Chinese official paying a condolence call at the Soviet Embassy referred to
''Comrade Gorbachev.''

Those two signals were read by some as a hint at the possibility that relations
would be re-established between the two nations' Communist Parties. Some Chinese
diplomats, however, said they simply signaled a desire to be polite to a new
Soviet leader with whom Peking expects to be dealing for years to come.

In his meeting with Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Li was also quoted by the New China News
Agency as saying that ''China pursues an independent foreign policy'' and adding
that Peking ''is not aligned with, nor does it establish strategic relations
with, other countries.''

These remarks were taken here as a possible hint that China might be prepared
for more balanced relations between Moscow and Washington.

In Peking, Mr. Li described the meeting with Mr. Gorbachev as ''positive and
friendly,'' and predicted that relations would gradually improve.

Three Major Issues

Nevertheless, China has not budged on its stand that major issues still divide
the two neighboring Communist nations. Chinese diplomats said today that there
was no question of modifying Peking's insistence that relations could not
improve significantly until the Soviet Union pulls its troops out of
Afghanistan, stops maintaining heavy troop deployments on the Chinese border and
stops supporting Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

Mr. Li's positive remarks were echoed by Peng Zhen, chairman of the National
People's Congress, who said both sides hoped for better relations.

A delegation from the People's Congress was in Moscow at the time of Mr.
Chernenko's death as the first part of an exchange of parliamentary delegations.
That visit itself, the first on this level for two decades, was a sign of
warming relations.

At a meeting with Soviet officials the day after Mr. Chernenko's death was
announced, Tass said, ''Mutual satisfaction was expressed from both sides with
the resumption of ties'' between the two parliamentary bodies.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND URGES NEWS MEDIA TO PROVIDE A NEW LIBEL REMEDY

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 531 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


Gen. William C. Westmoreland today urged the news media to give an aggrieved
individual a middle ground between writing a letter to the editor and starting a
long, costly libel suit.

The general, who filed a multimillion-dollar libel suit against CBS over the
documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' made his comments
before a National Press Club audience observing Freedom of Information Day. He
withdrew the suit after 18 weeks of testimony in a case believed to have cost $7
million to $9 million.

''Consider the plight of a public figure who believes, as I did, that his
performance has been unfairly degraded, that his honor has been impugned, that
his loyalty has been questioned,'' the general said.

''The chilling effect of a libel suit on journalistic enterprise is a valid
concern,'' he said. ''On the other hand, a letter to the editor has little
effect except perhaps to satisfy the writer who wants to get something off his
chest. There is a need for something in between.''

News Council Idea Favored

General Westmoreland said he favored ''something like a National News Council,''
a committee of journalists and public citizens which handed down nonbinding
decisions and let the public and news media draw its own conclusions. He said,
however, that the news media had not accepted such a plan.

''The route of the libel suit is not good, either for the plaintiff or
defendant,'' the general said. ''In many cases the legal costs alone are
prohibitive, both to the individual and to small publishers and radio and
television stations. The rules of evidence, the legalisms of the court system,
do not promote open and free debate.''

General Westmoreland said he had first sought a retraction or apology from CBS
before filing the suit over the documentary, whose thesis was that the general,
who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, had conspired to
deceive President Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the American people
about the strength of enemy forces in Vietnam before the Tet offensive.

''I had to decide whether the ''letter to the editor,'' or its equivalent, a TV
rebuttal, would suffice,'' he said. The suit, dropped a week before it was
scheduled to go to the jury, culminated with the parties issuing a joint
statement. It declared that CBS respected General Westmoreland's service to his
country and never intended to impugn his loyalty and patriotism, and that the
general respected the journalistic tradition of CBS.

While both sides claimed victory, some observers said CBS was the clear winner,
with no retraction being made or no money changing hands.

''I do not believe that either side won what it wanted,'' the general said.
''The time, energy and talent, to say nothing of money, that went into this
affair could have been better used.''

General Westmoreland nevertheless asserted that the lawsuit had been beneficial,
and that ''a lot of good has been accomplished.''

''Many in the media are being more careful in their work,'' he said.  ''The
public generally has a better understanding of what constitutes a documentary,
and the pitfalls in putting one together.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Westmoreland

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICERS BLAMED IN VIETNAM DEFEAT

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 16


A recent book by a retired Army general rejects the thesis that the Vietnam War
was lost because civilian policy makers ''tied the hands'' of the military and
refused to ''go all out.'' He says that senior officers must share the ''onus of
failure.''

''The 25 Year War,'' written by Gen. Bruce Palmer, says that the senior officers
''apparently did not clearly and unequivocally tell the President and the
Secretary of Defense that the strategy was fatally flawed and that U.S.
objectives were not achievable unless the strategy was changed.''

General Palmer, a former Army Vice Chief of Staff and a corps commander in
Vietnam, is also critical of purely military policies and shortcomings, saying
the Army should have insisted on a voice in senior promotions in the South
Vietnamese Army in order to create professionally competent partners who could
pacify their own country.

The book, published in September, initially achieved a word-of-mouth reputation.
The Pentagon book store and other Washington sellers were unable to keep it in
stock, and the University of Kentucky Press has followed an initial printing of
4,000 copies with a second printing this year of the same size.

Value to Future Leaders Cited

Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., a professor at the Army War College in Carlisle, Pa.,
and author of an acclaimed book, ''On Strategy,'' said General Palmer's book was
''especially valuable'' to the most promising colonels who are likely to become
the next leaders of the Army, ''especially because it stresses the need for
intellectual honesty and moral courage'' on the part of officers.

A highly favorable review of the book will appear in the next issue of the War
College magazine, Parameters. Colonel Summers said that today's colonels fought
as small unit commanders in Vietnam and were bewildered as to why when they had
won all their engagements, the war was lost. ''The danger is that they will
blame the media or the civilians instead of recognizing that we screwed it up,''
he said.

With the 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon seven weeks away, the book may
also influence retrospective analysis of the Vietnam trauma.

General Palmer's reputation as an Army elder is high. He commanded a brief and
successful military intervention in the Dominican Republic in 1965 and headed a
corps in Vietnam before becoming the administrative commander of Army troops in
that country. He was Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Vice Chief of
Staff in Washington during the closing years of the war. He is thought of as a
pragmatic, intellectual soldier more than as a ''military intellectual'' steeped
in theory.

Blame for Two Presidents

General Palmer by no means absolves Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M.
Nixon and other senior civilians of responsibility for the defeat. He is
especially critical of President Johnson's refusal to order national
mobilization and for a decision to fight the war in ''cold blood'' without
enlisting national emotions.

He also argues that the Nixon Administration's secret bombing of Cambodia and
North Vietnam ''dishonored the mililtary code of ethics'' and contributed to a
loss of public confidence in the legitimacy of the war.

But he says, in effect, that the military failed to use effectively the limbs
that were not tied by civilian policy. In these and other conclusions he seems
to quarrel with many recent reassessments of the war that argue that only a loss
of domestic support and a war weariness caused failure. He says officers adopted
a mistaken ''can-do syndrome'' and did a disservice by putting forth as
unanimous opinions that were not.

Passive Strategy Criticized

Perhaps his central criticism is that the United States adopted a passive,
defensive strategy, trying to defend nearly all of South Vietnam with American
troops while failing to build an effective South Vietnamese army.

General Palmer suggests that the United States should have concentrated its
combat troops in the northern area of South Vietnam and, preferably, also
extended a defense line across Laos to isolate the battlefield from continued
North Vietnamese infiltration and resupply. This, he argues, would have provided
a greater economy of force and permitted concentration on ''the No. 1 task'' of
building up South Vietnamese forces so as to achieve a strategic stalemate like
that achieved in South Korea 20 years before.

He approvingly quotes his friend, the legendary Vietnam War adviser John Paul
Vann, as concluding that the South Vietnamese Army was inept, poorly led and
corrupt, but that it need not have remained that way. The United States, General
Palmer writes, had ''nothing to lose'' in following Mr. Vann's consistent advice
to put unrelenting presssure for change on South Vietnam.

A 'Test of Will, Not Strength'

Repeated tactical successes against North Vietnamese and Vietcong units did not
win or end the war, he suggests, because the Communist forces could always
replace personnel at a rate equal to or faster than their losses. To Hanoi, the
war was a ''test of will, not strength,'' he says, asserting that the North
Vietnamese will to fight was ''inextinguishable.''

General Palmer is impatient with the argument that American aircraft were not
permitted to bomb enough targets often enough.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FEARS A SHIFT BY CHINA ON SOVIET



BYLINE:
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 16


Some Reagan Administration officials are concerned that Peking's efforts to
improve relations with the Russians have led to a softer Chinese stand against
Soviet involvement in Vietnam and Afghanistan.

Even before the latest friendly exchanges between Peking and Moscow in
connection with the accession to power of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the Soviet
leader, the Americans were noting what they described as unsettling indications
from China about Afghanistan and Indochina.

A key element in the American policy of seeking close relations with China has
been the strategic component. It is the belief that Chinese- American ties
compel the Soviet Union to maintain large forces along the Chinese border that
may be otherwise deployed in Eastern Europe, and that an anti-Soviet China
provides support for Southeast Asian countries that may otherwise be cowed by
Vietnamese or Soviet pressure.

Chinese Replies Ambiguous

When American diplomats raised the subject in recent months, the Chinese have
been ambiguous, officials said. One official said the Chinese seemed embarrassed
in mid-January when their relative inaction toward the clashes between
Vietnamese troops and Cambodian rebels on the Thai border was pointed out.

The officials said they were not even private assurances that Peking was not
backing away from its opposition to Soviet moves on the Chinese borders.

Since mid-January, the officials said, the Chinese have been more active both in
polemical statements toward Vietnam and in sending two more divisions to the
Vietnamese border. But the response has been less harsh than in previous
confrontations, the American officials said.

This has led to expressions of concern by Thailand and other Southeast Asian
nations that have counted on China to offset Vietnamese military power. The
Southeast Asians have made their apprehension known to the United States and to
China.

One high ranking American official voiced concern that if Thailand felt it might
lose a Chinese military counterweight to Vietnam, the Thais might strike a deal
with Vietnam acknowledging its control over Cambodia.

The United States has agreed to sell Thailand 12 F-16 fighters in response to
the latest events, the first time such an advanced plane has been sold to a
nation in Southeast Asia.

So far, the United States concern has been voiced more in the form of questions
than in the form of outright expressions of alarm because the Americans are
aware of China's sensitivity with regard to its policies toward the Soviet
Union.

Publicly China says it wants better relations with both the United States and
the Soviet Union, and it has stated that three issues stand in the way of
improved relations with the Soviet Union: the Soviet military concentration
along the Chinese border, Soviet military actions in Afghanistan, and Soviet
backing for the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia. The Soviet Union has also
established a Soviet naval and air base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

What is troubling the United States is that even though the Soviet Union has not
made concessions on any of these issues, the Chinese have evidently made a
decision to pursue improved relations anyway. American officials believe this is
connected to China's desire to take advantage of any economic and technical aid
the Soviet Union can provide and to seek overall calm on its borders with the
Soviet Union.

Concern Began in December

American questioning of China began quietly, with no public statements, last
December when Ivan V. Arkhipov, a First Deputy Prime Minister of the Soviet
Union, visited China and signed economic and technical accords.

The United States was not so troubled by the accords, American officials said in
interviews on Friday, but by what did not happen.

Mr. Arkhipov arrived in China on Dec. 20. While he was in Peking, the fifth
anniversary of the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan passed on Dec.
26, without any acknowledgment by the Chinese.

The United States, which formally condemned the intervention and issued a white
paper on Afghanistan, was unhappy, officials said.

China and the United States both support the Afghan rebels, and while there is
no sign of China backing off from support of the rebels, the Chinese silence on
the anniversary was unsettling, officials said. Later, after Mr. Arkhipov left
China, the Chinese resumed their criticism of Soviet actions in Afghanistan.

Also, while Mr. Arkhipov was in China, Vietnam began its dry-season offensive in
Cambodia. The Vietnamese first moved against the two non-Communist rebel groups
along the Thai border, wiping out their camps, and causing some 250,000
Cambodians to flee into Thailand. Then, in January, the Vietnamese turned their
guns on the Khmer Rouge, the Communist Cambodians who had been forced out of
power in 1979 by Vietnam.

The Chinese reaction became stronger in mid-January after Gen. John W. Vessey
Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visited China, officials said. In
addition, Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian of China toured Southeast Asia in late
January and early February and said on more than one occasion that ''if Vietnam
continues its provocation along the Chinese-Vietnamese border, China reserves
the right to give Vietnam a second lesson.''

That was an allusion to the Chinese attack in February 1980, after the
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

China Has Backed New Zealand

American officials have also been upset at the Chinese for supporting the New
Zealand decision to bar American ships that may be carrying nuclear weapons.

Moreover, the shared concern of China and the United States toward the Soviet
Union has made it easier for the United States and Japan to improve their
military ties because of the lack of Chinese support for Japanese neutralism.

The success of the Vietnamese in routing the Cambodian rebels from their base
camps caused American officials, such as Paul D. Wolfowitz, the Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs, to ask the Chinese last
month to step up their aid to the rebels.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE SPIRIT OF GENEVA

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


GENEVA From one generation to another,

Geneva always seems to look the

same. It is a safety-deposit box, as orderly as its clocks. Its mountains shut
out the suffering world. Its lake is as placid and superior as its swans - with
John Calvin's church on one side of the water and Woodrow Wilson's Palace of
Peace on the other.

But the Spirit of Geneva changes from time to time. Now the representatives of
the nuclear giants are here arguing about the balance of military power,
discussing the possibility of war in the stars before they have kept their
promises to maintain peace on earth, and speculating on the future of the new
man in the the Kremlin rather than on the future of mankind.

The Spirit of Geneva in Woodrow Wilson's time was quite different. In his
address to the Senate on Jan. 22, l9l7, he asked:

''Is the present war a struggle for a just and secure peace, or only for a new
balance of power . . .? There must be, not a balance of power, but a community
of power; not organized rivalries, but an organized common peace . . . a peace
among equals . . .''

The U.S. and Soviet Governments and their officials here are not talking in such
philosophical terms but in mathematical terms about numbers of missiles, and
throw weights and Stealth bombers and other mystifying ''peacekeepers'' that
give nobody any peace of mind.

It can and should be argued that it was not a balance of power but the absence
of that balance that led to the two world wars of this century; and that is
clearly the view of the present Governments in Moscow and Washington. So their
answer to most of their political conflicts is more weapons in the Middle East,
Latin America, Europe or Africa.

And yet it may have been intellectual failures that led to the tragedy of the
two world wars and to the tangles of Korea, Vietnam and the Middle East.

The Allies thought the Germany of the Kaiser was such a menace that they fought
him to the point of unconditional surrender and in the process helped the rise
of Nazism in Germany, Fascism in Italy and Communism in Russia.

They also overestimated the Chinese-Soviet alliance in Korea and underestimated
the power of nationalism in Vietnam and the religious opposition to the West in
the Middle East, believing that modern weapons would prevail.

The Russians have made the same mistake with China, Afghanistan and maybe in the
end in Eastern Europe, where they thought their military power would triumph in
the short run but where, with the extension of modern communications across the
Iron Curtain, they may very well end up as the last of the failed empires.

For a very long time, Geneva has been a center of ideas that are still in
dispute.

Unlike Luther, who wanted to return to the agrarian simplicities of life, John
Calvin argued for capitalism, trade, production, thrift, industry, sobriety,
freedom and responsibility. His Presbyterian church still stands on the Geneva
Hill.

The old Spirit of Geneva at the end of the First World War was best described by
Paul Valery, the French poet and philosopher, in l933. ''The most just and
serious criticism which in my opinion can be leveled against the League of
Nations,'' he said, ''is that it was not constituted first as a League of Minds.
The League brings together individuals who represent an historic system of
rivalry and discord. They bring to Geneva the best will in the world, but, along
with it, a burden of mental reservations and the invincible habit of wanting to
gain an advantage at somebody else's expense . . .''

This, of course, is precisely what is occurring here now as Max Kampelman of the
U.S. and Viktor Karpov of the Soviet Union smile for the photographers and agree
on ''the principle of confidentiality.''

They are hung up on the cold war propaganda and instructions of their
Governments, and this is not likely to change unless the new Soviet leader
Mikhail Gorbachev and President Reagan and their foreign ministers, Andrei
Gromyko and George Shultz, finally decide to think about the treaties they have
already signed rather than the ones they may sign sometime in the future.

The promises are clear in the Charter of the United Nations, here on the walls
of the Palace of Peace: ''To refrain from the threat or use of force . . . to
settle their international disputes by peaceful means . . .'' This was the
original Spirit of Geneva, and no nuclear arms control compromise is likely to
substitute for it.B

re

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHAT SHARON WROUGHT

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


BOSTON When a country is misled by its government on fundamental issues of war
and peace, it may take years to learn the price of folly. The decisions that
took America step by step into Vietnam had their reckoning 10, 20, 30 years
later.

Israel has no such luxury in Lebanon. Less than three years have passed since
Ariel Sharon sent Israeli forces across the border in a grand strategic stroke.
Today every Israeli faces the grim consequences of that act, menacing the
present and shadowing the future. The war in Lebanon can already be seen as one
of the worst disasters in Israel's brief modern history: a self-inflicted
disaster.

The Vietnam analogy, in its inexactness, indicates the extent of the danger.
However severe the trauma in Vietnam, the United States was 10,000 miles away
when the war ended. After withdrawing, Israel will still have to live with the
Lebanese as neighbors: neighbors transformed in large numbers from passivity to
violent hostility.

The greatest single consequence of the Israeli invasion and occupation has been
the arousal of the Shiites, the dominant population group in the south. In all
the years after 1948 the Shiites had no particular quarrel with Israel. By 1982
they had become resentful of the Palestinian guerrillas stationed in south
Lebanon, and many Shiite villages welcomed the Israeli invaders with flowers.

Now the Israeli occupation forces and the Shiites are locked in a murderous
cycle of violence, with guerrilla killings followed by the smashing of Shiite
villages. Religious fundamentalism is flourishing. The radical Hezbollah, or
Party of God, has signs right on the Israeli border. Israel must fear that,
after withdrawal is completed, its northern villages will face a far more
serious threat from Shiite guns and rockets than they ever did from the P.L.O.

That Israel brought such a danger upon itself is hard to understand. There are
many Israelis knowledgeable about and sensitive to Shiite Moslem traditions. But
the occupation army displayed much insensitivity, even disrupting Shiite
religious institutions. And instead of making security arrangements with the
Shiites, the Government relied on the largely Christian South Lebanese Army,
which is now disintegrating.

How could such mistakes have been made? They have to be attributed to hubris -
the overreaching pride that affected Israel's whole operation in Lebanon.

The announced purpose of the invasion was to remove the P.L.O. guerrillas from
south Lebanon. But General Sharon, a man of immense personal ambition, had a
bigger agenda. He engaged the Syrian Army, intending to end Syrian influence in
Lebanon. He planned to install in Beirut a Christian Phalangist regime closely
tied to Israel.

Those strategic aims were built on fantasy. And their pursuit proved disastrous.
Ze'ev Schiff, the respected military correspondent of Haaretz, summed up the
results of the war as follows: ''Israel and the Lebanese Christians have been
weakened. Syria has been strengthened, and Lebanon has become more Arab than it
ever was.''

Some of the responsibility for the disaster rests in the United States. The
Reagan Administration, through then Secretary of State Haig, winked at the
Sharon invasion plans instead of seeing them as the folly they were and saying a
firm no. And American supporters of Israel, too many of them, defended the
invasion heedless of the consequences - as if it helped Israel to give knee-
jerk support to disastrous policies of one of its governments.

Some American supporters are still trying to prove that the invasion was wise.
Charles Krauthammer, a senior editor of The New Republic, writing in The
Washington Post in January, said ''Israel won the main event'' in the war, the
battle with the P.L.O. ''As Israeli tanks head home,'' he concluded, ''leaving
Lebanon to the Lebanese and the Bekaa to Syria, they leave in victory.''

Israelis are too sensible to believe such fantasies. Their system has in fact
responded to reality in Lebanon far sooner than ours did in Vietnam.

An editorial writer in Haaretz whose son is serving in Lebanon wrote last week
of his relief on learning that his son had not been hurt in the guerrilla attack
that took 12 Israeli lives. Then he added:

''You start hearing the babble about a 'heinous deed' and the war against
terrorism, and you wonder: What are they talking about? The Shiites are fighting
for their land the only way they know how and according to the norms prevailing
there. The one who shouldn't be there, the one who shouldn't have been there
from the start, is my son.''B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Neo-Liberals Have a Message for the Democats

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


To the Editor:


My friend Fred Siegel, a professor of history, distorts history to make his
confused attack on the Democratic Party's neo-liberals (Op-Ed March 7). Mr.
Siegel uses every specious argument from left and right to blame these
revisionists for the demise of a party they in no way controlled.

First, the neo-liberals are not ''McGovernites.'' A convenient straw man
invented by conservatives, a ''McGovernite'' is virulently isolationist,
antimilitary and fiscally irresponsible. There is nothing in Gary Hart's 10-year
Senate record - a record that includes stewardship of the military-reform
movement - to suggest this stance. Nor is the economist Lester Thurow, a skeptic
of wage-and-price controls and an opponent of regulatory schemes where more
market-oriented solutions would suffice, a ''McGovernite.''

Further, Mr. Siegel forgets the historical exigencies that propelled the
Congressional class of 1974 - the one he blames for destroying the seniority
system and other misdeeds - into Congress. The old Democratic leadership's
instransigence on Vietnam and the environment had split the party, alienating
its progressive constituencies. The old chairmen looked after ''the economic
interests of their working-class constituencies,'' as Mr. Siegel puts it, by
promoting bloated military budgets and opposing environmental regulation - just
as Ronald Reagan is doing. The Watergate babies were given a vast mandate to
eliminate what amounted to antipopulist corruption.

Having exhausted his right-wing argument, Mr. Siegel turns to the left, and
blames the neo-liberals for being conservative Jimmy Carter clones. Again, he is
wrong. Jimmy Carter did not win election by reviving the New Deal coalition, as
Mr. Siegel states. He succeeded in the 1976 primaries by opposing such
traditional liberal candidates as Morris Udall, and by railing against
inefficiency and bureaucracy in government.

Mr. Carter failed as President when he turned his back on his campaign themes
and introduced new bureaucracies (the Synfuels Corporation, for example) and
played to the interest- group sensibilities of traditional Democrats. Likewise,
Gary Hart's primary victories in 1984 came on the strength of his ''new ideas''
theme; when he returned to interest-group pandering, he lost the momentum, and
his campaign died.

Mr. Siegel also conveniently ignores neo-liberal successes. Bill Bradley and
Richard Gephardt turned tax simplification into a national issue; when their
Democratic brethren spurned them, President Reagan stole a march and made it a
Republican program. The same is true of excellence in education, globalization
of the economy and promotion of entrepreneurial risk-taking - championed by
neo-liberals, these issues were made Republican ideas when fearful Democrat
elders ignored them.

But Mr. Siegel is correct about one thing: the Democratic Party, including the
neo-liberals, no longer appeals to working-class constituencies. Ronald Reagan
has shown that those groups will not be won back merely by reviving the bromides
and politics of the past; nor will they accept mirrored conservatism. The
Democrats have lost because they have displayed a fealty to mechanisms, not
principles.

The challenge to the neo-liberals is to transcend the politics of urban
development action grants and make their message comprehensible to voters: that
America is a partner in an international economy, and that government's role is
to help all people achieve the self-sufficiency they desire in this new world.

RANDALL ROTHENBERG New York, March 7, 1985

The writer is author of ''The Neoliberals: Creating the New American Politics''
(Simon & Schuster, 1984).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY EUROPE WORRIES, AND WHY WASHINGTON CARES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words


WHATEVER

else it may accomplish, the Reagan Administration's Central American policy has
succeeded in opening a second front of concern in Europe. If the differences are
not yet as deep as those engendered by Vietnam, they could ultimately raise
questions about the continued participation of some nations in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (particularly Spain, which will vote on the issue
next year), or perhaps cause enough friction to prompt the United States to
re-examine its own role in the alliance. The Council on Foreign Relations asked
several experts to assess Europe's thinking on Central America. Excerpts from
the resulting study, which was published last week, follow.  View From the Left

The U.S. approach perceives the fundamental root of the crisis in the global
East-West conflict. Hence Americans deduce that the security of the United
States, that is, of the West, is threatened. And as in any all-out war, anyone
who does not see the problem in these terms either shows himself to be ''soft''
on vital questions of Western defense, or, worse, becomes what the Marxists call
an ''objective ally'' of the enemy.

I am tempted to suggest - and I am well aware that I cannot represent the
positions or opinions of Western Europe as a whole - that not many of the allied
goverments in Europe fully share this analysis. True, Europe's prudence and
awareness of its own limitations, as well as its sincere desire not to
exacerbate trans-Atlantic differences and ''misunderstandings'' in a moment as
delicate as the present one, have limited open criticism to the most scandalous
actions (such as the mining of Nicaraguan ports early in 1984), which were also
widely criticized in the United States. Nevertheless, Europeans should not fail
to observe that their actual support for the general U.S. approach has been very
slight and, above all, unenthusiastic...

From the viewpoint of Europeans on the left, including the Spanish Government,
there is little hope that Washington's policies will succeed. As long as
economic power continues to be concentrated in the hands of agrarian oligarchies
that are more willing to live off interest from their dollars banked in Miami
than to invest in their own countries, as long as the mass of the population
remains on the margins of politics, and as long as armies continue to grow and
absorb economic resources and decision-making power, the reforms that are needed
will never cease to appear radical and almost revolutionary in character.
Fernando Moran Minister of Foreign Affairs, Spain Staying Sidelined

The fundamental reason our European allies insist on refusing to support Amerian
policies in Central America is that they do not believe - prefer not to believe
- that at the heart of world politics today is an ideological conflict between
two political models of the future: some version of Marxist-Leninism on the one
hand and some version of democratic capitalism on the other...

What is called ''detente'' is at best a temporary agreement between the two
great powers to lower the rhetorical temperature. The Soviets have never
permitted this to interfere with their actual policies. The United States,
having finally perceived this (after some years of self-delusion), will proceed
along the same lines. In any case, those two great powers have no control over
the eruptions that are occurring daily all over the globe, inside and outside of
their ''spheres of influence,'' and such developments will ruthlessly rupture
any ''detente'' constructed by diplomats.

To some degree the European attitude is little more than a desperate hope that
it can keep comfortably aloof from the turbulence of a worldwide ideological
conflict. To some degree, too, it reflects a smug conviction that both the
Soviet Union and the United States are young, raw, unsophisticated powers which,
with time, will learn to practice the art of raison d'etat with that skill
European statesmen and commentators feel they peculiarly possess. Yet whatever
the sources of the European perspective and European conduct - and there are
doubtless others that can be pointed to - one thing is clear: America's European
allies are fast approaching a moment of decision. The United States is not going
to remain committed to the defense of Western Europe, at the risk of nuclear
annihilation, if Western Europe is not equally committed to the defense of
America's interests.  Irving Kristol Co-editor, The Public Interest Judgment
Calls

It seems to me that Europeans must be alarmed at a U.S. policy that appears out
of control in Central America. They see rampant military escalation on all
fronts, coupled with the closing off of possibilities for realistic political
and diplomatic solutions, while at the same time the U.S. position in the region
deteriorates. They see a United States seemingly pursuing open-ended objectives
that cannot be accomplished with the means being employed, which makes them
wonder what Washington will do next. Europeans must have doubts about the wisdom
of U.S. judgments, and about the soundness of a political system that can
produce such judgments. They know the Soviet threat is real; hence their concern
not that the United States imagines the threat but that it might shoot itself in
the foot in attempting to deal with the threat. If Washington sought the
Europeans' help in bringing about solutions, instead of claiming a right to
European acquiescence to U.S. policies about which the Europeans have deep
doubts, it would help the alliance.  Representative Michael D. Barnes Democrat
of Maryland Benefit of the Doubt

For the Europeans, the credibility of their political solidarity with the United
States is at stake in Central America. Unlike in the Eastern bloc, in the
Western Alliance there is an open and critical discussion about the policies of
all its members. This includes the policies of its leading power, the United
States, whose strategic credibility (including its option of nuclear first use)
is crucial to Europe's security. In view of this, the United States must be able
to expect that its European partners will not impute malevolence to their main
ally in its policy toward Central America. Differing interpretations of the best
methods to achieve the West's mutual goals should be discussed openly, but in a
spirit of Atlantic solidarity, which, I repeat, is essential both to Americans
and Europeans for the preservation of their common interests...

Events such as the mining of Nicaraguan harbors with the help of the Central
Intelligence Agency or the discovery of a C.I.A. handbook for ''white terror''
create in Europe, especially among young people, the impression that the United
States is enmeshed in sinister intrigues. As a European politician, I must look
on this with consternation, because from such perceptions and the emotional
reactions they engender there can arise a virulent anti-Americanism that lends
strength to pacifism and neutralism and weakens the psychological-political
bases of the Atlantic Alliance.  Alois Mertes Minister of State, West Germany
Strains on NATO

Those who supposed that the major problem of the world at the beginning of 1981
was the Salvadoran guerrillas or the Sandinista Government showed an absolute
lack of understanding of the real situation in this region and this resulted in
undermining potential European support for U.S. policy in the area. The
conflicts there, which began in 1978, have involved the killing of nearly
200,000 Central Americans; the destruction of the Central American Common
Market; the uprooting of more than one million people to other cities and
countries, including the United States; and the introduction of Soviet interests
into a region where formerly they were unimportant. This situation was seen
clearly by the Europeans (and by many U.S. citizens), and it now constitutes a
major area of contention among some members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.  Daniel Oduber Former President, Costa Rica

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WRITING THE SECOND NOVEL-A SYMPOSIUM

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3902 words


The Book Review asked a number of first novelists how it feels to be writing a
second novel. Their replies follow:

Jayne Anne Phillips

Machine Dreams

THE writer believes there is a great difference between the attempts to write a
first and second novel. The writer believes he or she has learned certain
inalienable things during the long struggle with the first novel; he or she is
an older, wiser being. The writer thinks hard about the issue of control, of
bringing plans to bear, carrying on like a professional. Makes detailed lists,
conceives of a plot that is definitely not autobiographical, schedules the
actual writing time according to the outline of the book. The writer starts
working out in a gym, begins taking, perhaps, vitamins B-50 and B-6, which are
meant to improve memory. If the first novel has been successful, the writer buys
a serious, writerly object that bespeaks investment and confidence - a word
processor, a new bookshelf, reams of white paper. Or empty notebooks. In any
case, a new and bigger wastebasket. Meanwhile, life goes on. There are new love
affairs or no affairs, a loss of employment, a move to another apartment. The
writer grows desperate, quietly or not so quietly, is a failure or a has-been,
unprotected even by ignorance of the process to come. Finally the writer digs
in, with plans that are, admittedly, only pretexts. As before, there is a great
silence, with no end in sight. The writer surrenders, listening.

Frederick Barthelme Second Marriage

Autobiography is ubiquitous, first novel or last - it's the data stream, so it's
there in inflections, images, gestures, incidents, in the set decorationand in
the mouths of babes. This is true whether you write work that appears to be from
life but isn't, or you write remarkable new prose that seems to want to have
come from the planet Zombia.

The downside of the second novel is that you're still out in the middle of
nowhere doing something nobody asked you to do, and you suspect, all polite
evidence to the contrary, that they didn't ask because they don't want, and if
they did want, they'd get it elsewhere.

On the upside, second novels are easier because you're more comfortable with the
form, and you have this frail tissue of confidence that maybe if you did it
once, you can do it again. If you're lucky, you find a part of the last novel
about which you can usefully revise and extend your remarks, and if you're very
lucky a part of the last becomes the whole of the next, showing itself an
exquisite, under-plumbed territory. But, lucky or not, you've gotten some help
from the last book, you've learned seat-of-the-pants things about pace (a hard
lesson for a writer weaned on the short story), and about digression. If you've
been well reviewed, you've learned something from that, something about how
close or how distant you are from your fellows, about how much of what you
intend in all the ways that you intend it is being reconstructed on the reading
end.


Joan Chase

During the Reign of the Queen of Persia It seems to me that writing my first
novel was easier than writing my second, even taking into account the intrigues
of memory. When I began ''During the Reign of the Queen of Persia,'' I didn't
know I was writing a novel. The work I was doing could have ended up a novel, or
something else - or nothing at all. I was unpublished and I was making no
demands on myself. Eventually, of course, the work started making demands on me
and started becoming a novel. Now, the second time around, I am a ''novelist''
driving myself toward an enormous and predetermined objective. This time,
presumably, I know what I'm about, experienced in the tricks of the trade. But
writing a novel or story is always a leap in the dark, a scary thing. What I'm
learning now is that even the dimensions of the dark change when I begin again.

Susan Kenney In Another Country A first novel defines the subject, I think,
stakes out the territory the writer wants to explore, but not necessarily the
route to take. I didn't exactly set out to write a novel called ''In Another
Country''; I was writing short stories - or thought I was. They were about a
series of family crises, all told by the same narrator, chronological but not
continuous. When I put them together, I realized the stories were so
interrelated and interdependent that even though there were gaps in the
narrative, the whole thing read more like a novel than a book of stories.

Is the second novel more, less, or equally autobiographical in its origins? I
would say that all fiction is equally autobiographical in its origins -
imagination playing over one's experience, direct or otherwise - it's the
treatment that makes the difference. A first-person narrative often seems more
autobiographical than it actually is. Though the main events of ''In Another
Country'' are ones I experienced myself, almost all the situations are
fabricated, characters too, collapsed in time and space.

The novel I'm working on now I have found myself thinking about in a very
different way - as a whole, continuous (but maybe not chronological), from the
very beginning. My subject is still the interplay between past and present, the
effect of memory on both action and reaction, so I employ a lot of flashbacks,
as I did in ''In Another Country.'' But this one is told in the third person,
and fills in the gaps of ''In Another Country,'' the same events, seen from a
different perspective. So you could say it's equally autobiographical in origin,
but the conception is different, and so is the treatment, and those differences
are clearly technical.

Jay Cantor The Death of Che Guevara The first novel was America from the outside
- or from our other half. The angry son not included in the family. So for the
second novel I wanted to write myself back into the family, write about my
country - myself - from the inside. I'm American made. And when I thought about
what formed me, it was - as I think it is for many people - especially our
popular culture. It's certainly a chief source of instruction in the brave
strain of American life, that endless improvised existence, where all that holds
things together is the riff, a few chords, the movie's repeated plots, and
within that repetition we have to ring fresh changes, make it new, yet still the
same. Popular culture creates its audience, like a parent creating her children.
It makes us up.

Of course, popular culture was only one of my parents. The other was our
''high'' culture. My book is about the tension in the family, about the ''flat''
popular culture that wants to be round - to be taken seriously - about the high
culture, that, like a painting by Jasper Johns, wants to be innocent again,
beyond lies, perfectly flat. I guess this second novel's attempt to be more
autobiographical is really an attempt to write my parents' autobiography - the
not uncommon doomed attempt to be one's own parents, like America, self-
created.

Mary Robison OH! Whenever I run into a student of mine, Laura Yeager, she says
something such as, ''You know what happened? Lois's father was eaten by a
thresher,'' or, ''Lois found a sick duck,'' or, ''Yesterday, I left with the
Timmers on their cruise!'' Sometimes I tell Laura what's happening in my novel,
but I notice we never use the word ''fiction'' or ''character.'' I guess,
because the writing is a kind of alternative reality.

Working on this, my second novel, my physical habits are different. I carry
around a blue ring binder and write all over my days and nights. I'm less
concerned with getting through the story, less uncertain I can get through the
story, and I don't feel so much as though I'm on the Demon Drop ride at the
amusement park. I'm more interested in the ''architecture'' of this novel.

Padgett Powell Edisto The essential struggle during a first novel is to not
quit, to hold together at all cost what little fictional reality one may be
after.  The second novel strikes me as the zone in which the survivor of the
first bag of accidents can no longer be content to simply march. At least this
is the way I would have formulated it before wobbling into my second book. It
looks now, however, as if there is no sudden preoccupation with second-book
marvels of new utterance. One is yet just struggling to discover some meaning,
no more technically adroit than before.

The question of autobiographical content is perhaps the most heard, and the
answer implicitly desired is that the first book is the whole-cloth of one's
tiny life warped by ineptly applied precepts of Art. No one writing fiction for
the admirable purpose of effecting worlds more sensible and telling and
enlivening than the one we daily stumble through will put up very long with
dragging that quotidian one straight into his new, painted world. It seems
feasible that one spend his fiction as easily as his life, and entirely possible
to rely more heavily upon autobiographical seeding as one goes on, rather than
less. If this is so, one could argue a true function of the second-book
experience: suddenly, larger blocks and more exact nodes of ''real'' life may
seem correctly portable into the finally not so mysterious vapors of
make-believe.

Jay McInerney Bright Lights, Big City The second novel, before it exists, seems
to shimmer between two poles of strategy: extending the voice and terrain of the
first, or breaking new ground, free of the imperatives that shaped the first
book. The first novel is apparently born out of a void, though it has literary
ancestors. It becomes, irrevocably, a measure of the second, whether the
novelist's attitude is one of respect or rebellion.

In my second novel, I was most interested in those aspects of it which didn't
resemble the first novel in the least. I had exhausted certain autobiographical,
technical and thematic impulses and I set out to do something new. I had to
consciously shake off the persona of the first book, to stifle the old voice. I
am glad I completed what will be my second published novel before reviews came
in on the first, so that I was spared the self-consciousness of living up to, or
living down, my debut.

Ron Loewinsohn Magnetic Field(s) My first novel, ''Magnetic Field(s),'' was
written in what I can only describe as a state of grace that lasted - unbroken -
for six weeks. Before I'd written a single word I knew what the opening and the
closing sentences would be, and how the book's parts would be related to each
other. The clarity of this structure then allowed me to improvise my way along
from day to day, discovering as I went the details that would ''put a skin'' on
what I had to say about these characters as they went around violating each
other's Otherness or imaginatively participating in that same Otherness, saying
No to death.

I've just finished a new novel, a sequel to the first, called ''The Foul Rag and
Bone Shop,'' and getting the first draft down felt much more like work than
''Magnetic Field(s)'' did, even though I had (again) conceived its total form -
including its opening and closing sentences - before I began writing. ''The Foul
Rag and Bone Shop'' is a more sustained, more consecutive book than my first.
Writing it wasn't like being in grace, but it was still a delight.

Having done the first novel, I felt confident and relaxed enough about technique
to listen more deeply and more patiently to my characters as they revealed
themselves to me, living their daily lives, worrying about getting older and not
being appreciated, needing to feel love and aliveness, wanting, wanting both an
ideal of heroic courage and a ''realistic'' acceptance of limits, saying No to
death.

Brad Leithauser Equal Distance Having published one book of poems and one novel,
I find myself concurrently writing second books in two genres. While the poetry
emerges steadily, and the second novel only spottily, my twofold undertaking
already begins to clarify for me one difference between novel- and verse-
writing. The poet (or at least the poet who, like me, finds rhyme and meter
congenial) lives amidst a dazzling range of venerable but robust forms. Not so
the novelist. The ''traditions of the novel'' can seem curiously remote.

What does this mean for someone embarking on a second novel? Perhaps that a
completed first novel takes one little distance toward a completed second.
Novels - even one's own, apparently - are ever threatened by disconnection.
True, a novelist can bind his books together in numerous ways (sequels,
recurring themes, stylistic parallels, etc.), but he's apt to wind up feeling
that the linkages are mostly self- designed. Of course the novelist belongs to
his era, and his work will eventually unveil its hidden traditions and
continuities. But he probably doesn't feel this way. He's apt to see himself
laboring in isolation, heroically struggling to do new things in a medium that's
routinely pronounced dead. Feeling almost detached from the past, the novelist
seated before his daily blank sheets of paper is staring at something the formal
poet can only regard with a mix of disbelief and faint horror: a clean slate.

Andrea Lee Sarah Phillips It seems normal for a first novel based on
autobiographical material to exert a compulsion on its author: writing it is not
simply a first step into a new form, but a settling of accounts with the most
powerful of all collected material - the accumulated memories of childhood and
adolescence. Each story/chapter that makes up ''Sarah Phillips'' recounts an
episode that in its incomplete real state cast a lingering spell over me,
demanding development into an artistic whole that would somehow reveal its
essential nature. Right now I'm working on a second novel, which will be
different from anything I've ever experienced - it's an adventure story, full of
blood and hidden treasure. I think it's natural that in a second novel one
reacts a bit against the first, especially if the first was a bit of a
Bildungsroman, with all that embarrassing personal material. With the first, one
is attempting to make pieces of one's private mythology comprehensible to the
world at large; with the second, one takes far less vivid elements - life seen
through maturer eyes - and tries to make them at least entertaining.

Nettie Jones Fish Tales The major difference between ''Fish Tales'' and ''Puma''
is that I am more in control. I know where I am headed before I sharpen my
pencils. I am less limited in point of view. ''Fish Tales'' used the first
person exclusively. ''Puma'' is revealed through insights of several characters,
including the protagonist.

My first novel could be equated to a painter's collage. The casual reader has to
work at deciphering the manifold tales encompassed within its framework.
''Puma'' can be superficially understood. I am more skillful as a thinker and a
writer now. And I am more frightened of failure than I was when I dared to
proudly submit my first work.

''Puma'' is autobiographical in the same sense as ''Fish Tales.'' Nettie Jones
created both of them. Each dramatizes my reality blended with heavy shots of my
fantasies and my fascinations.

Thomas Farber Curves of Pursuit My previous two books, volumes of short fiction,
had allowed change of voice or characters as I wrote, permitting completion of
something every month or two. Not so ''Curves of Pursuit.'' And, as I sometimes
reminded myself, I hadn't even intended a novel, saw nothing inherently higher
or finer in the form, had simply found myself with an intriguing fragment which
kept refusing narrow boundaries. Nonetheless, dog paddling into the darkness,
turning 38, turning 39, I wondered - between periods of crazy exultation - if
I'd like the novel when I finished, if I finished. There was the confusing loss
of austerity and closure when, novel done, I blinked to re- enter the glare of
the larger world. Given all this, it perhaps makes sense that as I again commit
myself to fiction I'm also exploring in non-fiction some of the ambiguities of
the writer's vocation.

Charles Dickinson Waltz in Marathon  By the time ''Waltz in Marathon'' was
published, I was already deep into work on my second novel, and in a sense had
lost interest in the first. The anxieties and seductions of publication are
reduced by the concerns of fresh work. The new novel you are writing and excited
about provides a cushion of self- esteem that absorbs any negative criticism of
a work that is, frankly, old.

For a month or so after ''Waltz'' was first available, there was just too much
praise in the air. It was impossible not to believe some of it. The reviews were
generally good, my family and friends were enthusiastic. I was evidently quite a
singular person. It was an unreal time I found very appealing. Inevitably the
unreal time passed, my head deflated, my wife found me bearable again. And I was
left alone with the new book I was writing, which is the way it should be.

Rebecca Goldstein The Mind/Body Problem Writing my first novel recalled for me
the pleasures of playing hooky in high school, the only extracurricular activity
in which I participated. I was using the purloined time in a way agreeable to
the strange kid that I was: at the public library, laboring over heavy tomes of
philosophy.

I still love studying philosophy, which I now teach (and I am merciless with
students who repeatedly cut class). But my enjoyment now of Spinoza or Kant
never quite approximates what I experienced during the stolen hours of my youth.
Struggling through those impossibly opaque passages wasn't work, but a great
lark - precisely because, of course, I was supposed to be somewhere else, doing
something entirely different.

All of this was relived when I wrote my first novel. For now I was a professor;
it was summer; and what I was supposed to be doing was writing some massive
scholarly study that would guarantee me tenure. So I wrote a novel. What a lark!
I blithely shrugged my shoulders when I heard or read a writer bemoaning ''the
agony of the empty page.''

And then there's now. Now I am often asked, or even pressed, about my next
novel. I'm getting the message that a second novel is what I should be
producing. I think I'll sit me down and write a massive scholarly study.

T. Gertler Elbowing the Seducer Alexander Calder was commissioned to make a
horselike stabile for a Texas town. According to Jean Lipman in ''Calder's
Universe,'' the Texans said the finished work didn't look like a horse. The
artist responded, ''Well, it probably isn't a horse.''

This cheerful indifference to categories is downright inspiring. I feel
encouraged to report that writing a second novel isn't different from writing a
first, except for categorical expectations created by the different ordinal
numbers. In its serial aspect, novel-writing is much like marriage: the first
doesn't necessarily make you either wiser or less fit for a second, let alone a
third.

Obsessions, not autobiographical details, spur fiction, I think; and though they
may metamorphose from novel to novel, they don't abruptly disappear. A chain of
dreams leads from book to book.

Nora Ephron Heartburn  People ask me about my second novel all the time.  How is
it coming, they say. They can barely keep a straight face when they do, since
most of them apparently believe that my first novel was a fluke, barely fiction
at all, and that I am not likely to repeat the trick. For a while, I decided to
wipe the smiles off their faces by replying that my second novel was coming
fine, and that it was about Vietnam. This, it seemed to me, would take care of
the second novel question for years, since like most of my friends who write
Vietnam novels, I would be able to move from a phase of saying that I was hard
at work on my Vietnam novel to a much longer phase of saying that I was blocked
on my Vietnam novel. The point of all this is to say that not having begun my
second novel and not having a clue as to what it will be about, I don't know the
answer to your question, but I would like to say thank you for asking, assuming
you're not smiling, and even if you are. B

Rebecca Goldstein The Mind/Body Problem Writing my first novel recalled for me
the pleasures of playing hooky in high school, the only extracurricular activity
in which I participated.  I was using the purloined time in a way agreeable to
the strange kid that I was: at the public library, laboring over heavy tomes of
philosophy.

I still love studying philosophy, which I now teach (and I am merciless with
students who repeatedly cut class). But my enjoyment now of Spinoza or Kant
never quite approximates what I experienced during the stolen hours of my youth.
Struggling through those impossibly opaque passages wasn't work, but a great
lark - precisely because, of course, I was supposed to be somewhere else, doing
something entirely different.

All of this was relived when I wrote my first novel. For now I was a professor;
it was summer; and what I was supposed to be doing was writing some massive
scholarly study that would guarantee me tenure. So I wrote a novel. What a lark!
I blithely shrugged my shoulders when I heard or read a writer bemoaning ''the
agony of the empty page.''

And then there's now. Now I am often asked, or even pressed, about my next
novel. I'm getting the message that a second novel is what I should be
producing. I think I'll sit me down and write a massive scholarly study.

T. Gertler Elbowing the Seducer Alexander Calder was commissioned to make a
horselike stabile for a Texas town. According to Jean Lipman in ''Calder's
Universe,'' the Texans said the finished work didn't look like a horse.  The
artist responded, ''Well, it probably isn't a horse.''

This cheerful indifference to categories is downright inspiring. I feel
encouraged to report that writing a second novel isn't different from writing a
first, except for categorical expectations created by the different ordinal
numbers. In its serial aspect, novel-writing is much like marriage: the first
doesn't necessarily make you either wiser or less fit for a second, let alone a
third.

Obsessions, not autobiographical details, spur fiction, I think; and though they
may metamorphose from novel to novel, they don't abruptly disappear. A chain of
dreams leads from book to book.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM BOAT REFUGEES: 10-YEAR, ONE-WAY TIDE

BYLINE: By BARABARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words

DATELINE: SONGKHLA, Thailand, March 13


In Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, the Vietnamese are preparing to celebrate the
10th anniversary of North Vietnam's conquest of the South.  In towns and cities
across America, veterans and scholars of the war are sitting back and analyzing
a traumatic era.

But here on a beach in southern Thailand, Mai Xuan Sang has neither cause for
celebration nor time for reflection. A few weeks ago Mr. Sang, a 40-year-old
electrician, put his wife, two children, a sister and a brother-in- law in a
35-foot boat, turned his back on Vietnam and pushed out into a perilous sea.

''In Saigon,'' he said, using Ho Chi Minh City's old name, ''I had no job, no
money. I could not buy rice. We could not continue.''

Considers Himself Lucky

Twenty hours into his voyage, Mr. Sang said, the boat's motor cut out. He says
he had to row for two days before being rescued by a Thai trawler. He considers
himself lucky. Despite a sharp reduction last year in piracy, ''seven out of 10
boats are still attacked,'' Mr. Sang said.

Ten years after the Vietnam War ended the ''boat people'' are still coming.
About 1,500 a month flee Vietnam by sea, according to United Nations figures.
Another 2,000 leave monthly by air as legal emigrants under the Orderly
Departure Program. Hundreds try to escape overland across Cambodia to Thailand.

Those who come by boat, like Mr. Sang and others passing through the reception
center outside Songkhla on the Gulf of Siam, are no longer the rich and
well-connected. In the small crowd that gathered around Mr. Sang one recent
afternoon to hear him tell his story to a reporter, there were fishermen,
farmers, a teacher, shopkeepers and a goldsmith.

Many of them had little formal education; few spoke even rudimentary French or
English. Almost none had guarantees of Western sponsorship. They were profiles,
in short, of refugees who will be the hardest of all to place, relief workers
say.

Americans Still Seen as Angels

Yet nearly all of them have high hopes of a new life in the United States
because of past associations with Americans who had left their lives as suddenly
as they had entered, but who have never ceased to be thought of as potential
saviors.

In the Songkhla camp, where the most recent arrivals from the Gulf of Siam are
housed temporarily, family after family besieged a reporter with scraps of paper
bearing the names of Americans they had once known, people they were sure would
help them, even after all these years, if only they could be found:

''Colonel Shipman - he advised the Seventh Division,'' a Vietnamese veteran
called out.

''MacPherson - can you find MacPherson who was in Ba Ang?'' an old man asked.

''My godfather's name was Craig Wilson,'' a teen-ager said. ''I think he is in
California.''

Sometimes they press partly decipherable addresses into a visitor's hands.

Tracing Friends and Relatives

After initial processing and medical care, the boat refugees, including
increasing numbers who flee to the American Union Oil Company rigs in the Gulf
and are brought ashore by United Nations-chartered vessels, move on from
Songkhla to a camp in central Thailand to await resettlement. There, refugee
workers help them trace relatives and friends abroad.

The accounts by newly arrived boat people suggest that many are leaving Vietnam
after having served up to nine years in the prisons Hanoi originally called
''re-education camps.'' Most of the people say they were arrested beause of
their association with Americans or with the United States-supported South
Vietnamese Army or Government.

The United States last year offered to accept all re-education camp inmates who
met immigration requirements. But Vietnam has not agreed to release them, saying
it fears the exiles will form a dangerous source of opposition outside the
country.

Bui Van Huot, 35, who fled Vietnam in January with his wife and four young
children, was a cadet in the South Vietnamese military academy when American
troops left in 1973. He was rounded up in 1975 and imprisoned briefly. After
being released, he said, he immediately began to plot an escape, while going to
work as a farmer. It took him until 1985 to find a way out of the country.

Poorer People Are Fleeing

Past refugees said a fee of several ounces of gold or the equivalent of several
hundred dollars a person was commonly paid to secure a place on a boat. Refugees
said the money often went to the local Vietnamese authorities, who sometimes
provided the vessel.

Here at Songkhla, several refugees said they had paid very little or nothing for
their passages, using instead the boats of friends who also wanted to escape.
Their apparent poverty, however, did not prevent attacks by fishermen-pirates on
the high seas.

Ho Le Thuy, a 43-year-old woman who fled Vietnam last August with her husband,
who is a former South Vietnamese Army officer, and six children, said their
small craft carrying 13 people was attacked three times in three days. Their
last attackers, finding no valuables, abducted Mrs. Thuy and her three
daughters, who were sexually abused until rescued by another Thai craft 14 days
later.

Mrs. Thuy's attackers have been caught, however, and have gone on trial in
Songkhla, in a case that United Nations officials say reflects a radical change
in Thai attitudes toward piracy over the last 15 to 18 months.

More Action Against Pirates

Equipped with three navy patrol craft, three planes and seven police boats, a
Thai antipiracy operation based in Songkhla, and supported by a consortium of
donor countries, including the United States, is reducing substantially the
number of pirate attacks in Thai waters, refugee officials say.

Vietnamese are also attacked and robbed by fishing boats of other nations,
including their own, Thai officials say.

''We can't guarantee that all our fishermen are not pirates,'' Capt. Pravit
Sivaraks told reporters at the Songkhla Naval Station. ''But we can say that all
of the pirates are not Thai.''

''The number of arrests, prosecutions and convictions of pirates in Thailand
during 1984 marks a clear improvement in the fight against piracy,'' a report by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva concluded last year.
The agency's statistics said 35 percent of refugee boats in the Southeast Asia
area were attacked in 1984, down from 52 percent in 1983.

Image Concern May Be a Factor

Thailand's increased attention to the piracy problem stems, Thai and
international officials say, partly from a Thai Foreign Ministry concern about
the country's image abroad, especially in the United Nations, where Thailand is
now a member of the Security Council.

Thai and United Nations refugee officials would like to see Hanoi allow more
Vietnamese to emigrate, and more accepted by Western nations, so that fewer
would attempt the dangerous escape by sea.

Prasong Soonsiri, Thailand's National Security Council chief, who has partial
responsibility for the hundreds of thousands of refugees on Thailand's four
international borders and long seacoast, suggested recently that the refugee
problem stemmed from Hanoi's inability, after 10 years of rule, to improve the
lives of the Vietnamese people economically or politically.

''In Thailand, we vote with our hands,'' he told reporters at a briefing here.
''In Vietnam, they have to vote with their legs.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Vietnamese refugees

TYPE: STATISTICS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WILL ABC BOUNCE BACK?

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words


Until recently, a change in the overall alignment of the commercial broadcasting
industry was unthinkable. ABC, CBS and NBC were perceived as monolithic
entities, beyond the ordinary tides of business. But since early this year -
when assorted interests cast acquisitive eyes on CBS - a sense of impending
upheaval has been growing in the industry. And yesterday, when Capital Cities
Communications Inc. moved to take control of ABC, the unthinkable happened.

The question now confronting ABC executives is whether the surprising new
arrangement with Capital Cities will signal a dramatic change. The role of
momentum in the fortunes of a network is crucial. When things are moving forward
and up, they tend to stay that way for a while, sometimes for years. The problem
that has to be faced is whether ABC's recent slide in audience ratings will be
temporary or sustained. Has success during the last eight years made the network
sluggish? Can it bounce back?

Network spokesmen say that it can. They point to new series such as ''Eye to
Eye,'' which has its premiere Thursday, and several multimillion-dollar
mini-series, including a drama special dealing with the Vietnam War years in
this country, which are well along in the planning stage.

For its $3.5 billion, Capital Cities is acquiring a network whose record
indicates, if nothing else, an unpredictable and lively programming history that
could be repeated.

ABC was in last place in the audience ratings for so long, trailing CBS and NBC
for more than two decades, that by the time it leapt into first place at the end
of the 1976-77 season, it was being innovative out of necessity. There was
little to lose.

Suddenly it became the percolating network. The situation comedy ''Happy Days''
was taking off, trailed by successful spinoffs and imitators. ''Roots'' had been
broadcast over eight consecutive nights and attracted the largest audiences in
television-entertainment history.

The dynamic Roone Arledge, now president of ABC News and Sports, had turned ABC
Sports into a razzle-dazzle display of lively camera work and colorful graphics,
lending glitter to such presentations as ''Wide World of Sports,'' ''Monday
Night Football,'' and the Olympic Games.

More money and attention were being devoted to the news operations, which would
also be taken over by Mr. Arledge. Barbara Walters was making headlines after
being hired away from NBC News for the tidily impressive sum of $1 million.

ABC was moving, and kept moving for the better part of the last eight years,
jockeying with CBS for first place and usually leaving NBC a distant third in
the crucial ratings that spell profits.

This year, however, it is generally conceded that ABC will once again end up
last in the ratings - the season ends officially on April 21 - as NBC moves up a
notch with programs that appeal to the younger audiences who used to be the
special preserve of ABC. After years in the ratings cellar, NBC was forced into
trying harder and seems to be succeeding, most notably with the new and
enormously popular ''Cosby Show.'' Esther Shapiro, who produces ''Dynasty'' for
the network and who was once a vice president in the television division of ABC,
said she thought the programming department and creative management at ABC
needed ''a positive attitude'' after this season.

Although its daytime programming has remained solid, both its prime-time ratings
and its viewer demographics - by which advertisers set their rates, local
stations declare their allegiance and program suppliers determine their product
- have been in a precipitous decline this year.

Needless to say, ABC, not to mention Capital Cities, sees the current ratings
situation as temporary. In public and private remarks, Mr. Arledge and other top
programming executives have been aggressively defending their companies' vigor
and creativity, seeing no diminution in the future. Mr. Arledge has said that
his aspirations for ABC News involve combining its already admired technical
expertise with a new creative deepening of electronic journalism already
exemplified by the network's award-winning ''Nightline.''

In the years since he took over as president of both ABC News and Sports, Mr.
Arledge is generally acknowledged to have opened up the frontier of electronic
journalism with the combining of the instant communication he pioneered at ABC
Sports with the the in-depth information he learned to deliver on his
''Nightline'' program. ''Nightline,'' which has created the capability of
instant political and public dialogue in late hours, was followed by another
success, ''This Week With David Brinkley,'' the Sunday morning interview program
so successful it found itself stylistically echoed by the other two networks.
Many television analysts have cited during the Arledge years ''an ABC look,''
which combines bright computer graphics, electronic speed and a sophisticated
voice like the one that Mr. Arledge chose in Peter Jennings.

Mr. Arledge has said he would like to extend those factors to other parts of his
programming day, including a new prime-time magazine program he is developing,
as well as a children's information program, to which he gives a high priority.

Back in the 1960's, when ABC was groping for anything that might attract
audiences to its schedule, the emphasis was on kiddie and youth shows, ranging
from ''The Mickey Mouse Club'' and ''Batman'' to ''The Mod Squad.'' For the
older viewers, there were such popular entertainments as ''The F.B.I.'' and
''Peyton Place.'' The typical ABC product had a cheap look, highlighted by sets
that seemed to consist of two walls and a piece of tacky furniture.

At the same time, however, ABC was triggering major changes in the packaging of
television entertainment. In the 1960's, it opened prime time to participating
advertising, thereby triggering the demise of the single-sponsorship program.
And, seeing a future in the made-for-television movie, ABC began investing
heavily in its ''Movie of the Week'' presentations, a development that brought
the major Hollywood film studios solidly into television production.



Kiddie Allure

When ABC jumped from third to first place in 1977, a move that represented an
estimated $60 million in additional profits, the network retained a reputation
for its kiddie allure with weekly series such as ''Happy Days,'' but the overall
record also contained examples of what spokesmen like to call ''distinctive and
innovative'' programming.

Other series down through the years have included ''Barney Miller'' and
''Taxi.'' A close - some would say too close - relationship with the producer
Aaron Spelling has brought forth a string of hits going from ''The Love Boat''
to the current blockbuster ''Dynasty.''

On a loftier level, the ABC record has been impressive indeed. Apart from
''Roots,'' ABC's ''event'' presentations encompass ''Roots II,'' ''The Winds of
War'' and ''The Day After.'' ABC Theater productions, under the direction of
Brandon Stoddard, can claim the docudrama ''The Missiles of October,'' ''A Long
Day's Journey Into Night'' starring Laurence Olivier, ''Eleanor and Franklin,''
''Friendly Fire'' and last season's ''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' Like the other
networks, ABC could show signs of schizophrenia in the quality level of its
programming.

In sports coverage, Mr. Arledge became interested not so much in bringing the
event to the viewer as bringing the viewer to the event. The visual ''pacing''
became as important as the developments on the field. The viewer was taken into
the stands to see what the other fans looked like and how they were reacting.
Supplementary features have become commonplace in every sports broadcast, often
to the annoyance of traditionalists but obviously to the delight of new and
expanding audiences.

With all of this, the future for ABC is far from certain. There is indeed that
element of sheer momentum working against the network. But there is another
aspect of television programming that shouldn't be underestimated: luck.
Obviously, Capital Cities thinks the ABC record still holds a winning chance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SANDINISTA FORCING THOUSANDS OUT OF WAR ZONE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: JINOTEGA, Nicaragua, March 17


The Nicaraguan Government has begun the forced evacuation of thousands of
peasants from the countryside in a drive to deny local support to rebels
operating in the north, according to evacuees and international relief agency
officials.

The program has two objectives, according to Sandinista officials here and
Western diplomats in Managua who specialize in military matters. The first is to
deprive the rebels of material support and intelligence by removing relatives
and neighbors sympathetic to them from war zones.

But equally important, these sources said, is the creation of ''free-fire
zones'' where the Sandinista People's Army can operate freely against the
rebels.

Simultaneously, the sources said, peasants are being resettled in new villages
where the Government hopes to win them to its side while keeping them under
military surveillance.

''The Sandinistas are moving to the strategic hamlet concept,'' said one Western
diplomat in Managua. ''Everybody leaves the area, and then you bomb the hell out
of the woods.''

Creating a Dependency

Lino Hernandez, an official of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, said,
''The whole objective of the resettlement program is to create a dependency on
the Government.''

He added, ''It is something like the strategic hamlet policy the U.S. carried
out in Vietnam or what has been done in Guatemala.''

President Daniel Ortega Saavedra made the resettlement program public in a
speech March 10, saying that up to 7,000 families would be affected this year.
But he described the refugees as ''displaced peasant families'' who were
''mobilizing themselves on their own'' in response to rebel attacks and were
seeking security from his Government.

Many of the peasants, though, tell of Sandinista troops arriving in their towns
and ordering the inhabitants to leave within 24 or 48 hours. At Limay, west of
here, evacuees and relief officials said that the homes of some peasants were
burned or their roofs were destroyed and animals were killed to prevent the
people from returning.

''It was on Feb. 16 that the soldiers came and told us we had 48 hours to get
out,'' said Juan Herrera, a former resident of Pantasma who is now resettled
near Asturias. ''We didn't want to go because it meant we would lose our whole
coffee crop and all our beans and corn, but we had no choice.''

Accused of Aiding Rebels

Mr. Herrera said the Sandinista soldiers, whom he estimated at battalion size,
accused the Pantasma residents of aiding the rebels operating in the area. In
other places, such as La Rica, peasants said they had been told that the area
was ''unsafe'' and that they would have to move out.

''Some of the people have been evacuated because they have a brother or a
husband with the rebels,'' said Felix Arauz, a Red Cross official in San Rafael
del Norte. ''Others have been ordered to leave because the Government has told
them it wants to bombard their area.''

''In areas of continuous combat, the army is telling people they have to leave
to save their own lives,'' added Mr. Arauz, who said mass evacuations in his
area began about a month ago.

Large-scale resettlement of peasants thought to be sympathetic to the rebels was
first carried out early in 1982 among Miskito and other indigenous groups living
along Nicaragua's Atlantic coast. An estimated 8,000 Indians were affected by
that action.

More recently, the Sandinistas have ordered the evacuation of nearly 20,000
peasants living in the provinces of Rio San Juan and Zelaya in the south. The
current relocation program, however, appears to eclipse those earlier efforts.

30,000 Reported 'Displaced'

In Managua, Reinaldo Antonio Tefel, director of the Nicaraguan Institute of
Social Security and Welfare, said 30,000 people had been ''displaced'' by the
war since the end of November. He said that most of the refugees were fleeing
the rebels, but added that ''those who have not fled are being requested to
leave'' northern war zones.

Mr. Tefel, whose agency is in charge of providing care for the resettled
peasants, estimated that 50,000 people would be moved this year as part of the
program announced by Mr. Ortega. That figure represents 1.5 percent of the
Nicaraguan population.

Mr. Tefel said it was possible that ''a few'' families had been forcibly
evacuated because they were giving support to the rebels. But he indicated that
his agency's work was designed to bring social services to the peasants and that
he expected the new resettlement program would be a long-term effort.

''This will go on as long as the war lasts,'' he said.

The new peasant settlements are gradually to be provided with health services,
schools and credits so that the residents can plant crops. But many of the
peasants evacuated from the war zones appear to be resentful of the disruption
of their traditional way of life.

''Here they want us all to work on a cooperative,'' said Celestino Echevarria,
an evacuee from Pantasma now living with his wife and seven children in a
one-room shack near Asturias. ''Back home, we all had our own pieces of land,
and that is better.''

With the peasants removed from the war zones, the Sandinista army and air force
are free to carry out what a Latin American diplomat in Managua called ''search
and destroy'' missions. That allows the Government troops to assume that any
forces they meet in the cleared area belong to the enemy, the diplomat said.

In Yali, where hundreds of the refugees are being housed temporarily, local
officials said that one such zone 100 kilometers square had already been created
northeast of here. An estimated 7,000 people have been removed from 18 different
communities in the area, most of them in the last month.

''The zone is completely uninhabited now,'' said the town's Mayor, Manuel Ruiz.
''There's only the army and the contras.''

Mr. Ruiz said that Sandinista troops were about to mount ''operations of total
annihilation'' in the area, around La Rica, ''now that there are no peasants
around.''

The campaign, he said, could begin ''at any moment.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSTON HOUSING AUTHORITY ACCUSED OF RACIAL STEERING

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, March 18


Houston's public housing authority has systematically funneled Vietnamese
refugees into an inner-city housing project to lessen opposition to a plan to
clear and develop the property, a prime piece of downtown real estate, a court
document suggested today.

The document, a report prepared for the housing authority, suggested that the
''steering'' arose from a belief that black or Hispanic-American residents could
more effectively protest demolition of the project.

The Housing Authority of the City of Houston has subsequently been evicting
tenants and boarding up the units.

The housing authority's actions were described by two volunteer lawyers for some
of the Vietnamese tenants as they began arguments in a lawsuit filed in state
district court to halt the evictions.

'Not True,' Director Says

Questioned in court about the purported ''steering'' of Vietnamese to pave the
way for demolition, Earl Phillips, executive director of the housing authority,
replied, ''That's not true.'' He also said Vietnamese residents who were being
evicted were living there illegally.

The lawyers for the Vietnamese charge that the housing authority is purposely
letting the 1,000-unit Allen Parkway Village public housing project deteriorate
to the point that the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development will
have no choice but to allow the city to tear it down. The Federal agency has
ultimate control over the project's fate.

The housing authority formally voted in November 1983 to tear down the 41-
year-old projet, maintaining that renovation would be too expensive and that the
land on which it is situated would be better used for income-generating
development.

Funds for Project's Renewal

However, critics of the city's plan observe that the housing authority had
earlier refused to spend more than $10 million earmarked by the Federal
Government to renew the project, and contend the authority had chose instead a
plan of willful neglect

The project lies along Buffalo Bayou and Allen Parkway in an attractive area
that developers, at the peak of Houston's economic boom, said should be ideal
for office and residential development.

Today, an internal technical report prepared for the housing authority was
introduced as evidence to suggest that changes in the ethnic makeup of the
project's residents were no accident.

The report said that the project was originally built exclusively for whites,
the largest of its kind in the South at the time, but that as racial barriers
were gradually lifted the project by 1976 was 66 percent black, 3 percent
Hispanic, 26 percent white and 5 percent Indochinese.

''However,'' the report continues, ''the period between 1976 and 1983 has seen
the project go from two-thirds black to more than one half Indochinese. It is
unlikely that this demographic change in tenant population was due to random
assignment from the waiting list.''

Instead, the report says, ''the 'steering' of Indochinese residents to Allen
Parkway Village appears to have been an attempt to isolate the project from the
Fourth Ward and the large black Houston community and to defuse the issue
(possible sale of the public housing project) as a political concern.''

Less 'Fallout' Seen

The report says later that ''a decision to demolish a project that houses
Vietnamese refugees would cause less political 'fallout' than the same decision
to tear down a project housing mostly black families.''

Mr. Phillips conceded that the technical report cited was a part of the housing
authority's files and was prepared under its auspices.

But ''it doesn't necessarily mean that I agree with it,'' said Mr. Phillips, who
has been the executive director since 1982.

Mr. Phillips, who is black, maintained that the Vietnamese the housing authority
was trying to evict ''are considered squatters who are there illegally.''

In some cases, Vietnamese tenants who originally occupied units at Allen Parkway
Village simply passed them on to other members of their families when they left,
leaving the new tenants without official certification.

Michol O'Connor, a lawyer for the Vietnamese, said that many of these unofficial
transfers of housing units had been sanctioned by a former employee of the
housing authority, a Vietnamese who was the only staff member able to speak the
language. She said in court that that employee had since been dismissed amid
allegations of bribery.

Mr. Phillips said that whether the Vietnamese tenants understood the situation
or not, the former employee ''was not acting for the housing authority, he was
acting for himself.''

However, Miss O'Connor read into the record a statement from the minutes of the
housing authority in which Mr. Phillips conceded the authority had some
responsibility for the Vietnamese being there.

Neighborhood organizations and other critics of the plan to tear down the
housing project maintain that the housing authority has inflated the projected
costs of renovation of the two- story garden apartment units in order to justify
their demolition.

Lawyers for the Vietnamese said that the housing authority had boarded up at
least 296 of the 905 units.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of refugees

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
UNCLE SAM'S CONTRAS

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


Nothing could have disclosed more clearly the sheer arrogance of Ronald Reagan's
policy toward the recognized Government of Nicaragua than his news conference
statement that its ''present structure'' would have to be removed unless
''they'd say uncle.''

Saying ''uncle'' is, after all, like ''throwing in the towel,'' a recognized
symbol of surrender. In Central America, moreover, such a remark from a U.S.
President must have carried a particularly contemptuous ring - and not just in
Managua. Throughout that region, ''Uncle Sam'' - owing to his long economic
domination and frequent military interventions - is by no means the loved and
admired figure he is in the United States.

Mr. Reagan's news conference remarks at least cleared away his shabby pretense
that he only wanted the Nicaraguan Government to stop shipping arms to
anti-Government guerrillas in El Salvador - an activity never proved, anyway.
And now his aides are assiduously pointing out that the Boland Amendment -
prohibiting expenditure of Federal funds to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government
- is no longer in force.

So if Congress now appropriates the $14 million with which Mr. Reagan wants to
resume aid to the so-called Nicaraguan Democratic Force - better known as
''contras'' - Congress in fact will be voting funds for the military overthrow
of the Sandinista Government in Managua. Senior contra leaders, in interviews
with James LeMoyne of The New York Times, have conceded what was obvious all
along - their objective is now and has been from the start to throw out the
Sandinistas and to take their places in power.

It's clear also that Mr. Reagan lied to Congress, as well as the public, in
obtaining the past appropriation of about $80 million to support the contras. A
senior member of the Senate Intelligence Committee - to which, if to anyone, the
truth should have been confided - told me in 1984 that the Administration had
assured the committee repeatedly that its only purpose was to interdict the
alleged flow of arms from Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas. Now, after the
bombing of Managua's airport, the mining of Nicaraguan harbors, the blowing up
of Nicaragua's main oil depots, and the growth of the contras to an army of
12,000 to 14,000 men, a State Department official tells Joel Brinkley of The
Times that arms interdiction never was the goal of aid to the contras.

That, he said, would have been ''a fool's errand.'' Indeed, and it may be
wondered if politically shrewd senators ever really believed such a transparent
falsehood.  Mr. Reagan's intent to aid the contras in overthrowing the
Sandinistas is not so intelligent, either. Contra foot soldiers are not, for the
most part, mercenaries; but their military leaders are indelibly stained by
former membership in the hated National Guard of the repressive Somoza regime,
and their political leadership was hand-picked - as most of their supplies have
been provided - by the C.I.A., Uncle Sam's not-so-hidden hand.  A
counterrevolutionary force backed by the C.I.A. and led by former National
Guardsmen is the worst possible bet to gain popular support in Nicaragua; these
are not Mao's fish swimming in the sea of the people. The very fact, moreover,
that Nicaragua is under military attack by a force directed and supplied by that
same Uncle Sam who has so often intervened in Central America - giving
Nicaraguans, the last time, the Somoza dynasty - is bound to strengthen support
for the Sandinista Government and improve Nicaraguan national unity in resisting
external attack.  Perhaps as a reflection of these Nicaraguan realities, Mr.
LeMoyne - visiting the contras' base camp on the Honduran-Nicaraguan border -
found that most of the troops were peasants from the northern part of the
country; few were either middle class or from the more populous south. And since
they began their war early in 1982, the contras have not been able to take and
hold any substantial Nicaraguan town or territory, or to demonstrate enough
support to make a provisional government seem plausible.  Thus, to resume
support for the contras would be to commit the United States to a failing,
probably doomed military force, not to a popular political movement; worse, to
the overthrow by force and terrorism of a Government recognized throughout the
world. And openly linking Ronald Reagan's prestige and credibility to that force
and that objective would make all the more likely the ultimate participation of
U.S. forces in what would be not so much another Vietnam as another
Afghanistan.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ADM. EDWIN J. ROLAND, 80, DIES; EX-COMMANDANT OF COAST GUARD

BYLINE: By THOMAS W. ENNIS

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 382 words


Adm. Edwin J. Roland, a former commandant of the United States Coast Guard, died
Saturday while on vacation in St. Petersburg, Fla. He was 80 years old and lived
in Old Lyme, Conn.

In 1966, Admiral Roland received the Distinguished Service Medal, the nation's
highest award for achievement and service in the armed forces. He was cited for
gains the Coast Guard made in management and as a humanitarian agency under his
leadership.

The medal was also given for the admiral's quick response during the Vietnam War
to the urgent need for small river and coastal craft to help check the flow of
supplies from North Vietnam to the Vietcong in 1965.

Admiral Roland, who was appointed Coast Guard commandant in 1962 by President
John F. Kennedy, held the post until his retirement in 1966. He had joined the
Coast Guard headquarters in Washington as assistant commandant with the rank of
vice admiral in February 1962.

Football Captain

Previously, the admiral had been commander of the Eastern Area and the Third
Coast Guard District, with headquarters in Manhattan, a position he attained in
1960. Before that, he was commander of the First Coast Guard District, with
headquarters in Boston.

Admiral Roland was a graduate of the Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.,
and was commissioned an ensign in 1929. He was commandant of cadets at the
academy in the early 1950's. His earliest assignments were as a gunnery officer
on Coast Guard destroyers.

He received the Navy Commendation Ribbon for his service as destroyer commander
in convoy escorts from the United States to Mediterranean ports during World War
II.

The admiral was captain of the 1928 football team at the Coast Guard Academy. He
was inducted into the Coast Guard Academy Athletic Hall of Fame in 1972, the
first nominee for that honor. He was also a quarterback on the 1931 Coast Guard
Bears team that won the President's Cup, which was presented by Mrs. Herbert
Hoover that year.

Admiral Roland is survived by his wife, the former Jane Dare Fitch; two sons,
Edwin J. Jr., of Chicago, and Capt. William F., of the Coast Guard in Honolulu,
four grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

A funeral service is to be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow at St. James Episcopal Church
in New London.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Adm. Edwin Roland

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'THE FANTOD,' A PLAY BY AMLIN GRAY

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


WATCHING ''The Fantod,'' Amlin Gray's laborious new play at the Perry Street
Theater, one might be tempted to conclude that a talented writer has been
stymied by an unyielding subject. ''The Fantod'' is an elaborate pastiche of
Victorian literature - from the epistolary novel to the Gothic melodrama - and
its message is predictable: Mr. Gray is out to expose the sexual neuroses, moral
hypocrisies and social inequities that festered just beneath the rectitudinous
veneer of 19th-century England. Given the number of times we've been down this
path, one wonders whether any playwright, however clever, could possibly make
the journey lively.


But, on reflection, it's hard to let Mr. Gray off the hook. This writer
previously proved, in ''How I Got That Story,'' that he could write a fresh
comedy about an overly familiar topic, the Vietnam War, well after others had
seemingly exhausted its theatrical possibilities. What's more, such recent plays
as Caryl Churchill's ''Cloud 9'' and Charles Ludlam's ''Mystery of Irma Vep''
have demonstrated the continuing potency of revisionist Victoriana on stage. The
real drawback of ''The Fantod,'' one finally realizes, is not its subject but
Mr. Gray's uncharacteristically pedantic treatment of it.

The play takes its title from an archaic word defined in the program as ''a
state of nerves'' or ''a physical state induced by drugs, illness or sexual
arousal, leading to an expansion of the consciousness.'' The setting, designed
with Sendak-like creepiness by Richard Hoover, is the foliage- laden solarium of
an English manor house in 1854. There we meet the members of the mourning
Marryat family, whose paterfamilias has just been killed in battle in the
Crimea. The Marryats and their neighbors are all suffering, in varying degrees,
from states of nerves. As Mr. Gray's plot has it, the characters soon drift into
those deeper fantods induced by drugs, illness and sexual arousal.

The fantods are provoked by a mysterious visitor, Sir Tristam Northmoor (Norman
Snow). A reptilian confidence man masquerading as an unctuous temperance
crusader, Sir Tristam is a quack chemist and mesmerist. While he claims that his
medical experiments are all designed to banish drink, his clandestine purpose is
to unleash corseted Victorian consciousnesses. Like a Merry Prankster of the
1960's, he uses his wiles and potions to liberate the Marryats from the grip of
sexual repression, muscular Christianity and strictly codified manners. He also
wouldn't mind having his way with the family's teen-age daughter, who has
sublimated her awakening erotic impulses into a bizarre spiritual communion with
a potted plant.

This not unpromising tale is eviscerated as Mr. Gray piles on all the Victorian
cultural detritus he can: ornate circumlocutions, recited letters and diary
entries, Dickensian coincidences and reunions, a parish Vicar's doggerel verse,
even an amateur theatricale with songs. There's far too much of everything -
from Norman L. Berman's incidental music to inessential secondary players - and
yet far too little thematic payoff. Seventy years after Lytton Strachey, Mr.
Gray's routine debunking of Victorian pieties hardly seems worth the enormous
expenditure of research and erudition.

Worse, both the playwright and the director, Stephen Katz, fail to reconcile the
work's conflicting tones. Sometimes the play is deadly serious, as if Mr. Gray
were refracting the Victorian world through a modern sensibility in the
recondite manner of John Fowles's ''French Lieutenant's Woman.'' But the gravity
is dispelled by the parodistic interludes, and the cast often can't decide when
to play for keeps and when to go for laughs. There are also some passages that
resist theatricalization altogether: When Mr. Gray sends up Victorian novels, as
opposed to Victorian drama, his writing seems designed to be read, not staged.


The only completely successful performance is Mr. Snow's. As Sir Tristam
camouflages his twisted schemes with Uriah Heepish manners and forensic
temperance oratory, the actor draws a wicked comic contrast between the
character's public pose of sepulchral propriety and private eruptions of
unhinged libido. Mr. Snow also presides over the play's one truly dramatic scene
- in which Sir Tristam at last mesmerizes the youngest of his hosts. But by then
it's Act II, and the audience at ''The Fantod'' has long since slipped
irrevocably into a numbing trance of its own.


Nervy Victoriana

THE FANTOD, by Amlin Gray; directed by Stephen Katz; music by Norman L. Berman;
set design, Richard Hoover; costume design, Andrew B. Marlay; lighting design,
John Gisondi; production stage manager, Joseph De Pauw; production manager,
Michael Moody. Presented by NY Theater Workshop, Jean Passanante, artistic
director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director, At Perry Street Theater, 31
Perry Street. Mrs. Hannah MarryatJeanne Cullen Rachel MarryatLorraine Morgan
Arthur LoscombeMark Moses Maj. Leonidas MarryatCharles Gregory Vicar DidbinBurke
Pearson Sir Tristam NorthmoorNorman Snow Miss Selina DarchMartha Miller Mr. John
ConnorCharles Gregory


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Is Said to Seek Better Ties With U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, March 19


Vietnam is proposing to normalize relations with the United States as a way of
eventually settling the Cambodia conflict, Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, said today.

Mr. Mochtar described the initiative as one of the ''new elements'' in a five-
point proposal he brought back with him Sunday from a trip to Hanoi.

The normalization process would begin, he said, with a Vietnamese response to
repeated United States requests for information on American soldiers listed as
missing in action in the Vietnam War.

A second ''new element'' in Vietnam's five-point proposal is apparently Hanoi's
willingness to drop the issue of foreign military bases in the region from
future peace talks on Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MICHIGAN U. DAILY, MUCKRAKER OF 1960'S, STRIVES FOR RELEVANCE

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich.


Twenty years ago, when talk of racism, war and politics dominated college
campuses, some students at the University of Michigan praised The Michigan Daily
and others picketed it. But six mornings a week throughout the school year
nearly everyone read it.

The Daily still appears every morning but Monday, its logo trumpeting ''95 Years
of Editorial Freedom.'' But on the quiescent Michigan campus of the 1980's it is
threatened with what is, for newspapers of any kind, the unkindest fate of all:
irrelevance.

More Than Coverage

When the archetypal 1960's survivors of the movie ''The Big Chill'' reminisced
about their student days, it was a yellowed, dog-eared clipping from The
Michigan Daily they unearthed. Along with student newspapers in other campus
towns, such as Madison, Wis., Berkeley, Calif., or Austin, Tex., The Daily
seemed not so much to cover its times as to embody them.

The Daily's reporters hitchhiked to all the principal stops of the antiwar
movement, from Grant Park in Chicago to the Washington Mall to Miami. They
forced a University Regent accused of conflict of interest to resign, exposed
covert financing by the Central Intelligence Agency of university research and
scrutinized the academic performance of Michigan's football players.

All along, the paper's irreverent and occasionally irresponsible articles would
outrage alumni and administrators, who were forever searching for ways to ''do
something about The Daily,'' as the former university president Robben W.
Fleming once said.

''The Daily symbolizes a dozen college newspapers from that era that were
influential on their campuses and in their states,'' said Prof. Melvin Mencher
of the graduate school of journalism at Columbia University, an authority on the
college press. ''It was known throughout the country for its investigative work,
its enterprise, its graduates.''

Not Its Former Self

''The campus press now is just a totally different entity,'' he said. ''It's not
even a pallid imitation of what it was.''

The Daily's problems are financial as well as spiritual. In its heyday, 11,000
copies rolled off the antiquated Goss letterpress at 420 Maynard Street six
nights a week. Now, on a campus with 34,000 students, the press run has
plummeted to around 3,700. Advertising revenue is also down dramatically. At one
time the only part of the paper that lost money was the nickel Coke machine;
this year The Daily could lose as much as $60,000. It has never had a subsidy
from the university and is surviving on surpluses from earlier, fatter years.

Move to Give Issues Away

The Daily's condition is so perilous that last month, in an effort to win back
readers and advertisers, its staff opted for the once-unthinkable: to give the
paper away. Should The Daily's supervisory board approve - the matter is now
under consideration - the paper will be available free at sites around the
campus rather than sold at 15 cents a copy.

''It would give me satisfaction to know that people are paying to read what I
write rather than picking up The Daily because it's sitting there, but it's the
only thing we could do,'' said Neil Chase, a junior from Washington who recently
became The Daily's editor. ''There's no pride in a paid circulation if nobody is
paying for it.''

Belatedly and a bit begrudgingly, The Daily is adjusting editorially to changing
campus mores. The newspaper recently published a series on career options, along
with an article on the usefulness of ''Cliff Notes,'' summaries of classic works
and other academic shortcuts. There is a new column on computers, along with
what the newspaper labeled the ''Yuppie Yellow Pages,'' which includes
advertisements for resume services, hairdressers, briefcases and law board cram
courses.

Newspaper Staff Has Shrunk

The size of The Daily's staff has shrunk along with its readership. At a time
when, as Abbie Hoffman recently told an Ann Arbor audience, campuses are
''hotbeds of social rest,'' undergraduates are apparently no longer so willing
to sacrifice their circadian rhythms, grade-point averages and gastrointestinal
tracts for what The Daily always offered in exchange: a bully pulpit and a
byline.

Mr. Chase, who puts in the 50 to 60 hours a week expected of Daily editors,
remarked with some amazement that even those who did join seemed to think that
scoring well on their midterm examinations was more important than reporting on
the odd demonstration or writing for the paper.

''Students don't talk about us as much on campus,'' he said. ''You don't see
copies of The Daily tucked under their arms as they walk to class.''

Daily's Plight Raises Concern

Word of The Daily's plight has prompted expressions of concern from its large
network of alumni. For them, The Daily was a place where they could interview
almost anyone, write almost anything, and use any four-letter word they wanted,
provided it was approved by an editor and channeled to the proper typesetter in
the print shop downstairs.

''After three years writing about Vietnam, Lyndon Johnson and Eugene McCarthy
for The Daily, I felt in all my innocence that I could take on any newspaper
writer in the country,'' said Walter Shapiro, an editorial page editor in the
late 1960's who now writes for Newsweek. When he accompanied Walter F. Mondale's
Presidential campaign to Ann Arbor last October, he recalled, ''There was an
icicle of sadness that I wasn't 20 years old again and able to go over to 420
Maynard Street to write it up for The Daily.''

Amid the cluttered Daily office, where manual typewriters, wooden benches and
bound volumes of back issues evoke the spirit of editors and controversies past,
not everyone is pleased with recent changes at the paper. One staff member wrote
about the Yuppie Yellow Pages: ''I don't care how broke we are, we shouldn't
cater to Business School slime.''

Mr. Chase said: ''I feel as if there are 95 editors looking over my shoulder,
but I don't think we're letting anyone down. We're broadening our appeal, not
selling out.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Neil Chase and Tom Miller

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
V.F.W. Ousts Post In Foreign Policy Dispute

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, March 19


The national office of the Veterans of Foreign Wars has revoked the charter of
its Santa Cruz post for publicly opposing the V.F.W.'s official position on
Central America.

In a statement Monday from the veterans' headquarters in Kansas City, Mo., the
national commander, Billy Ray Cameron, said that while he recognized the right
of individual members to speak out on issues, the post in Santa Cruz, 70 miles
south of here, ''must abide by the mandates of the national convention.'' In
August, the convention voted to support President Reagan's policies in Central
America.

Those policies were seen as ''escalating rather than resolving conflicts'' in a
resolution adopted by Santa Cruz Post 5888 in April 1984, according to Richard
Anderson, a Vietnam veteran who is the post commander.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
House Panel Approves Cambodia Rebel Funds

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 209 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


The House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asia voted today, for the first time,
to allocate $5 million in funds for the non-Communist Cambodian rebels who are
fighting against Vietnamese forces.

At the initiative of Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, the
money was approved for use by the two non-Communist rebel groups, one headed by
Son Sann, a former Prime Minister, and the other by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
former Cambodian head of state. None would be made available to the third rebel
group, the Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for the death of millions of
Cambodians during the period it ruled.

The funds could be used for military purchases, and this would be the first time
such money would be provided by the United States. The subcommittee action must
still be approved by the full committee and the full House and Senate. The
Administration, until now, has opposed giving military aid to the Cambodian
rebels.

In another subcommittee action, military aid to the Philippines for the 1986
fiscal year was drastically cut, to $25 million in grants. The Administration
had asked for $100 million, divided equally between grants and loans. The panel
raised economic aid from $95 million to $155 million.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Returns Remains Of 5 It Says Are M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 20


United States military officials flew to Hanoi and returned to the Philippines
today with what Vietnam identified as the remains of five Americans missing in
action since the Vietnam War.

It was the first such turnover of American remains in eight months and came a
month before Vietnam celebrates the 10th anniversary of the capture of Saigon.

Maj. Barry Glickman, spokesman at Clark Air Base north of Manila, said a C-130
transport plane flew to the Vietnamese capital of Hanoi early today to retrieve
the remains and returned to the United States base in the evening.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Cause and Defect of Orangemail The case of the morning sickness drug
Bendectin shows how the American legal system has twisted itself into a
contradiction on cases involving science and health. There are more and bigger
such cases ahead and unless something is done, there will be more contortions.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 658 words


A Federal jury in Cincinnati decided last week that Bendectin is not the cause
of birth defects. That accords with the best available scientific evidence. But
consider how narrowly, and at what cost, the legal system cranked out the same
verdict.

From more than 20 epidemiological studies, the Food and Drug Administration
believes Bendectin is safe. There's no evidence that it increases the natural
rate of birth defects. But personal injury lawyers have another calculus to work
with: a jury's heart will go out to individual suffering, particularly a
deformed child and its parents.

The first Bendectin case brought against the drug's maker, Merrell-Dow,
perfectly reflected the jurors' torment. They ruled that the child's injuries
were not caused by the drug, but awarded the parents $20,000 for medical
expenses anyway. The company won on retrial. In the second case, a jury awarded
$750,000 but was reversed by the judge.

Despite these results, each trial stimulated a flood of new claims. The company
offered to set up a $120 million fund to pay all present and future claimants.
To settle after or in anticipation of losses is reasonable. But the costs of
justice have become absurdly excessive when defendants feel compelled to settle
after they have won.

Yet some of the plaintiffs' lawyers wanted even more than $120 million. They got
the settlement overturned and went back to court. Now District Judge Carl Rubin
in Cincinnati took the unusual step of separating the issues. First, the jury
was to decide if Bendectin was a cause of birth defects, and only if so, what
the liability and damages should be. He also ruled that the damaged children be
kept out of the jury's sight. The jury concluded Bendectin was not a cause of
birth defects.

Personal injury lawyers work for a contingency fee, taking a sizable share of
any damages but getting nothing if the case is lost. That's the only way many
plaintiffs can get their cases brought. But it encourages lawyers to make
multiple claims: extra cases need little extra preparation, yet each promises
the same high premium fee as the first.

Both with Bendectin and Agent Orange, the herbicide used in Vietnam, the
available scientific evidence speaks formidably against a causative link to
injuries. Still in both cases hundreds of attorneys were prepared to sue,
presumably believing that in the jurors' minds a parade of pitiful injuries
would outweigh the abstract evidence of epidemiology.

The costs of fighting such a mass of suits drives the defendant toward
settlement. The makers of Agent Orange, or their insurers, paid $180 million
rather than face interminable litigation - orangemailed by the threat of the
law's costs and of juries' preference for compassion over dispassion.
Merrell-Dow would have paid $120 million in orangemail had not the opposing
lawyers tried to shake it down still harder.



Even in cases where a substance clearly causes injury, like asbestos, lawyers
end up with a disproportionate share of the damages. Who ultimately bears this
cost? Consumers do, since manufacturers, faced with higher liability insurance,
mark up their products or, as in the case of certain vaccines, simply cease
production.

Neither plaintiffs nor defendants have cause for happiness with such a system.
Its defects are significant because other cases waiting in the wings, involving
toxic dumps and industrial chemicals, are likely to raise similar problems.

Powerful remedies are open to the judges who oversee such cases. Sharply
reducing fees, as Judge Weinstein did with Agent Orange, restores attorneys'
risk to the level that justifies their high contingency fees. Making causation
and damages separate issues, as Judge Rubin did with Bendectin, helps juries
separate science from sentiment. By following these creative examples, judges
can save the legal system from the contortions in which tort lawyers have tied
it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ADMINISTRATION SEEKS A STRONGER LOCK ON 'CLASSIFIED' FILES

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Presidents have complained for decades about Government secrets showing up in
the morning paper or on the evening news.

But Ronald Reagan and other Administration officials have sought with special
vigor to control the flow of information. Now there is a move afoot to plug
''leaks'' by sending the leakers to prison.

The White House confirmed last week that legislation making it a crime for
Government employees to disclose ''any classified information'' without
authorization had been proposed by the Central Intelligence Agency and was being
considered within the Administration.

The week before, the Justice Department, for the first time, won a ruling from a
Federal judge in Baltimore that such disclosures can already be prosecuted under
existing criminal law.

These and previous Administration leak-plugging initiatives - including efforts
to impose lifelong censorship upon officials with access to secrets and expand
use of lie-detector tests to track down leakers - have had as their principal
targets officials who make disclosures, not reporters who publish them.

But the Administration has also taken aim at journalists, not with legal
sanctions but by denouncing them and restricting their access to Government
information.

Asked at his press conference last week to comment on statements by critics
raising doubts about the patriotism of reporters, President Reagan suggested the
media were biased, but said ''I'll leave that argument to others.''

The ''others'' include George A. Keyworth 2d, Mr. Reagan's science adviser. He
said in February that ''the press is trying to tear down America'' and ''seems
to be drawn from a relatively narrow fringe element on the far left of our
society.''

Secretary of State George P. Shultz said in 1983, ''it seems as though the
reporters are always against us and so they're always seeking to report
something that's going to screw things up.''

And Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger suggested in December that The
Washington Post had given ''aid and comfort to the enemy'' by reporting
classified details about a planned space shuttle mission. (The Post responded
that most of the information was already in the public record.)

The Administration's restrictions on access to information include a
Presidential order giving officials greater leeway to classify documents secret,
strict controls on press access to Grenada during the October 1983 invasion; a
new practice, in the Pentagon and some other agencies, of requiring top-level
approval before senior officials can give interviews, and efforts to narrow the
Freedom of Information Act.

National Interests Disputed

''The Reagan Administration's policies are causing the most significant media
access restrictions on Government information since the end of voluntary
censorship in World War II,'' says Jack Landau, executive director of the
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press.

''What they really are saying,'' Mr. Landau adds, ''is that they own the
information'' and that neither the press nor the public has a right to know or
publish what the Government decides should be secret.

Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said last week that he hoped ''journalistic
ethics would prevent people who have obtained what is in effect stolen property,
stolen information, from utilizing it in a way that would compromise or hurt the
national interest.''

Part of the logic underlying this view is that military secrets are just as
accessible to such foreign adversaries as the Soviet Union when they are
published as when they are ferreted out by foreign spies.

Most journalists disavow publishing things that would betray vital secrets. Many
Administration complaints involve publication of ''secrets'' more likely to stir
political controversy than to give foreign adversaries new information. Earlier
this month, for example, Mr. Shultz said that an article in The New York Times
about American contingency plans for deploying nuclear depth charges in allied
countries had ''done us a considerable amount of damage.''

He acknowledged the plans had previously been published abroad. The ''damage''
was apparently political fallout in the allied countries.

Justice Department lawyers say that a reporter who knowingly publishes an
officially classified national secret is guilty of violating broadly worded
espionage laws that date back to 1917. Civil libertarians and journalists
dispute this, and the department has never put its theory to the test against a
journalist.

But the department is trying to jail Samuel Loring Morison, a naval intelligence
analyst, for giving a British military magazine classified satellite
intelligence photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier under construction. He is
charged with espionage and the theft of Government property.

The only similar case on record was the Nixon Administration's prosecution of
Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo for giving the Pentagon Papers, a classified
study of the Vietnam War, to The New York Times and other newspapers. That case
was dismissed on account of governmental misconduct.

Earlier this month, Federal District Judge Joseph H. Young of Baltimore upheld
the Government's position that Mr. Morison can be convicted if the Government
can prove he deliberately sent secret documents to the magazine, even if he had
no intent to harm national security.

If adopted by appellate courts, legal scholars say, Judge Young's pretrial
ruling in effect means that the United States has had a broad official secrets
act on the books for more than 60 years.

The C.I.A. is not so sure Judge Young's ruling will stand. That is why it is
proposing a new secrecy law, which would carry a maximum penalty of five years
in prison and a $25,000 fine, for leaks of classified information by Federal
officials and others, apparently including members of Congress, who have
''authorized access'' to the information.

Mr. Reagan has not yet decided whether to send the proposal to Congress, where
it would encounter opposition from members concerned that it might constrict
informed debate constricting informed debate about national security policies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Wendy Smith WALK ME TO THE DISTANCE.;
By Percival Everett. (Ticknor & Fields, $14.95.)

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


When David Larson returns from Vietnam, he is alone. His parents have died in a
car crash; his sister and her hippie husband want nothing to do with a former
soldier. Aimlessly driving west from his native Georgia, he stops in a small
Wyoming town simply because his car breaks down there. The beauty of the
landscape and tough friendliness of the people attract him, so he gets a job and
stays on as a boarder with Sixbury, an elderly widow with a retarded son to
support. David tentatively begins to put down roots in the town, which seems to
him a refuge from the confusion of post-Vietnam America, but modern life's
complications manifest themselves even in rural Wyoming. His relationships with
the various women who enter his life are tense and problematic; a 7-year-old
Vietnamese girl is abandoned in the rest station where he works; he is caught up
in an act of old-fashioned frontier justice that has contemporary implications
and consequences. The novel ends on a note of chastened hope. Although tragedy
and sorrow have touched those close to him, it seems that David has at least
found a home. Unfortunately, the reader may well have wearied of David's
problems long before he resolves them. The comic inventiveness praised by
critics in Mr. Everett's first novel, ''Suder,'' is virtually absent here,
replaced by a terseness that verges on blankness. Presumably intended to reflect
the spirit of the West, the book's laconic prose fails to create any resonance
of theme or character. There are a few nicely observed scenes of alienation and
dislocation, but in general ''Walk Me to the Distance'' doesn't travel very far
beneath the surface.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words


FEMININITY, by Susan Brownmiller. (Fawcett Columbine, $7.95.) Femininity, Susan
Brownmiller says, ''in essence, is a romantic sentiment, a nostalgic tradition
of imposed limitations.'' Our reviewer, Carol Gilligan, commented last year that
femininity ''defines a way of looking and a strategy for containment. The
critical questions are of perspective, power and judgment. By attaching these
questions to the details of femininity and extending her description through an
extraordinary range of historical example and literary illustration, Miss
Brownmiller has turned a treacherous subject into a lively and compelling
book.''

THE MARCH OF FOLLY: From Troy to Vietnam, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Ballantine,
$9.95.) Barbara W. Tuchman's concern in this analysis is governments' ''pursuit
of policy contrary to self-interest'' - that is, she exposes how often and how
fatally the psychology of the governing class is flawed. Last year our reviewer,
John Keegan, said that in focusing on three events - the Protestant Reformation,
the American Revolution and the Vietnam War - Mrs. Tuchman identifies the futile
policy ''with precision, dissects it with delicacy and dismisses it with
contempt.'' Ballantine has also reissued

THE ZIMMERMAN TELEGRAM ($7.95), her 1958 account of a telegram sent in 1917 by
the German Minister of Foreign Affairs. The message, which altered the course of
history, was designed to keep the United States out of World War I. Samuel Flagg
Bemis observed here that Mrs. Tuchman ''retells with great literary and dramatic
talent the story of how the Zimmerman telegram was conceived, prepared,
intercepted, deciphered and published.''

Z, by Vassilis Vassilikos. Translated by Marilyn Calmann. (Pantheon, $3.95.) A
Greek political assassination in 1963 was transformed by Vassilis Vassilikos
into a 1968 novel on state-sponsored terrorism and by Costa- Gavras into a 1969
film that won an Academy Award. Albert J. Zuckerman wrote here that Mr.
Vassilikos ''weaves fact with poetic fantasy, produces a texture peopled with
dozens of characters, and knots them tightly one to the next. All ultimately
derive meaning from the ways they eventually link up with and embellish a
blood-red central medallion, the murder.'' He called the author's gifts
''dazzling.''

THE UGLY AMERICAN, by William J. Lederer and Eugene Burdick. (Fawcett Crest,
$3.50.) This 1958 novel was also based on true events and made into a movie.
Robert Trumbull wrote here that the ''two experts on Southeast Asia spell out in
illustrative anecdote why the free world is losing ground in that part of the
world to the Communists - often through the fault, the book says, of the
Americans sent there to sell democracy. . . . This experienced pair (has)
produced a book that is not only important but consistently entertaining.''

NINETEENTH-CENTURY AMERICAN PLAYS, edited by Myron Matlaw. (Applause, $8.95.)
This collection, first published in 1967, contains seven historically
significant plays. ''The Black Crook: An Original Magical and Spectacular
Drama,'' written by Charles M. Barras in 1866, was America's first musical
comedy. James Herne's 1890 play, ''Margaret Fleming,'' dealt with adultery and
was the country's first problem play. ''The Octoroon,'' written by Dion
Boucicault in 1859, was a successful melodrama and one of the few contemporary
plays about slavery. Mr. Matlaw's introduction and prefaces have been called
sound and stimulating.

FREUD AND HIS FOLLOWERS, by Paul Roazen. (New York University, $15.) Commenting
on this 1975 study, Nathan G. Hale Jr. said here that Paul Roazen ''intends a
revision of Ernest Jones's often worshipful biography (of Freud), restoring, as
it were, the blemishes to the official memorial sculpture. The issues Roazen
raises are of major importance, notably the interaction between personality and
theory, which he argues is central to the history of psychoanalysis.''

AN UNEXPECTED VISTA: A Physicist's View of Na

ture, by James S. Trefil. (Collier/Macmillan, $7.95.) Written for the general
reader interested in the physical sciences, James S. Trefil's 1983 book is about
where physicists' imaginations have taken them. Heinz R. Pagels remarked here
that ''beginning with the world of everyday experience - rainbows, oil slicks,
blue sky, light bulbs and refrigerators - Mr. Trefil shows how these
commonplaces provide deep clues about the material order of reality.'' He termed
the book ''fine.''

THE SUNDAY HANGMAN and

SNAKE, by James McClure. (Pantheon, $2.95 each.) These are two of James
McClure's mysteries featuring his team of South African investigators, the white
Lieut. Tromp Kramer and the black Sgt. Mickey Zondi. In ''The Sunday Hangman,''
a 1978 work on frontier justice, the two seek the person acting on his own to
catch criminals and hang them. Our reviewer, Newgate Callendar, said, ''McClure
is as skillful as ever in creating character and backgrounds.'' In ''Snake,''
published in 1976, a woman with a snake act is killed, along with her python.
Mr. Callendar remarked that this was ''a good book, and quite different from the
average procedural.''

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Ballantine, $3.95.) The daughter of the famed
ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, Candice Bergen began life as a Hollywood child
ensconced in opulent vulgarity. Gina Mallet, in her comments on the actress's
autobiography, wrote here last year that it is ''engaging, intelligent and
wittily self- deprecating. . . . Miss Bergen is unflinching in her revelations
about herself.''

FISH, by Monroe Engel. (University of Chicago, $6.95.) The principal characters
in this 1981 novel are a divorced woman, Gretta, and a divorced man, Fish. The
love of Fish (who narrates) for Gretta consists of a kind of anxiety that lifts
his life out of its prosaicness - he is attracted to her as some people are to
puzzles. One reviewer speculated that the story may be Monroe Engel's way of
saying that love now is as difficult to understand as modern literature - that
it is, in fact, modern literature. The book's writing and structure were
praised.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Not the Third Reich of the New World

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 337 words


To the Editor:


After playing around with his little ''Anschluss Football'' (Op-Ed, March 11),
Frederic Morton kicks America. He says that he doesn't ''see the United States
as simply, and simplistically, the New World's Third Reich,'' but he suggests
precisely this.

Here are a few points Mr. Morton might think about: Millions of people would
flock to this country, as he has and as I have, from countries where they are
oppressed, if they could; tens of thousands in Vietnam, where the United States
policy he condemns failed, have risked their lives to escape, and Nicaragua,
that tiny country in Central America that evokes Mr. Morton's compassion,
becomes more dictatorial and militaristic from month to month. There are
hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, living under dictatorial rule today who
treasure their little American football, or flag, or other U.S. symbols in
secrecy and hope.

Would not Mr. Morton's father have applauded Western intervention in Nazi
Germany early on? Of course, he would. All of us who managed to escape from Nazi
rule rooted for the West to stop, and if possible overthrow the Nazis. What
makes Mr. Morton think that today's victims of dictatorships feel differently? I
speak of the Poles, Czechs, Vietnamese, Cambodians, Cubans (as demonstrated by
hundreds of thousands who, like Mr. Morton and myself, managed to get out) and,
yes, increasingly, Nicaraguans, as represented by Arturo Cruz, Eden Pastora and
the many other current equivalents of the anti-Nazis of our time.

That is not to say that the United States should attempt to intervene in every
case where a dictatorship rules. It does mean that Mr. Morton's parallel lacks
not only intellectual substance, but also good taste: in the United States he
could become a successful author, be free to shape his life as he saw fit, watch
millions of refugees from post-Hitler dictatorships come to this country as he
did - and then write his Op-Ed piece.

ROBERT B. GOLDMANN New York, March 11, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR A RENEWED U.S. ROLE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

BYLINE: By Robert A. Manning ;
Robert A. Manning writes on international affairs for the Far East Economic
Review and other publications.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Vietnam's recent brutal but effective military campaign against the Cambodian
rebels fighting along the border between Thailand and Cambodia may have opened a
window of opportunity for the United States and the Asean countries - a chance
to settle the tragic conflict in Indochina and reduce Soviet influence there.

The Vietnamese offensive - some 20 rebel camps were destroyed in February and
March - was part of a two-track strategy: to eliminate any serious resistance to
the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, and then bargain from a position of
strength to settle the conflict there on terms favorable to Hanoi.

Vietnam has in effect created a new set of political facts in Cambodia. At the
same time, however, its own dire economic straits are compelling it to seek an
opening to the West.

How can the West be sure that Hanoi wants to negotiate? Consider what happened
in the last few months. Even as Vietnamese troops were destroying the Cambodian
rebel bases - those belonging to the non- Communist guerrillas and the Khmer
Rouge - and driving some 300,000 refugees across the border into Thailand, Hanoi
agreed to cooperate with Washington on recovering Americans still missing in
action in Vietnam.

The supreme irony is that Vietnam is now advocating more American involvement in
Southeast Asia. The Vietnamese clearly hope to curb Chinese influence. They also
seem to see that Soviet economic aid has not been sufficient to sustain their
country, and they fear the consequences of a China-Soviet rapprochment.

What exactly has Vietnam gained from the recent offensive? First, the Vietnam
-backed Government in Phnom Penh no longer faces any significant resistance
inside Cambodia. Second, much to the chagrin of the Asean states, Hanoi has
called China's bluff: although it is the main backer of the Khmer Rouge, Peking
has not launched any significant counter-offensive against Vietnam. Third, the
refugees driven across the border put new pressure on Thailand to reach some
kind of settlement. All three gains would be useful to Hanoi in negotiations
over Cambodia.

What would be the likely outcome

of such talks? The key question is whether Vietnam could accept a
''Finlandized'' Cambodia, over which it had less than complete control. The new
Cambodian government would have to be the product of internationally supervised
elections and would likely be headed - nominally at least - by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, former head of state and leader of one of the non-Communist rebel
factions. It would, however, also have to include some non-Communist rebels now
fighting under Son Sann, the former Prime Minister, and even some Khmer Rouge,
although not their infamous and barbaric leaders.  There has already been a
flurry of diplomatic activity in the region. Senior American, Soviet, Chinese
and Australian officials have been in an out of Thailand and Vietnam. Last
month, Prince Sihanouk appeared in Canberra, urging international talks.  There
is as yet little to suggest that Vietnam is willing to accept less than total
domination of Indochina. But Hanoi's desire for Western aid and investment gives
the United States significant leverage. So far, the Reagan Administration has
deferred to China and the Asean countries on all questions involving the
Cambodian conflict. A bold American initiative could, however, do much to
encourage Vietnamese flexibility.  What does Washington stand to gain? The
eventual normalization of relations linked to a phasing down of the Soviet
military presence at Cam Ranh Bay.  For their part, many in the Asean countries
would like to see Hanoi weaned from the Soviet bloc: Vietnam is after all the
only likely counterweight to Chinese influence in Southeast Asia. This would be
a serious blow to Moscow and could only enhance American security interests in
Asia. A settlment would also eliminate the possibility that the worst of the
Khmer Rouge would eventually shoot their way back into power in Cambodia.
Washington would have nothing to lose from a diplomatic initiative. It would at
the very least score points with our Asean allies and call Vietnam's diplomatic
bluff.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ASSERTS SANDINISTAS USE 'STALIN'S TACTIC'

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


President Reagan accused the Nicaraguan Government today of using ''Stalin's
tactic'' in relocating thousands of citizens who he said ''do not support their
tyrannical regime.''

Mr. Reagan was referring to recent reports that the Government had been moving
residents out of their homes in the north of Nicaragua, where fighting has been
under way between Government troops and United States-backed rebels. The object,
according to Sandinista officials and Western diplomats in Managua quoted in the
reports, is to deny the rebels material support and intelligence from
sympathizers, and to allow the creation of ''free-fire zones'' where the army
can operate without fear of harming civilians.

The President, speaking here before a group of about 100 merchants, businessmen
and others from Central American countries, also charged that the Sandinista
Government had attempted to ''dwarf and bully'' its neighbors.

In a speech marked by tough language, the President further asserted that the
Sandinistas had conspired to bring Communist revolution to all of Central
America and had been ''eager puppets for the Soviets and the Cubans.'' In
addition, the President said, the Sandinistas had ''harbored'' members of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and other organizations that he described as
terrorist.

'Stalin's Tactic' of Relocation

Mr. Reagan, discussing the reports of forced relocations, said the Sandinistas
were employing a tactic that was common in Communist countries and not fully
recognized in the United States by people who, he said, ''find it hard to look
reality in the eye.''

''Just last week the Sandinistas started the forced movement of thousands of
people from Jinotega and Murra in order to create 'free-fire zones,' '' Mr.
Reagan said. ''And they're using Stalin's tactic of gulag relocation for those
who do not support their tyrannical regime.''

''How many times have we seen this pattern of forced relocation repeated - in
the Ukraine, in Vietnam, in Cambodia, Afghanistan, Angola, Ethiopia, Cuba and
elsewhere?'' he added. ''And yet, because we are such a trusting people, anxious
to believe others and believe that they share our hopes and our dreams, some
still find it hard to look reality in the eye, or to rouse themselves even when
our most vital interests are threatened.''

In response, Francisco Campbell, the minister-counselor at the Nicaraguan
Embassy here, said that the refugees in Nicaragua had been ''created by the
terrorists' practices unleashed against the Nicaraguan people following
instructions given to the contras by the C.I.A..'' Contras is the name by which
the rebels are usually known.

He said the practices had become known last year when a Central Intelligence
Agency instructional manual was publicized. The manual advised the rebels on
guerrilla warfare techniques.

'Policy of Aggression'

''In order to alleviate this problem,'' Mr. Campbell said, ''the U.S.
Administration would do well to set aside its policy of aggression and
participate seriously and honestly in the Contadora peace process that seeks to
bring peace to Central America.'' He was referring to the efforts of four
countries known as the Contadora group - Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and Panama
- to bring about a negotiated settlement of regional disputes.

Mr. Reagan said the refugee situation was an example of the Soviet Union's plan
for the region, which he asserted was designed to ''crush self- determination''
and democracy. In the last five years, he said, the Russians had provided more
in military assistance to Cuba and Nicaragua than the United States has provided
to all of Latin America.

''It is a plan to turn Central America into a Soviet beachhead of aggression
that could spread terror and instability north and south, disrupt our vital sea
lanes, cripple our ability to carry out our commitments to our European allies
and send tens of millions of refugees streaming in a human tidal wave across the
border,'' he said.

At the same time, Mr. Reagan asserted that many Nicaraguans were fleeing to
neighboring countries to ''escape Sandinista tyranny.'' That tyranny, the
President said, included an attempt to crush personal freedoms, attack the
church, wipe out the Miskito Indians, summarily execute suspected dissidents and
drive leading democrats into exile.

''And they force young boys to defend the revolution while Soviet bloc advisers
sit in Managua living off the people,'' he said.

Mr. Reagan's also traced United States policy toward Nicaragua from the time the
Sandinistas came to power in 1979. At that point, he asserted, Washington had
been supportive, providing Nicaragua with $119 million in aid over the next two
years, more than any other developed country.

'Eager Puppets'

''How did they respond to America's outstretched hand of friendship, trust and
generosity?'' he asked ''Well, the Sandinistas became, as they always planned,
eager puppets of the Soviets and Cubans.

''They created their own Karl Marx postage stamps. They sang an anthem that
called the United States the enemy of mankind. They brought in East Germans to
organize their state security. They became a rubber stamp for the Communist bloc
in the U.N., voting against democracies on virtually every crucial issue, from
refusing to condemn Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia to not accepting Israel's
credentials.''

''While the United States was offering friendship and providing unprecedented
sums of aid, the Sandinistas were building up an army that dwarfed and bullied
their neigbors,'' he said, adding later that they were ''already conspiring to
bring Communist revolution to all of Central America.''

Mr. Reagan singled out Nicaragua's Interior Minister, Tomas Borge, as having
received ''training from the Soviets, Cubans and the P.L.O.'' He noted that Mr.
Borge had asserted later that one could not be a true revolutionary in Latin
America without being Marxist-Leninist.

At the start of the speech Mr. Reagan was told by a member of the audience of
businessmen and others that ''we love you.'' Later, he was presented a plaque by
two men, identifed as Carlos Garcia and Alberto Suhr, who he said had been
persecuted by the Sandinistas.

Mr. Reagan, who is seeking Congressional approval of $14 million for the
Nicaraguan rebels, said that they were ''true revolutionaries'' and that with
United States help democracy could be restored in Nicaragua.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ALONE AT THE WALL

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 256 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


Morning was still new to Washington, and the muted violet of dusk still hung in
the air. It was quiet and empty downtown, and there she stood, alone at the
massive granite wall, with thousands of names and her one painful memory.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial was erected more than two years ago, bearing
58,022 names of the dead or missing engraved in polished stone, and still few
hours seem to pass when someone is not standing beside it. In the morning, it
was a woman, a blue raincoat wrapped around her shoulders and a small book
tucked under her arm. Was it a Bible? A diary? An album?

She reached out and pressed her fingers against the engravings, for always at
this memorial there is the compulsion to touch, to feel. Day after day, hundreds
of people walk by, and always, the hands graze over the letters, searching for
names and, often it seems, hoping for answers.

Rain fell softly, dropping on the neat bunches of carnations and roses that had
been placed at the base of the monument over the weekend. Still, she stood,
undisturbed by the city that was slowly waking up around her.

Buses began to roll. Passing cars became more frequent. Joggers trudged around
the mall behind her. Two runners stopped a moment at the side of the reflecting
pool and looked at the woman. Then, as if feeling like intruders, they turned
away and slowly continued their run.

It is difficult for a stranger to walk away from the wall, the bond of sadness,
confusion and respect is so strong. How then do the mothers leave?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PERHAPS THE PENTAGON'S ENEMY NO. 1

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


One of the paradoxes of capital politics is that an overpriced Government
coffeepot is just as likely to stir controversy and catch the public's eye as is
the MX missile, the Hydra-like issue that endured yet another vote today in its
endless Congressional tests.

As sure as there will be more votes on the seven-story-high intercontinental
rocket, opponents of soaring military budgets and waste are searching for
something as notorious as last year's $7,622 10-cup airplane coffeemaker at the
Pentagon, or another $9,609 Air Force wrench or $436 Navy hammer, for that
matter. For such mundane subjects of scandal have proved to be graphic measures
of what can happen to taxpayers' money in the name of national security.

Dina Rasor is one such citizen-ferret. As the head of an unusual private
organization, the Project on Military Procurement, she researches and publicizes
military budget abuses from a cottage-like office more suitable to potting
geraniums.

Gritty Information

But this week she had nothing so spectacular as a $170.98 flashlight or a
$13,905 crew chief's chair to deal with. Even if she had some such sensation,
Miss Rasor probably would not have timed it for the MX debate, since she tries
to avoid being identified with factions in a policy dispute.

Her research focuses on the kind of gritty information about waste that can
break through the Government's public relations and awaken taxpayers. Most
notorious was her disclosure last year with Representative Barbara Boxer,
Democrat of California, of that coffeemaker aboard the C-5A cargo plane that, in
the view of critics, set new standards for self- parody at the Pentagon. More
substantial have been disclosures of critical problems with major weapons such
as the M-1 Abrams battle tank; more embarrassing was a private computer printout
mapping the lobbying wiles of a military contractor.

In a city where information is the single most valued commodity, Miss Rasor is,
in effect, a sly commodity broker, serving as a discreet conduit of information
to the public from disgruntled and anxious workers in the Pentagon who use her
to keep their anonymity and ease their consciences. Her information brokerage is
growing, with three others assisting her lately in a task that she did alone
four years ago in ''fencing'' sensitive data to trusted journalists.

'The Waste Is Still There'

The project, financed by $200,000 a year in foundation grants, includes Paul
Hoven, a one-time Vietnam helicopter pilot, and his former partner in military
consulting, Joseph R. Burniece, as well as Donna Martin, a former television
journalist. They try to fathom the Dante-esque rings of the Pentagon where tens
of thousands of people work so secretly and where the public relations ministry
is geared to now claiming credit for uncovering some of the scandals that others
say Miss Rasor first helped to publicize.

''The waste is still there,'' Miss Rasor, 28 years old, said with the confidence
of a detective who knows how to stake out the capital's sluice-ways. ''They're
just becoming more clever now in covering their tracks.''

Miss Rasor talks of her ''underground'' in the city - a carefully protected
group of ''100 or more'' informants who find sanctuary in the very blandness of
the Pentagon legions. They confide in a score or so retired military workers who
then transfer documentation to Miss Rasor's office. While ''whistle blowers''
occasionally go public in Washington, she advises them that it is often less
agonizing and more valuable to remain covert. ''No press release is worth
somebody's career,'' she said.

The project obtains more than enough raw information about mundane waste without
having to deal in classified secrets. ''If we did,'' Miss Rasor said, ''the
Pentagon would try to use that to discredit us inside the building. They can't,
and it's worked pretty well for us.''

In reaching within an Administration that has approched apoplexy at times over
unauthorized disclosures, with even the polygraphing of the President's highest
advisers once considered as a serious antidote, Miss Rasor has tales of great
satisfaction to tell. Some of her sources, she says, quietly attend hurried
Pentagon strategy sessions designed to counter her project's latest disclosure.

'A Lot of Guts'

''They'll call me and say, 'Here's what they're going to say and here's the
documents to refute it,' '' she said. ''A guy who does that has a lot of guts.
Part of it is just patriotism. With 15 years on the job, they wouldn't risk the
grief unless they cared about defense. There's a lot of guys just sitting there
not wanting to go outside the system.''

The most startling effect of Miss Rasor's work may be the simple intimation of
how much more remains to be uncovered. Since her start as a lone researcher with
a skeptical taxpayers' group, she remains essentially a crafty ant working a
mountain. She doubts the Government could ever marshal strength to investigate
itself with the zeal of outsiders.

''Right now they kill the messengers,'' she said. ''The money is the corrupting
influence. You're judged in the bureaucracy by the size of your budget and
whether you can win a political battle, not whether the things you're buying
with that budget can actually defeat an enemy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dina Rasor

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Repair Pledged for Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 40 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


The chairman of the volunteer group that built the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
said today that his organization would do whatever was necessary to fix hairline
cracks that have developed in a few of its 140 polished granite panels.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, March 15


The danger was clear and present. No clouded circumstances, no uncertainty about
motive or intent. The man on the other side of the counter was holding a
long-barreled .22-caliber revolver and the muzzle was pointed between Bill
McGilton's eyes.

The demand was unequivocal as well: ''This is a holdup.'' Carmen McGilton,
Bill's wife, was sitting on a stool at the end of the counter 10 feet away. She
saw the gun. She heard the words. She came out shooting:

''I said to myself, 'Not this time.' That was my thought, 'Not this time.' ''

They opened their small grocery a year ago. It was Carmen's store really. She
was the one who had saved for years to buy the goods to stock the store.
Carmen's Grocery, they called it, a cramped place, with cheap pine shelves, at
Putnam and Liberty Streets in the Hill section of the city - an old, sagging
neighborhood not far from the tracks.



The first robbery took place on Nov.  3, 1984. Two men with guns took more than
$1,000. The crime left the McGiltons reeling. Bills went unpaid. Their stock was
depleted. It took them two months to come back. Then on Thursday, Jan.  31, just
after noon, the man with the long-barreled revolver and two of his companions
entered the store.

Carmen had in her pocket a .25-caliber, 6-shot, semiautomatic pistol. She
wounded one robber in the arm and another in the back of the shoulder. She
sprayed four more shots at them as they fled. One bullet lodged in the front
door. Another smashed the glass in the soda case.

The other day, Mrs. McGilton, holding her index finger extended, with her hand
in the shape of a pistol, re- enacted the incident. She pointed to the bullet
hole in the door and apologized for her marksmanship.

''I really,'' she said, ''was trying to shoot them in the head.'' Two suspects
were arrested when they went to hospitals for treatment. The third later
surrendered to the authorities.



The shooting in New Haven, at first, seemed to mirror an incident in New York
City. Victims striking back, the law-abiding turning the tools of violence on
the lawless - echoes of a debate set off by Bernhard H. Goetz.

But unlike the subway shooting in Manhattan, in which Mr. Goetz shot four young
men after one of them asked him for money, this case is not muddied. The police
ruled it a clear matter of self-defense. Deadly force, they said, was used to
thwart deadly force.

Still, clear-cut as it is, the incident raises some troubling questions, some
''what ifs,'' as Maj. Walter P. Connor of the New Haven police calls them. What
if some of Carmen's errant shots had cut down someone on the street? What if
there had been customers in the store? What if she had shot and killed her
husband, who, before he dropped to the floor, was in her line of fire?

And there are times, said Police Chief William F. Farrell, when self- defense
invites self-destruction. ''We had an incident,'' he said, ''where a store owner
kept a gun in a drawer. Two perpetrators came in with shotguns. His wife reached
in the drawer for their gun and the perps killed the husband. That's why I get
concerned about making people heroes who shoot someone.''



The police confiscated the McGiltons' weapons for evidence, but the couple had
more and have rearmed themselves.

The other day, they carried their weapons tucked under their sweaters. Bill, who
is 45 years old, was standing behind the counter near the jars of penny candy.
Carmen, 42, was on her stool by the white-enamel counter scale. A neighbor, a
red-haired woman, sat on the dusty windowsill, reading a paper.

''I used to practice with a BB gun,'' Carmen said. ''I really don't like guns,
but you have no choice. It's either you or them.''

''It's a good thing I wasn't in here,'' said the neighbor. ''I would have passed
out.''

''If we had really been ready,'' Bill said, ''we would have dropped every one of
them. They would all have been on the floor dead.''

''I didn't want to hurt no one,'' said Carmen, cutting him short. ''I'm a human
being. I was just a housewife. It took me 10 years to get this store, 10 whole
years of saving every penny I could.''

''I know about guns,'' said Bill, picking up where he left off. ''I shot them
ever since I was a child in West Virginia. I was in the Army in Vietnam, was
wounded over there.''

''We can't live without our guns,'' Carmen agreed.

''You can say that again,'' the neighbor broke in. ''Maybe you should teach me
to shoot.''

''Everyone should protect themselves,'' Carmen advised her.

''It ain't like it used to be,'' the neighbor said. ''There used to be a cop
walking on the beat here years ago.''

''How many years ago was that?'' Carmen asked.

''Oh,'' the neighbor said, ''17, 18?''

''I'm lucky if I see a cop ride by in a squad car,'' Carmen said.



Bill looked out the window. ''If I get another chance, it will really be bad for
them,'' he said. ''We're ready.''

''I'm more alert,'' Carmen added. Then, she paused for a moment. ''Actually I
was mad. I was very mad.''

''A lot of people from the neighborhood came in to congratulate us,'' Bill said.

''Yes,'' said Carmen. ''It was wonderful. They brought wine, flowers,
champagne.''

Bill stared at the street. ''They like to catch us when it's really cold and the
streets are deserted,'' he said.

''No one is going to force me out,'' said Carmen, tight-lipped. ''I'm staying
right here. I'm not moving. I have three children, and this store is for them.''

''We worked hard at this place,'' Bill said. ''Been working hard at it all
along. I told her if they come again, you shoot, under any circumstances, you
shoot. It's just like an act of war. If they drop the bomb, we got to drop the
bomb.''

''It makes me feel good that I protected myself,'' said Carmen, shifting on her
stool. ''I'm not afraid anymore.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Vietnam Debate

BYLINE: By Bernard Gwertzman

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


NO MORE VIETNAMS. By Richard

Nixon. 240 pages. Arbor House. $14.95.  SAIGON fell to the Communists on April
30, 1975. And former President Nixon has marked the 10th anniversary with a
bristling volume on the lessons he believes should be drawn from the Vietnam
experience. This is a very lively issue in Washington these days as the debate
goes on over United States military involvement in Central America. There seems
to be an agreement that there should never be ''another Vietnam'' but
disagreement over just what that means.

Mr. Nixon wants to be heard in that debate because the main thrust of his book
is that the United States should not be deterred from becoming involved in
Central America and other places in the third world by fear of what he calls the
''Vietnam Syndrome.'' To those who say that the United States should stay out of
countries like El Salvador and Nicaragua, Mr. Nixon replies that the lesson of
Vietnam is not that the United States should stay out such places again, but
that ''we will not fail again.''


Because Mr. Nixon's goal in this book is to argue a thesis for a tougher United
States posture around the world, and only secondarily to talk about Vietnam,
this book is not a place to turn for a good summary of the war. As history, it
is second-rate, with many questionable assertions about the past. This is a
highly contentious book, with Mr. Nixon's language disappointingly shrill. The
first paragraph sets the mood for the entire book: ''No event in American
history is more misunderstood than the Vietnam War. It was misreported then, and
it is misremembered now. Rarely have so many people been so wrong about so much.
Never have the consequences of their misunderstanding been so tragic.''

Every President who dealt with Vietnam, with the one exception of himself, Mr.
Nixon suggests, blundered. President Eisenhower, he says, made a ''critical
mistake'' in not sending in American bombers to help the French who were under
siege at Dien Bien Phu. President Kennedy made several errors, he writes,
including backing away from using force in Laos. And President Johnson, trying
to save Vietnam and the Great Society program, ''made the worst possible
choice,'' Mr. Nixon writes. ''He would fight - not to win, but only not to
lose.''

But although Mr. Nixon is sharply critical of his predecessors for their lack of
military zeal, he is very understanding of his own caution. He says that when he
took office in January 1969, ''the only strategy for pursuing a military victory
that deserved serious consideration would have been to order a major escalation
of the conventional war.'' He said the United States had the resources to
achieve victory in six months of heavy fighting. Why did he not do it? ''None of
these options was compatible with political reality.''


Since it was his Administration that signed the papers that ended the United
States presence in Vietnam, Mr. Nixon seems determined to make clear that he was
not responsible for the debacle that is being marked on April 30. In a chapter
called ''How We Won the War,'' he says that when Secretary of State William P.
Rodgers signed the Paris accord with Hanoi in January 1973, ''we had won the war
in Vietnam.'' But the ''peace was lost'' he says because of ''a spasm of
Congressional irresponsibility'' and a biased press that never reported on
Vietnam fairly from the start. Complaints about Congressional weariness about
Vietnam and the press's fascination with South Vietnam's failings instead of the
North's are worthy of serious discussion, but Mr. Nixon puts them forth in a
stridency that does not seem to serve his case well.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Nixon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'WALK THE DOG'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 615 words


ONE of the stranger reunions in contemporary drama takes place late in the
second act of Robert Auletta's ''Walk the Dog, Willie.'' The setting is an
animal hospital in which Ronnie Billins, a crazed young veterinary student,
presides over the corpse of a dog he has just killed. Who should suddenly appear
but Ronnie's brother, Willie. Missing an eye and an arm, but otherwise not much
the worse for wear, Willie, we learn, has returned from the dead. Soon he and
Ronnie have regressed into childhood games, sniffing each other and emitting
shrill canine yelps.

Long before this howling duet, however, Mr. Auletta's expressionistic political
allegory has already run amok in pretentious symbolism and hysteria. This is
unfortunate because ''Walk the Dog, Willie'' presented by the Production Company
begins promisingly.

In its first act, set on a lawn in front of a Norman Rockwell-style house, we
meet the Billins family and their neighbors, who emerge as an ironic image of
all-American normality.


Jennifer (Amy Steel), the fresh- scrubbed girl next door with corn-silk hair,
turns out to be a suicidal nut case who recently returned from a mental
hospital. Bijou (Larry Bryggman), head of the Billinses' household and his pal,
Browfield (Evan Thompson), an admitted child molestor, amuse themselves by
showing her the suicide notes she scrawled in her own blood while incarcerated.
Meanwhile, Bijou's wife, Rose (Lilene Mansell), serves lemonade and chatters
about Jesus. The situation deterioriates further when Ronnie (Dan Butler)
returns home unexpectedly from college with his girlfriend and for no apparent
reason has fits of violent rage. Now and then, the characters pause to muse on
the whereabouts of the enigmatic Willie (William Converse-Roberts), who we are
told was a ''wild child'' the family found living among sheep and reared as a
second son.

One thing that can be said for ''Walk the Dog, Willie'' is that the playwright
has a vision. Without mentioning Southeast Asia, he imagines the collective soul
of America rotting with suppressed guilt and denial over Vietnam. We treat our
Vietnam veterans the same as we treat Willie, he implies, like barely
recognizable orphan children who still have the power to haunt us, even in
death. One of the playwright's puns is that Ronnie is studying to be a ''vet,''
by killing helpless animals. But the nightmare of Vietnam will not disappear.
The drama culminates with a violent final solution similar to David Rabe's
''Sticks and Bones.''


Directed by the talented Norman Rene, ''Walk the Dog, Willie,'' which was first
staged in 1976 at the Yale Repertory Theater, is very well- acted. Mr. Butler
invests Ronnie with a riveting physical and emotional energy, while Miss Steel
plays a combination savage ''Baby Doll'' and pathetic Ophelia. And Mr. Thompson
plays Browfield with the chilling conviction of someone who relishes every
detail of his evil. Handsomely austere sets by Mike Boak and glaring,
hallucinatory lighting by Debra J. Kletter lend ''Walk the Dog, Willie'' a mood
of ominous grandeur.




Vet Under Fire

WALK THE DOG, WILLIE, by Robert Auletta; directed by Norman Rene; setting by
Mike Boak; costumes by Walker Hicklin; lighting by Debra J. Kletter; sound by
David Gotwald; production stage manager, Jack Doulin; dramaturg, Colette Brooks.
Presented by The Production Company, Norman Rene, artistic director; Abigail
Franklin, managing director. At 15 West 28th Street. Bijou BillinsLarry Bryggman
JenniferAmy Steel BrowfieldEvan Thompson Rose BillinsLilene Mansell Lou
AnnKathleen Mahony-Bennett Ronnie BillinsDan Butler WillieWilliam
Converse-Roberts


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Amy Steel

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL WOULD DENY FUNDS FOR C-17 PLANE

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


A key Senate subcommittee has voted to halt funds for the $40 billion C-17
transport plane program if Congress decides to cut deeply into President
Reagan's military budget.

The 5-to-4 vote at a closed meeting of the Armed Services Subcommittee on Sea
Power and Force Projection late Monday was the first significant vote in
Congress this year against a major weapons system. It was a signal to lawmakers
that some of their prize job- producing programs would suffer if the military
budget is reduced.

The subcommittee vote caught the Air Force and the manufacturer, the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation, by surprise and opened a fierce lobbying effort to reverse
the decision when the full Armed Services Committee takes up the issue next
week.

For the subcommittee's action to take effect, it would have to be approved by
the full committee and by Congress.

The subcommittee vote, which would deny money for full-scale development of the
C-17, came as the panel was drafting a military budget that would give the
Pentagon only enough of a budget increase in the fiscal year 1986 to allow for
inflation. That is the level approved by the Senate Budget Committee.

The panel also drafted two other versions of its budget, both including money
for the C-17, in case Congress decides to allow the Pentagon a more generous
growth rate for the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1.

According to a committee aide who was present for the vote, the subcommittee
chose to give up the C-17 because it was a program scheduled to grow rapidly in
the next few years and because it had an alternative in the existing C-5
transport plane.

The C-5 is a larger plane with greater carrying capacity but the Air Force has
contended that the C-17 is better for ferrying troops and material into short
poorly paved runways.

The subcommittee also voted to trim about $200 million from the $2.4 billion the
Air Force requested to expand its fleet of the wide-bodied C-5, allowing 14
instead of the 16 requested.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger in February authorized the full- scale
development of the C-17 and had requested $453.7 million in the 1986 budget that
would include beginning production of a prototype at the Douglas Aircraft
Company subsidiary in Long Beach.

Deletion of the funds by Congress would be a major setback for McDonnell
Douglas. The company has suffered losses in its commercial aircraft operations
for several years.

Managers See Senators

Frank Tomlinson, public relations manager for McDonnell Douglas in Washington,
said failure to win approval this year for the development money ''would mean
the potential loss of the program.''

He said C-17 program managers had been flown in from Long Beach, Calif., on
Tuesday to talk to senators about the vote in the hope of having it overturned.
Mr. Tomlinson said the C-17, if approved, would eventually create about 15,000
jobs and double employment at the Douglas Aircraft Company subsidiary in Long
Beach.

The purchase of transport planes has been one of the most highly politicized
military battles in Congress since 1980.

In 1982, McDonnell Dougls lost out to the Lockheed Corporation in the
competition to sell planes to the Air Force for moving its Rapid Deployment
Force to trouble spots. The Pentagon chose to buy 50 of Lockheed's C-5s, but
Congress voted some funds in 1982 for research and development on the C17. In
the fiscal year 1985, McDonnell Douglas received $123.3 million for the C17.

The Air Force now plans to buy 210 C-17s by the end of the century, at a total
cost of $39.6 billion.

According to Senate aides, Monday's vote came as part of an unorthodox procedure
in which the Armed Services Committee is drafting three separate military
authorization bills for the fiscal year 1986. One version would allow only for
inflation, as prescribed by the Senate Budget Committee. One of the others would
allow for growth of 3 percent above inflation and the other 4 percent, in case
Congress overrides the Budget Committee.


The C-17



History

The C-17 grew out of an Air Force competition that began in 1979, aimed at
developing a new plane, then called the C-X, that could carry troops and bulky
cargo into remote areas. The C-5, in service since the Vietnam War, was judged
too large for the meager airstrips in many potential hot spots. In 1981, the Air
Force announced that the McDonnell Douglas Corporation had bested the Boeing
Company and the Lockheed Corporation in a three- way design competition. But in
1982, after intense political infighting, the Air Force decided to pass up the
new plane and buy a modified C-5 for its new Rapid Deployment Force, arguing
that the older plane would be available sooner. The Air Force said that after
buying 50 C-5's, it would switch to the C-17 in the late 1980's, and has paid
McDonnell Douglas yearly sums to keep the program alive.





Size


The C-17 is a good deal smaller than the C-5, which remains the largest cargo
plane in the world. The C-17 is 175 feet long, compared to 248 feet for the C-5.
Its wingspan is 165 feet, compared to the 222-foot breadth of the C-5.





Maneuverability


Because of its large size and lack of maneuverability, the Air Force restricts
the C-5 to landing at runways of 5,000 feet or longer. The C-17 has a wing and
brake design that make it more maneuverable, needing an estimated 2,640 feet to
take off when it is half full of cargo. It can use a 60-foot wide runway,
compared to a 90- foot minimum for the C-5.





Capacity


The C-17 can carry 172,000 pounds, compared with 261,000 pounds in the C-5. But
because of the way its doors are arranged, it can be loaded and unloaded more
quickly, and can drop its cargo by parachute from low altitudes.

Cost

The Air Force expects to pay $39.6 billion for 210 C-17's, purchased between now
and 1998. The first two are to go into service around 1988.  Jane's All the
World's Aircraft

Artist's conception of C-17 cargo plane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENT IS GUILTY IN CAMPUS SLAYING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 441 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., March 28


A judge today found a Vietnamese student guilty of involuntary manslaughter in
the shooting death of a university professor who worked with refugees from
Vietnam.

The student, Minh Van Lam, was convicted of killing Edward Lee Cooperman, a
physics professor at California State University at Fullerton. Mr.  Cooperman
was one of the first Americans to visit Hanoi after the Vietnam War.

Judge Richard Beacom of Orange County Superior Court returned the verdict in Mr.
Lam's nonjury retrial, which followed a mistrial last month. Sentencing was
scheduled for May 17.

The first trial of the 21-year-old student ended with a deadlocked jury. Mr.
Lam, who agreed to let the judge decide the case without a jury, insisted that
Mr. Cooperman was shot accidentally in his office on the university campus last
Oct. 13.

Testimony From New Witness

Judge Beacom, who presided over Mr. Lam's first trial, reviewed the transcripts
of the first trial this morning, then heard testimony this afternoon from a
defense witness who did not testify in the first trial. The judge then found Mr.
Lam guilty of involuntary manslaughter.

Mr. Lam's attorney, Alan May, and the prosecuting attorney, James Enright,
agreed to allow the judge to rule alone on the case against Mr. Lam, who was
being held in Orange County Jail in lieu of $200,000 bail.

Jurors at the first trial on Feb. 19 acquitted Mr. Lam him of the first-degree
murder charge by a 12-to-0 vote, and Judge Beacom eliminated that charge in the
retrial. The jurors deadlocked on the other charges.

The jury split, 11 to 1, in favor of acquitting Mr. Lam of voluntary
manslaughter, but split, 7 to 5, for conviction on a charge of second-degree
murder, and 9 to 3 for conviction of involuntary manslaughter.

A new jury was selected last week, but the jurors heard no testimony.

Political Motives Ruled Out

The police ruled out political motives in Mr. Cooperman's death even though he
worked with Vietnam's Communist regime and Mr. May said his client was a staunch
anti-Communist.

Mr. Lam insisted that Mr. Cooperman was shot while they were engaging in
horseplay, but the police said the shooting involved something ''personal''
between the two.

A .25-caliber pistol was found beside Mr. Cooperman's body, and Mr. Lam has
admitted placing the gun in the professor's hand out of fear to make the
shooting appear to be a suicide.

Mr. Cooperman's associates have said the professor told them that he had
received death threats, and Mr. May has said Mr. Cooperman bought three guns in
the months before his death, including the weapon that killed him.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAPITAL'S ECONOMY IS SEEN AS HARMED

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


The partial success of President Reagan's campaign pledges to cut the Federal
payroll and reduce bureaucratic regulation is described in a new study as
''clearly harming'' Washington's economy by curtailing the growth of its major
industry: government.

A report published this week by the Greater Washington Research Center says the
Reagan Administration's personnel and budget policies have become ''a drag on
the growth of the Washington economy'' and the city is ''no longer immune to
national economic recession.''

''Measured by number of employees or real wages paid,'' Federal jobs ''are not
currently providing any growth in the area economy, and the foreseeable outlook
is for no improvement,'' according to the report, ''The Changing Washington
Economy.''

A more fragile economy here would follow half a century of steady growth. Today,
nearly one in every four of the 1.7 million employees in the urban and suburban
area here work for the Federal Government.

The Decades of Growth

From the beginning of the New Deal in the 1930's and through World War II, the
Korean and Vietnam Wars and the Johnson Administration, Washington benefited
from a continuing increase in secure Federal jobs. There was little private
industry here to be hurt by recessions.

Federal civil servants more than trebled in a decade, to a wartime peak of
285,000 in 1943 from about 70,000 in 1932. That was a number not to be surpassed
until 1966, when the Johnson Administration was expanding both the Vietnam War
and its Great Society programs.

From then on, the bureaucratic total rose more or less steadily until 1980, the
end of the Carter Administration, and a peak of 376,000 civil servants.

The number was 353,000 by 1982, at the end of Mr. Reagan's first year as
President. It was 350,241 last year. According to the National Capital Planning
Commission, which keeps the count and makes projections, a Reagan Administration
reduction among Federal workers nationwide is expected to end 150,000 jobs by
1987. That would reduce the roster of jobs here by 39,000, to 51,000.

Farmed-Out Work Is Up

A principal change in Federal policy has been to farm out to private businesses
more of many tasks from janitorial to technical and management-level work. It is
a change that the report says has the bookkeeping effect of moving some
Government hiring costs from ''personnel'' to ''purchasing.'' This denies the
employees not only Federal pay rates and pensions benefits but also the
protection of Federal job security.

The report also says that revisions in how Federal space is used are among the
changes in the federally dependent economy that may have ''far-reaching and
long-range effects powerful enough to cause either strong growth or a local
recession.''

Shrinking of the size of Washington offices, according to Philip M. Dearborn, a
vice president of the independent business-supported Research Center who is the
author of the new report, may represent a blow to the construction and real
estate industries here.

He said, in an an interview: ''It seems to be not widely perceived yet that, in
his 1986 budget, the President has proposed not just another payroll cut and a
Government employee wage freeze but a 10 percent reduction in the cost of
Government work space allotted to those who remain.''

Loss of 3 Million Sguare Feet

The report says a 10 percent reduction in Government use of space, whether by
cutting each employee's working space or abandoning leased space in privately
owned buildings for Government-built offices, would mean a decrease in
Government use of about three million square feet, ''the rough equivalent of one
year's production of new privately constructed space in the Washington area.''

The economic implications of the Reagan policies, the report says, cover a span
of actions and economic consequences that go beyond the loss of thousands of
Government jobs and salaries that have not kept pace with inflation.

The policies have also reduced the jobs in trade associations, a development the
report termed ''the most surprising'' of the nongovernment retrenchments. The
Administration's policies of deregulation were the cause of this change, the
report said, since industry and trade associations have found they have fewer
Government rules to oppose.

'Association Capital of U.S.'

When, in the 1970's. industry and professional associations were moving steadily
into expensively appointed offices in the ''K Street canyon,'' the stretch of
office-building blocks near the White House, it was said that the city was on
the verge of becoming ''the association capital of the United States.''

Indeed, by 1980, trade associations had become the urban-suburban region's third
largest nongovernment, service sector employer - and within the District of
Columbia, alone, the single largest.

From 1980 to 1982, the Research Center report says, there were only 347 new job
slots in trade associations across the entire metropolitan area, all of them in
new, high-rise, low-rent suburban offices ''beyond the Beltway.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph showing number of Federal Employees in Washington from 1930 to
1980 (Source: National Capital Planning Commission)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Professor's Widow Files Suit Against Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: FULLERTON, Calif., March 30


A widow filed a $12 million suit Friday against a Vietnamese student convicted
of killing her husband, charging he had caused a wrongful death. She and others
also asserted that prosecutors in the case had failed to pursue information
pointing to a political assassination.

The suit, filed in Orange County Superior Court, seeks damages from Minh Van
Lam, 21 years old, who was found guilty Thursday of involuntary manslaughter,
said Lawrence Teeter, attorney for the widow, Klaaske Cooperman, and her two
daughters.

Mr. Teeter said Mrs. Cooperman's husband, Edward, a physics professor at
California State University at Fullerton, who had ties to the Hanoi government,
had received death threats.

Mr. Lam had testified that Mr. Cooperman was shot accidentally Oct. 13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ALICE ARLEN REWRITES THE NEWS FOR 'ALAMO BAY'

BYLINE: By RICHARD GRENIER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1672 words


Screenwriters are a sour bunch, says Alice Arlen: ''Movie writing is never good
enough for them. It's a director's medium! A lot of writers are really
novelists, or playwrights, or great journalists, and for them working on a movie
can be very frustrating. But for me it's the best!''

And, indeed, Mrs. Arlen seems the picture of cheerfulness as she sits looking
out on Manhattan's Central Park from a duplex belonging to Candice Bergen. For
Candice Bergen's husband is the film director Louis Malle. And Louis Malle's new
movie is ''Alamo Bay,'' for which Mrs. Arlen has sole screen credit as writer
and which opens Wednesday at Loews New York Twin. Last time around she received
an Academy Award nomination for co-writing ''Silkwood'' with Nora Ephron, and at
this very moment she is writing a film adaptation of Joan Didion's
''Democracy.'' ''I've been very lucky,'' she said gratefully. ''I've been really
spoiled.''

Mrs. Arlen's luck took a while in coming, but when it came it really came. And
she acknowledges all her debts: to the schoolgirl chum who got her her first
screen assignment, to Miss Ephron who ''pushed very hard'' to get her onto
''Silkwood,'' to Ed Harris, who plays the lead in ''Alamo Bay'' and came up with
many insights and ideas, to the Texans she interviewed while writing the
screenplay - about a confrontation in a Texas coastal town between local
fishermen and recent Vietnamese immigrants - and of course to Mr. Malle, her
director. Sometimes, to hear her tell it, Mrs. Arlen seems to have had hardly
anything to do with the screenplay at all.

''There's no way I'm ever going to be a novelist in my life,'' she said. ''I've
made my peace with that. A movie absolutely is a director's medium, and if I
were 15 years old and had my life ahead of me I might try to be one -.'' She
catches herself. ''I'm the worst executive in the world, though, so it would
never work. But I love working with people, so for me screen writing is perfect.
If a director tells me to rewrite something 7,000 times, I'm no more angry than
if - I mean, if I were an architect and I were building you a house, and you
said tear down the wall, well, it's your house! I mean, this is Louis's movie!
Anyway, if it hadn't been for Louis, what would I have done with this story all
by myself? I'm so sentimental and liberal. God knows what I would have made of
it.''



''I was trying to see the situation through Louis's eyes,'' said Mrs. Arlen
thoughtfully, sinking back into the sofa. ''I was trying to animate another
person's vision. The concept was Louis's. There's no point saying anything else.
What we would do, you see, is we would talk, and then I'd try to dream up scenes
from what we'd been talking about. Mike Nichols was like that, too, with
'Silkwood.' You can see I'm not a theoretical thinker. I would just try to feel
my way into the situation.''

The actual historical episodes which first suggested ''Alamo Bay'' took place
from 1979 to 1981 in Seadrift, Tex. One hundred Vietnamese - only one of whom
spoke English and that very imperfectly - arrived in a Gulf Coast town with a
population of only a thousand. They did not know the customs of the local
inhabitants. Their children urinated in the streets. One of the Vietnamese was
arrested for hunting deer by spotlight and without even a hunting license - a
document of whose very existence he professed ignorance. Worst of all, they did
not observe the time-honored local fishing practices. Nerves rubbed raw by hard
times, Vietnamese and Texans had quarrel after quarrel, the culmination coming
in the shooting by a Vietnamese named Sau Van Nguyen of a young Texas fisherman
named Billy Joe Aplin.

Tried for murder, Mr. Nguyen was acquittedby an all-white jury on the grounds of
legitimate self-defense . Members of the Ku Klux Klan staged minor
anti-Vietnamese demonstrations in other towns along the coast, but, in Seadrift,
600 people (out of 1,000) held a mass meeting and unanimously passed a
resolution calling on the Klan to stay away. Gradually things quieted down on
the Texas coast, where 15,000 Vietnamese now fish in peace along with
native-born Texans. And recently the quarterback of the Seadrift high school
football team was a Vietnamese.



''Louis kept telling me that he didn't want a film that would be morally
black-and-white, and we sure don't have one,'' Mrs. Arlen said. ''It's a
sympathetic portrayal of someone who joins the Ku Klux Klan! Like in 'Lacombe
Lucien,' where Louis's young Frenchman joins the Gestapo. We had sympathy for
both sides, both the Texans and the Vietnamese. My mother, when she saw the film
last night, said, 'There but for the grace of God go we. Strangers coming in and
crabbing where your daddy crabbed?' There's a lot of redneck in me, too. You
bet!''

''But your heart went out to the Vietnamese,'' Mrs. Arlen continued. ''I was in
awe of how hard they work, and how they take care of each other. And the
courage! They're very stoic. They never boast about how they got out of Vietnam
in little boats. They never whine. They were really against our making the movie
in the beginning, you know, because they didn't want to seem to be complaining.
After what they'd been through in Vietnam, they told us, this was nothing. And
you should see them now! The boys all playing baseball and football, and the
girls practicing baton twirling. And the little ones talk pure Texan! And they
all dress like Texans!'' Mrs. Arlen paused emotionally. ''I think this country
has a right to feel very proud. What other country in the world takes people in
this way?''

A decision was taken early on not to retell the tale of Sau Van Nguyen and Billy
Joe Aplin but to substitute a wholly invented story, using the Vietnamese-Texan
friction along the Gulf Coast as background. Mrs. Arlen suggested a major woman
character and also a love story. Mr. Malle agreed immediately. Both of them
spent time in several towns on the Texas coast, interviewing residents and
soaking up atmosphere. There were lengthy talks about plot development, after
which Mrs. Arlen would write her first drafts.



''Silkwood'' was criticized for its ending. The film hinted - a hint hard to
substantiate - that Karen Silkwood, a worker in a plutonium plant, was driven
off the road and to her death because of her role in investigating safety
conditions at the plant. The criticism was not lost on Mrs. Arlen, who
determined in ''Alamo Bay'' to use a completely fictitious story except for the
background. ''We don't like that word 'docudrama,' '' said Mrs. Arlen,
grimacing.

''Oh, gosh,'' she said lugubriously. ''You're going to get Alice Arlen on
docudrama. This is going to be pathetic. The fact is, I never really thought it
out. I believe in what we did in 'Silkwood,' but I'm not looking to defend
docudramas in general. I think docudramas are running into trouble, and there's
real cause for concern. But I still stand behind 'Silkwood'! Haven't writers
used real events before? Yes, yes, Tolstoy, Shakespeare.

''Look, I was thrilled to work on 'Silkwood' because I thought we were right. I
am profoundly convinced that was a sloppy plant. No, I don't think it's beyond
debate! Everything's debatable! We put it up for debate! No, I'm not against
nuclear power either. I don't think it's up to us to decide whether this country
should have nuclear power or not. I'm for health and safety. That's all! Maybe
'docudrama' is a generic term that could apply to magnificent works as well as
shabby works.



''Look at 'The Killing Fields!' '' Mrs. Arlen said abruptly. ''Isn't that the
most powerful indictment of the Khmer rouge massacres you've ever seen? I used
to think America was responsible for those massacres, but I don't any more. I
think the Khmer rouge were responsible!'' Mrs. Arlen moans. ''Oh, boy. All these
big thoughts from Alice Arlen. All right! All right!'' she declares in a
combination of jest and exasperation. ''From now on I'll only do comedies and
love stories!''

Returning to the subject of collaborative creation, she said, ''I literally
can't remember, though, who thought of what. It's sort of a joke. Nora Ephron
and I joke about that. We say we can't remember who came up with what. Three
years later someone says, 'My idea,' and everybody else thinks, 'Hey, wait a
minute, that was my idea!' Secretly everybody has his own version. It's like a
marriage. I mean, everybody thinks it was his idea. The real authorship of the
idea get lost.

''I've been lucky two times with wonderful directors, Louis and Mike Nichols.
They're the two directors everybody I know would kill to work for. Both Louis
and Mike are open and improvisational. They both let me attend casting sessions.
They both took me along when they scouted locations. Louis is more a camera
person. He can't keep his hands off a camera. Mike is more - what? Theatrical?
They both treated me terribly well.''



Mr. Malle, who has been in the back of the duplex chatting with a friend,
emerges from his lair in time to overhear the compliment. ''In actual fact I
couldn't have made 'Alamo Bay' without Alice,'' he said, smiling as Mrs. Arlen
hid her face in her sweater. ''I knew we had a terrific setting for a film. But
we needed great characters and a great story, and Alice created them.''

If Mrs. Arlen was the indispensable spring from which all waters flowed in the
creation of ''Alamo Bay,'' she is certainly modest about it. Later, in the
elevator, whe whispered as if Mr. Malle could still hear her, ''I remember when
my agent called and asked me if I wanted to work with Louis Malle, I was
absolutely stunned and said, 'It would be an honor.' Then Louis got on the phone
and I was a real idiot. All I could think of to say was, 'I'm honored. I'm
honored.' ''

Hurrying away along Central Park South, she said, ''I'm late. I'm going to catch
it.'' Waiting for her near Columbus Circle was her husband, Michael Arlen, a
writer for The New Yorker. The Arlens were off to see a movie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Alice Arlen (Cori Wells Braun); Photo of scene from 'Alamo
Bay'

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
WHAT'S 'SECURITY' ANYWAY?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


WASHINGTONThere was a kind of April Fool's

Day logic about the MX missile

debate here these last few days. The Administration insisted that the way to
reduce the number of nuclear weapons in the world was to build more MX missiles.

Last year, it told the Congress that it wanted the MX missiles because the
Russians were not at the bargaining table. This year, it insisted on 21 more
MX's because the Russians were at the bargaining table and wouldn't believe in
our negotiators unless they had them. The President's argument was that while
the MX might not be an effective military weapon, it was an essential bargaining
chip to get promises for the future from the Russians, whose promises have not
convinced him in the past.

How is the success of this argument in the Congress to be explained? President
Reagan, who promised to balance the Federal budget, has added more to the
national debt in four years than all the other Presidents combined in the 192
years of the Republic.

As the majority leader of the House, Jim Wright of Texas, pointed out at the
conclusion of the MX debate, ''We are spending more on weapons and on military
might this year than we spent in any year during the Vietnam War, in any year
during the Korean War, and, yes, in any year during World War II.'' Yet the
President's argument prevailed, by only a few votes, but enough to finance more
MX's.

One explanation is that President Reagan is strong politically and the Democrats
are weak. He insisted that to defeat him on this issue when nuclear talks are
beginning in Geneva and at the start of a new regime in Moscow would demonstrate
that the U.S. was ''irresolute and divided.'' He also argued that defeating the
MX program would cost representatives defense contracts and jobs in their
districts and states, and maybe their seats in the next election. Such things
are not ignored on Capitol Hill.

On one thing, however, the President and Congress agreed: The goal both sides
had was the security of the nation. Where they differed was on the meaning of
''security'' and the means to that end. This is the fundamental question on
which there are honest and unresolved differences of opinion between and within
the political parties.

The President, with undoubted sincerity, believes that the threat to the
nation's security lies primarily in the buildup of Soviet nuclear arms, that
Moscow is impressed only by military power, and therefore no matter the cost,
Washington must proceed with its ground-based missile and Star Wars programs to
persuade the new Gorbachev regime in Moscow to negotiate in good faith for a
safer world order.

This is a policy that has to be taken seriously, but it is rejected by the
equally sincere people who think we have already established a dependable
balance of nuclear power, and who believe the security of the nation lies not
abroad but at home.

According to this view, the main threat to the nation's security lies in our
budget and trade deficits, in the decline of our old industries in the cities
and our farms on the prairies, in the loss of control of our borders, in the
threat of crime, drugs and racial tension, and in the moral decay of an
increasingly acquisitive society.

At the end of the MX debate in the House, Representative Wright tried to
redefine the meaning of national security. It depended upon so many things other
than missiles, he said.

Our industrial base was declining. Last year we had a trade drain of $123
billion and in the process lost three and a half million jobs.

We had to wonder what was happening in America, he said. Our security depended
upon a productive agriculture, yet the whole fabric of American agriculture was
eroding, with thousands of farms in foreclosure and thousands more on the brink.

With eight million unemployed, Mr. Wright added, the President says we cannot
afford to extend unemployment compensation, and says that the jobless need job
training and then cuts the job-training program by 28 percent.

''In the ultimate analysis,'' he concluded, ''national security depends upon an
enlightened and educated citizenry capable of leading the world into the 21st
century, but . . . Japan, with half our population, is graduating more than we
are graduating in science, in engineering and in the technologies.''

Mr. Wright moved the House with his appeal for a new definition of national
security. But the problem of defining ''security'' and ''diplomacy'' remains.
Next week Speaker Tip O'Neill and some of his Congressional buddies are going to
Moscow to case the joint and talk to Mr. Gorbachev, which is a funny April
Fool's Day theory of the conduct and misconduct of foreign affairs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TIGHTENING WASHINGTON'S INNER CIRCLE;
WALTERS WON'T BE A REGULAR WHEN THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL CONVENES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


According to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, who stepped down last week as chief
representative to the United Nations, ''they are the highest, frankest, most
authoritative discussions of United States foreign policy.'' She was talking
about the meetings of President Reagan's National Security Council which she
regularly attended, but which her successor, Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters, will
not, at least not on a regular basis. Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who
wanted to limit the power of the U.N. reprsentative, won the White House's
agreement not to renew the N.S.C. pass for General Walters.

So upset was General Walters at losing the privilege of attending all N.S.C.
sessions, that he reportedly came close last week to resigning even before the
Senate had had a chance to approve his nomination.

It was the kind of story that could be understood only by those familiar with
how power is perceived in Washington. General Walters had already been assured
that he would have full Cabinet status, carrying on the anachronistic tradition
started by President Eisenhower, who decided to put his campaign adviser, Henry
Cabot Lodge, in the Cabinet as well as at the United Nations.

Mr. Eisenhower had no grand strategy in suddenly elevating his U.N. ambassador
to Cabinet status; he simply wanted to have Mr. Lodge around the White House. To
outsiders, Cabinet status might seem the ultimate one could hope to achieve.
That might have been true in 19th century Washington, but the reality of life in
Washington these days is that Cabinet meetings, in the words of Zbigniew
Brzezinski, the National Security Adviser to President Carter, are ''almost
useless.'' Mr. Brzezinski said they were so boring that he used to catch up
surreptitiously on his light reading by placing magazines on his knees during
the meetings. They are no more lively in this Administration where President
Reagan has been known to doze off at the meetings from time to time, according
to his aide Michael Deaver.

Thus, being a Cabinet member, while symbolically important, may have less
panache than meets the eye. Power in Washington is counted in terms of
information. The more secret and restricted the information is, the more a
person with access to it counts. Henry A. Kissinger, National Security Advisor
to President Nixon, rose so quickly to prominence because Mr. Nixon and he
closely hoarded the most important diplomatic and military secrets. Since N.S.C.
meetings, by their nature, are highly restricted, with the agenda of the
sessions itself a classified secret, just being allowed to attend earns the
participant additional standing. But beyond that, the council decides things.
Often the decisions are worked out behind the scenes by the President and two or
three of his key advisers, but nevertheless, the N.S.C, does vote on critical
matters of war and peace.

Under the law that created the N.S.C. in 1947, the only statutory members are
the President, the Vice President, the Secretary of State and the Defense
Secretary. The Director of Central Intelligence and the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff are statutory advisers. All others, including the national
security adviser, have to be invited. For some like Mrs. Kirkpatrick, Edwin
Meese 3d, the former counsellor, now Attorney General, James A. Baker 3d, the
former chief of staff and now Treasury Secretary, and Mr. Deaver, the deputy
chief of staff, the invitation was a standing one. Others attend as needed,
depending on the topic. Presumably, General Walters would be called in if some
crucial United Nations-related matter were to be discussed or if problems in
Latin America or North Africa, on which he has expertise, were on the table.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said it was ''very useful to me to be a member of the N.S.C.''
because being able ''to hear the discussions gave me a kind of sense of
confidence about the goals of the President, the Secretary of State and
Secretary of Defense.'' It also allowed her the chance to voice her own views.
During the war between Argentina and Britain over the Falkland Islands in 1982,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who was sympathetic to Argentina, regularly engaged in debate
with then Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. ''Our positions were
unreconcilable,'' he said later.

Mr. Shultz is reported to have found himself, like Mr. Haig, in occasional
debate with Mrs. Kirkpatrick at the council, and was uneasy with the idea that
the U.N. representative should be able to challenge her superior at N.S.C.
meetings. He saw the U.N. representative as just another Presidential
ambassador, who should take orders from the President and his chief foreign
policy manager, the Secretary of State.

If General Walters is unhappy with his status, he is following a grand
tradition. President Kennedy, trying to head off liberal appeals for Adlai
Stevenson to be made secretary of state, persuaded him to take the U.N. job, as
America's representative to the world, but then cut him out of important
information and decision-making, leaving him frustrated and angry. Arthur
Goldberg was asked by President Johnson to give up his Supreme Court seat to
become the U.N. representative, with the pledge that he could work to end the
Vietnam war. Instead, Mr. Goldberg, despite important diplomatic work on ending
the 1967 Middle East war, had little to say in the Vietnam negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of National Security Council in September 1982 (The White
House/Michael Evans)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM IN AMERICA: A PREFACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


NEARLY A DECADE HAS PASSED SINCE the fall of Saigon, but the haunting image of
that last helicopter poised for flight on the roof of the United States Embassy
still lingers in the American imagination.  April 30 will mark not merely the
10th anniversary of the Communist takeover of South Vietnam, but also the
decisive moment when America was dealt its first military defeat. For a while,
the pain of the Vietnam experience was such that Americans suffered a collective
repression. Now there seems to be a willingness to examine this chapter in our
past.  What is Vietnam's legacy in America? To find out, The New York Times
asked a team of reporters to examine how the Vietnam experience affects our
everyday life, our high art and popular culture, and the veterans who fought the
war. The result is this special issue of The Times Magazine on how Vietnam lives
on in the hearts and minds of Americans.

What emerges is a picture of a country that has not entirely resolved its
feelings about the war. Ten years later, Vietnam continues to confound us with
unexpected consequences.

The shame of defeat - reflected in the way we treated the Vietnam veterans -
seems to be receding, and now the Vietnam veteran appears to be emerging as a
national hero. The monolithic black monument in Washington, on which the names
of the 58,000 Americans who died in the Vietnam War are enshrined, attracts more
than two million visitors a year.

Another perception has changed. In the years since America pulled out of
Vietnam, the Communist victors have unleashed a series of pitiless attacks
against their neighbors. And a nation once portrayed by some American
intellectuals as the repository of moral rectitude now stands exposed as the
Prussia of Southeast Asia.

Indeed, many of the old certitudes cherished during the war by the ideological
left and right are being called into serious question. It is now generally
acknowledged, for example, that although America lost the war, the hawks were
wrong about the falling dominoes.  Both from interviews and the results of a
Times Poll, it appears that the memory of Vietnam has kept politicians from
rushing troops into Central America to stamp out the Sandinistas. Yet, existing
side by side with this posture of restraint is a burgeoning patriotism and
greater determination than at any time in the last decade to use American power
abroad. There is a perceptible evolution in the popular attitude toward national
leadership. The Vietnam period brought the ''imperial presidency'' into
disrepute. But today the United States is governed by a second-term President
who not only talks tough but is cheered for carrying a big stick.  The survey
finally shows that if America is at last emerging from its amnesia about
Vietnam, this is no guarantee that the lessons of the war will be remembered.
For among young people, there is generally no clear idea of how the war was
fought or how it tore apart America. For this new generation, the passions of
the Vietnam era are the stuff of history.  - THE EDITORS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 17, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

The preface to The Times Magazine's special issue about Vietnam, on March 31,
misidentified the building shown in a famous photograph of the rooftop
evacuation of Americans by helicopter in 1975. The site was also misidentified
in a picture caption on April 30 with a Vietnam chronology. It was a Saigon
apartment building, not the United States Embassy.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ENDURING LEGACY

BYLINE: By Joseph Lelyveld; Joseph Lelyveld is a staff writer for this magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7543 words


A YOUNG BRONZE GOD OF WAR.'' JOHN DENTON FIRST HEARD that phrase in harangues
and pep talks when he was going through officers' training as a marine. It
resurfaced in his mind a generation later at a sun-dappled Fourth of July family
picnic. What brought it back was an encounter there with a young soldier who
seemed as eager for action as Denton himself had been when he took command of
his first platoon in Bravo Company, Seventh Engineer Battalion, at Danang, South
Vietnam, in 1966.  Denton, now an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
hadn't realized that soldiers like that were still being turned out. Trying to
express how moved and transfixed he felt when he saw the young man, Denton
described a vision: ''He was 21, if that, and he took me right back to what I
was. He was ready, and he was going to do it, almost to the point of saying, 'I
sure hope they've got a war going someplace.' It made me feel good, but at the
same time I wanted to go over and put my arm around him and say, 'Hey, have you
got about five minutes? I want to tell you a few things.' '' Denton never had
that conversation. If he had spoken, he would have talked, he said, about the
responsibilities rather than the glory of command, about the strength a leader
derives from his men, about devotion to them as an element of valor.

Instead, this F.B.I. man was toiling late in the den over his garage in
Knoxville, Tenn., pouring it all into a novel - not about the country called
Vietnam, or the questions represented by the war, or what happened to the
veterans when they returned to an ungrateful, even hostile, nation. The country
and questions and aftermath were all incidental. What he needed to explore was
the nature of the camaraderie of men at war, almost to the exclusion of these
other matters.

Almost, but not quite, for Denton now has a 10- year-old son, and when he thinks
of his boy, he does not think of young gods of war. In that context, Vietnam -
everything about it - returns in a rush, and his tone of voice changes. Instead
of the gentleness that is there when he speaks of the men with whom he served on
Hill 55 and Marble Mountain, there is urgency, even resentment. ''Next time
we're going to need a contract,'' he says. ''I'm not saying I won't send my son
- I probably would - but before we commit our sons, we better have full support,
across the board, from every segment of society. Before I commit my son, I want
these things addressed. I want a decision.''

Nearly 10 years after the fall of Saigon - when the superpower of the Western
world rescued its last representatives in Vietnam, helicopter by helicopter,
from the roof of an embassy that had served as a viceregal outpost - this kind
of double exposure on issues of peace and war has lodged itself in the
consciousness of millions of Americans.

There is that instant when disbelief can be suspended and the righteous use of
power again seems possible; and there is that equally emotional moment that
follows, when disbelief returns in a clatter of old doubts and bitterness.
Politicians and strategists still refer to the ''Vietnam syndrome'' as if it
were a lingering ailment in search of a miracle cure. Others, continuing the old
Vietnam debate on a higher level of abstraction, contend that the war itself was
a costly and wrenching cure for imperial delusions.

But it was not ancient arguments I discovered in nearly a month spent wandering
around the United States, trying to assay the feelings Vietnam still aroused, it
was the voltage those feelings are still capable of delivering.

I began with the notion that I might have to explain why I wanted to talk about
the war at this late date but - except when I was talking to members of the
younger post-Vietnam generation, for whom the names of Vietnam battlegrounds
like Hue and Khe Sanh carry no connotations at all - no preamble was necessary.
The feelings required no excavation; they were available, still churning, the
way they must have been in 1875, 10 years after Appomattox.

''It seems like the American people can't get used to the past,'' an auto worker
in Detroit observed. ''They have it on the brain.''

The feelings are still there and unsettled, but now they tend to be focused on
the future. We want to give ourselves absolution, although we remain deeply
divided - as individuals and as a people - over what it is we need to absolve
(whether it is what we did fighting the war in Indochina or what we did
protesting it at home).

Even more urgently, we want to know how it will be if there is a next time,
whether the use of power in a third-world setting would automatically reopen the
old divisions.

In other words, when we talk about Vietnam we are seldom talking about the
country of that name or the situation of the people who live there. Usually we
are talking about ourselves. Probably we always were, which is one conspicuous
reason our leaders found it so hard to shape a strategy that fit us and our
chosen terrain.




Obviously, the war is not over for Americans like Scott Marr, who has had three
operations in the last year at the Audie Murphy Veterans Hospital in San Antonio
to have old fragments of shrapnel removed from his body; or Greg Nystrom, a
waiter in Hollywood and aspiring photographer, who has not been able to banish
the thought that a father shot down over North Vietnam more than 19 years ago
might still be alive.

In less obvious ways, the war is not over for tens of millions of other
Americans, especially those whose sense of their country and the world was
shaped in the Vietnam era. If anything - with the passage of time, the need to
reinterpret America's longest war to a younger generation, and its usefulness as
a metaphor and touchstone for the debates on Central America - the Vietnam
experience is reasserting itself. Suddenly with the dedication of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial on the mall in Washington, where it now outdraws every other
monument but the Lincoln Memorial, Americans have settled on a new and more
gratifying image of the Vietnam veteran. Instead of the incipient psychopath
deserving pity, he is a patriotic symbol and something of a culture hero, often
presented now as self-sufficient and irreverent, trusting only himself because
his leaders and society let him down.

Hollywood, as ready to exploit the new image as it was the old one, has
dispatched actors Chuck Norris, Tom Selleck and Sylvester Stallone for a series
of rematches with the old insidious enemy who now, 10 years after the war's end,
is fully as fiendish and fanatical as our World War II enemies were in movies
when our forces were still in the trenches. Action-adventure films that lead
back to the jungles of Indochina seem to have only one subject - the search for
more than 2,400 Americans who are still believed, as a matter of devout popular
conviction, to be missing in action in Vietnam or Laos.





In the intellectual sphere, the debate on the war still periodically flares,
with conservatives launching sporadic raids to seize the moral high ground that
those who opposed the war once confidently occupied. To the extent that it was
the left that introduced moral zeal into American politics while the war was
being fought, it is providing models for today's right. Vietnam, exults the
Committee for the Free World, is no longer an occasion for ''America- bashing.''

Meantime, bumper stickers that cry ''No Vietnam War in Central America'' are
sprouting on California freeways. And across America, from lower Manhattan to
Concord, Calif., Vietnam veterans go on constructing monuments to their dead. In
all of this, Vietnam functions less and less as a real place than as a mirror to
America, the way the polished black granite slabs of the memorial in Washington
reflect the faces of the thousands who go there in search of one or another kind
of catharsis.

A New York Times poll (page 34) taken at the end of last month indicates that
Americans are more ready to agree with the assertion that their country's role
in the war was ''immoral'' or at least ''wrong'' than with President Reagan's
characterization of it as a ''noble cause.'' It indicates, too, that they mostly
subscribe to the view that we learned in Vietnam not to intervene in civil wars.
But many who took these stands were also prepared to send combat troops to El
Salvador to prevent a Communist takeover there. For many, then, it might be
said, immorality had something to do with failure. What was true for these
individual Americans was especially true for the United States Army.



 RAUMATIZED BY ITS FAILURE to subdue the peasant soldiers of a poor Asian
country and grieved by its losses - of men, discipline and prestige - the Army
tried at first to treat Vietnam like a bad affair whose lessons were all for the
politicians. In officers' clubs and war colleges, the lieutenants who ''humped''
with their men through rice paddies and highland forests schooled themselves to
talk of almost anything else as they ascended to field-grade ranks.

But as the Vietnam lieutenants became colonels, the military started to pick at
the wound and assess its own failures: the divided command structure, short duty
tours for field officers, lopsided imbalance of support troops to fighting
troops, reliance on ''body counts,'' systematic self-deceit and failures of
intelligence. Studies by some of the Army's best thinkers, notably Gen. Bruce
Palmer Jr. and Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., have erased the myth that the war was
lost only because the politicians reined in the generals.

Now commander of the Fourth Airborne Training Battalion at Fort Benning, Ga.,
Lieut. Col. Leonard B. Scott was a 22-year-old lieutenant leading a Ranger
patrol in the first company that went into northern Cambodia in 1970. With a
picture of John Wayne as a cavalry officer on a shelf behind him, the colonel is
the image of a tough airborne officer - trim, blond, suited up for the jump he
will make before lunch. But when he gets on the subject of leadership and
Vietnam, his eyes get wet and he

''The Army did not perform well in Vietnam,'' this officer says, ''but that guy,
that individual soldier, on the whole he did an outstanding job.''

Scott's feelings had nowhere to go in the post- Vietnam Army so they flowed,
like those of the F.B.I. man in Knoxville, into a novel. Called ''Charlie Mike''
and scheduled for publication this year, it is a hymn on the theme of valor -
that of the American soldier and that of the North Vietnamese enemy as well.

The experience of writing it has made the colonel feel, at 37, like a
''dinosaur.'' The younger officers are sick, he thinks, of hearing about
Vietnam. When the last battalion commanders with Vietnam experience are phased
out, he says, ''some people will say, 'Great! We finally got rid of the Vietnam
mentality, the jungle-warfare mentality.' '' Then wars like Vietnam may look
easy again.

If Vietnam is remote to the younger officers, it is infinitely more remote to
their troops, the newest of whom were getting ready for kindergarten when the
American withdrawal began. If you are over 35 and want to feel like 135, try
talking about Vietnam with a recent high-school graduate, someone like Susan
Greene. If this were 1969, she would probably have found her way to Woodstock.
With blond curls and an ingenuous manner, she is, at any rate, the image of a
flower child of that era. Now, in another time, Susan Greene is preparing for
airborne training in Colonel Scott's battalion. Asked for her opinion of the
Vietnam War, Private Greene replies: ''It was stupid.''

''Do you think you'd feel that way if we had won?'' she is asked.

Her eyes widen. She looks a little confused. ''From the way I thought, we'd won
the war,'' she says.

''When did you find out we lost?''

''Right now. Just now. I never studied it, you know.''

Steve Holstein, a 20-year-old airborne recruit from Charleston, W.Va., offers a
more knowledgeable view. ''The Vietnam War is something our generation really
takes seriously,'' he maintains. ''It makes us want to prove something - that
there's a younger generation now that isn't out to exploit each other or cut
each other down.''

Its spirit was captured for him, he says, in a World War III movie called ''Red
Dawn,'' in which a group of high-school students takes to the Rockies as
guerrilla fighters after their Colorado town is falling to a joint Soviet-Cuban
force. Soviet helicopters swoop down on the young insurgents the way American
gunships assaulted Vietnamese in ''Apocalypse Now.'' Private Holstein admits he
cried at ''Red Dawn.'' The Colorado guerrillas never had a chance against the
Russians, of course, but they showed the merit of resistance in a ''no- win
situation,'' and now the young recruit applies that lesson to Vietnam: ''We
proved that we were there for our allies when they are in trouble, even when
it's a no-win situation.''

However, his grasp of the Vietnam War is not quite as firm as his grasp of World
War III. He plays along when I start to quiz him on some names from the Vietnam
era, starting with that of a former lieutenant who once faced a court-martial at

''Sounds familiar,'' the young man replies.

''My Lai?'' He shakes his head from side to side. ''Tet?'' Same response.
''Thieu and Ky?''

''Doesn't ring any bells.''

Fascinated by the results, I try again a few days later with a Sunday-school
class of high-school juniors and seniors at St. Michael and St. George Church in
Clayton, Mo., a comfortable suburb of St. Louis.

''McNamara?'' I begin.

''Some kind of politician.''

''Ho Chi Minh?''

''A city.''

''Is that all?''

''He was the head of something.''

''Ho Chi Minh was a city, a trail and a guy,'' says the teacher, a former Huey
pilot and Cobra gunner named Donald Armstrong, who is now an Anglican priest.

''Did he look Vietnamese?'' asks a student who appears to be serious.

I try again. ''The Chicago Seven?''

''Some kind of gang there. It's not Mafia or something, is it?''

Last round. ''Thieu and Ky?''

A young man closes his eyes and smacks his forehead; the answer drops out:
''Brothers! They were brothers who ran South Vietnam.'' ''You're close, but I
think you mean Diem,'' I tell him.

''Oh, yeah,'' he agrees. ''Diem Bien Phu.''

*

The quiz provokes a discussion. Asked by one of his students to explain how he
felt as a Christian about the things he was required to do in combat, the priest
responds by describing the experience of flying into a village in Cambodia where
many inhabitants had been slaughtered by the Communist insurgents of the Khmer
Rouge. ''As a Christian,'' he says, ''what I used to think about was the people

''Where does that turn-the-other-cheek thing come in?'' a girl asks.

''Some of those people had their cheeks cut off,'' the priest replies in an even
tone. The next question comes from a young man in a blazer and bow tie with a
precociously stern voice: ''Where was the patriotic movement during the Vietnam
War?''

''The war got so emotional that it was beyond patriotism,'' Don Armstrong, who
is now 36, answers. ''Honor became how you dealt with your circumstances. If you
kept your commitments, that was honor. If you stood up to the system, that was
also honor.''

Chatting after class, the priest talks about the weird experience of coming
home. One day he was flying a chopper under fire in Cambodia. Less than 72 hours
later, he was sipping martinis in his parents' living room, where everyone was
too considerate to ask about the war. What had been the entire context of his
life for a year became his dirty little secret.

Many veterans say it was years before they could sit calmly in a social
situation. Don Armstrong was one of the lucky ones, a vet who could accept
himself without flashbacks or remorse.

The realization that there are well-adjusted, psychically whole combat veterans
from Vietnam is only beginning to seep into the consciousness of many who
opposed the war. Sometimes, Armstrong says, they resist it.

''The country was suffering from a post-traumatic stress disorder, not the
Vietnam veteran,'' contends Barry Levin, a successful criminal lawyer whose
combat decorations, including a Bronze Star Medal and three Purple Hearts, hang
in a glass case in his penthouse office in Los Angeles. ''I am not ashamed to
say that the best years of my life were in the military. I loved the war. I'm
very proud to have fought in combat for my country.''

Does he think such people should now feel some responsibility for what happened
in Indochina after the Americans left? ''Sure, sure,'' he replies in an offhand
manner. In his mind, that conclusion is too self-evident to require spelling
out. ''It's too easy in America,'' he goes on. ''They're consumers of freedom,
not protectors of freedom.''

The ''they'' conveys an alienation the lawyer readily acknowledges: He has
little use for contemporaries who didn't fight in the war, he says. Yet Vietnam
veterans are divided like the rest of the population on questions of war and
peace.



 IN SANTA CRUZ, CALIF., I VISITED V.F.W.  Post 5888, which has had its charter
revoked by the national V.F.W. for passing a resolution in favor of
''self-determination and nonintervention in Central America,'' then conveying it
to a Sandinista representative in Managua, Nicaragua. ''It's our duty to see
Vietnam doesn't happen again,'' asserts Lee Bookout, an angry transplanted Texan
and former marine who says he kept his feelings about the war so bottled up that
''I was married for years, and my wife didn't know I was a vet.''

''Yeah,'' says Richard Anderson, the post's commander, who fought in Vietnam
during the 1968 Tet offensive as a member of a mortar platoon, ''that's how it
was with me and my first wife.''

The vets wear their Veterans of Foreign Wars hats. The hall they occupy has
glass cases with souvenirs retrieved from the Spanish- American War. Anderson
and Bookout are both heavy- equipment operators. Drafting manifestoes is not
their line of work, but that is what they were doing when I got there -
preparing their appeal to the national leadership of the V.F.W., which has
proclaimed the organization's ''unanimous'' support of the President's stand in
Central America. A Harvard lawyer might have found it hard to improve on their
draft, which says they had fought for the right to dissent.

The Santa Cruz vets have a vision of themselves as a ''first wave'' of former
servicemen who will join together in the cause of peace. Near San Jose, I
encountered veterans of another kind, former peace activists who had leaped
across the ideological divide - with no sacrifice of radical zeal, nor loss of
belief that they are in confrontation with a decadent society. They are taking
their stand with conservative Christians seeking to ''restore the strength of
our nation,'' as a brochure I was handed puts it, by placing it on ''a biblical
base.''

If you are disposed to do so, you can write off Bill Garaway and Dennis Peacocke
as cultural mutants, but they are earnest, hard-working individuals who are more
conspicuously, at this juncture in America, part of a ''wave'' than those who
still identify with their former cause. If they are not typical, at least these
''Christian activists,'' as they are pleased to be known, show how the zealotry
of the 1960's left has provided models for the 80's right.

Garaway, now a successful contractor, was a leader of the draft-resistance
movement in the Vietnam period; following two Federal prosecutions (and a
featured role playing a character like himself in Antonioni's ''Zabriskie
Point''), he went searching for a ''new consciousness'' on a commune, winding up
by himself in a tree house in the woods above Palo Alto.

Peacocke, whose passage included the Free Speech Movement at Berkeley and the
Trotskyite Socialist Workers Party before he tripped off into LSD, black-belt
karate and Zen, is now a pastor and leader of an evangelical movement in
Northern California called the Covenant Outreach Ministries.

Both men are heavily involved in the right-to-life movement and building support
for a resolute American stand in Central America. Both are prepared to ''give
witness'' to what they regard as the moral failures and self- deception of the
antiwar movement. ''Everything we were told wouldn't happen has happened,''
Peacocke says. ''We were told it wasn't North Vietnam's war, but a 'people's
war.' Now we find out North Vietnam engineered the whole thing. We were told
there would be no genocide and slaughter. There has been genocide and slaughter.
What the people we did not trust said was true.'' He adds, ''The Third World War
started a long time ago, and we are losing.''

It is only among ideological converts, however, that this kind of confession
from 1960's activists is apt to be heard. Probably because the war had been
disowned by virtually every segment of American opinion by the time troop
withdrawals began in 1969 and the Nixon policy of ''Vietnamization'' was in
place, the ''Who lost Vietnam?'' witch hunt that stirred jittery premonitions in
the Johnson White House never materialized. Periodically, however, intellectual
disputes on the issue of intervention in the third world are enlivened by a
suggestion from the side that jousts under the neoconservative banner that a
little confession might be good for liberal souls.

Writing in Commentary five years ago, a sociologist named Peter L. Berger asked
whether the antiwar movement had been guilty of ''a moral failure of terrifying
proportions'' for neglecting to think through the consequences in Indochina of
the American defeat. Only two months later, the same journal ran an article by
Charles Horner pointing to the Khmer Rouge slaughters in Cambodia and the
tragedy of the Vietnamese boat people as evidence that ''thousands, perhaps
millions, had died because the American effort in Vietnam had been allowed to
fail.'' Finally, Norman Podhoretz, Commentary's editor, laid out the revisionist
case two years later in his ''Why We Were in Vietnam,'' which concluded that the
war was honorable but unwinnable, then argued that ''the antiwar movement bears
a certain measure of responsibility for the horrors that have overtaken the
people of Vietnam.''

The debate, when it is joined, gets a little intricate. The revisionists beg the
operational questions, never saying that America should have stayed in the war
with its men and its bombs. They also have to acknowledge that the continuing
Indochina wars do not make a tidy allegory, for they have been among Communists
- Vietnamese, Chinese, Cambodian - all of whom, without distinction, the United
States thought it was resisting when it intervened in Indochina. Intending to
withstand revolutionary Maoism, we ended up in a tacit alliance with the
Chinese, who support the Khmer Rouge, the faction responsible for the worst
genocide since Hitler. Paradoxes and counterarguments multiply, but among
veterans of the antiwar movement it seems that there has been a noticeable
aversion to engaging in a political post-mortem.

This does not mean that Indochina has been ignored by liberal intellectuals. The
New York Review of Books, which provided essential reading to serious-minded
doves during the war, has probably followed the Vietnamese and Cambodian
catastrophes in more detail than any other intellectual journal, including
Commentary. The emphasis has been on eyewitness accounts, which has meant they
were almost invariably by foreigners, starting with an article in 1977 by a
French- Canadian priest, Andre Gelinas, who portrayed ''the New Vietnam'' as a
place of rampant corruption and random terror.

''We are all a little neo- something,'' remarks Joseph Duffey, who ran for the
Senate in Connecticut as an antiwar candidate in 1970 and now is chancellor of
the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. ''That was our time, and we should
learn some lessons from it.'' Expressing the lesson he learned, Duffey
paraphrases Barry Goldwater. ''Extremism in politics is a vice,'' he says,
contending that the antiwar movement, by the ''virulence'' of its attack on
American values and institutions, may actually have prolonged the war. But
Duffey does not feel he is responsible, as an opponent of the war, for what has
happened in Indochina. What he feels is ''chastened.''

John Froines, one of the Chicago Seven and a full-time peace activist for two
and a half years, was similarly disinclined to plunge into the old debates when
I visited him at the School of Public Health at the University of California at
Los Angeles, where he is an associate professor, specializing in toxicology.
''For me Asia has faded,'' he acknowledges. ''I'm more focused on molecules.''

The scientist's opinions are now measured, detached. ''Everyone at a
subterranean level tries to think through that period,'' he says, ''but what's
the take-home lesson?''

The professor poses the question and answers it in a roundabout way that has
meaning in terms of his own current preoccupations in the laborartory. It is
that the Occupational Safety and Health Act was signed by a President named
Richard Nixon, whom the movement reviled. Now, he says, the law is being undone
by ideologues. ''I have a certain fondness for the Nixon Administration,'' the
toxicologist concludes. ''At least they were understandable. Nixon wasn't any
more immoral than other American Presidents. He was just caught in the Vietnam
web.''

In the 60's, proponents of intervention used to argue somewhat wanly that we had
to engage the realities of a complicated world; the opponents brandished moral
principles and brushed aside complexity. In the 80's, I was beginning to
conclude, it is just the opposite. But Daniel Ellsberg, a veteran of both sides,
didn't fit into my paradigm. He had known Vietnam too well to be simplistic then
and he was not inclined to waffle now. Over herbal tea in his hillside study on
the outskirts of Berkeley, where he maintains a one-man think tank on issues of
war and peace, Ellsberg read to me a passage from one of his official reports
from Vietnam that he had published in 1972 without apologies. The Communists, he
had predicted, would introduce ''forced- draft industrialization under
totalitarian controls, capitalized by exploitation of the peasants and preceded
by a blood bath to destroy or terrorize potential opposition.''

''I did not take naive positions,'' he says, marking the passage. ''There is a
tendency now to stereotype the entire antiwar movement as pro-Hanoi. A
stab-in-the-back legend is growing up.''

Ellsberg argues that there is a peace movement in place now that is more broadly
based, more knowledgeable about techniques of nonviolent protest and more
disciplined than the movements of the 60's. It has shown itself in the campaign
for a nuclear freeze. It will show itself again, he says, as the conflicts in
Central America widen. The Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon are also
better prepared, he contends. They have built airfields, made their logistical
arrangements, sealed borders and eliminated the possibility of sanctuaries
before running the risk of American casualties; they are also ready, he says, to
limit television and press coverage. ''But if you think all we need is
censorship, more air power and tougher police,'' Ellsberg says, ''look at Russia
in Afghanistan or Vietnam in Cambodia.''

Ten years later, we are talking about Vietnam again, but often as an analogy.
What we really want to know is what we would do the next time. The question is
put two ways. Positively: Have we regained our national will and purpose?
Negatively: Are we about to tear ourselves apart all over again? The two
concerns, it may be noted, are both self-regarding. They are also not mutually
exclusive, as The Times poll shows.  ON ASH WEDNESday, in Chicago's Loop, I
found myself on the fringes of the first peace demonstration I had happened to
witness in more than 13 years, a religious service conducted at midday in the
lobby of the Everett Dirksen Federal Building by clergy and laity from Chicago
churches that have pledged to serve as sanctuaries for political refugees from
El Salvador and Guatemala. A ''statement of confession and concern'' was read
out, calling on the Government ''to repent of its death-causing destruction and
seek the forgiveness of God and the wounded children, women and men of Central
America.''

Then, stepping forward, one by one, the 60 or so participants had the ashen mark
applied to their foreheads and took a little extra carbon on their fingertips,
which they then ran along the rough stone surface of the lobby wall, forming a
faintly visible web of powdery black streaks, a symbol ''of death and
repentance.'' Like many demonstrations of the 60's, it was essentially a media
event, affecting for those who took part but largely ignored by passers-by.

It was familiar except for one crucial factor: The participants were so much
older, which is to say there were hardly any kids. (Later, back in New York, I
asked the Rev. William Sloane Coffin, a leader in the sanctuary movement as well
as a leader in the early days of the Vietnam protests, whether this was typical.
He acknowledged that it was, citing the absence of the draft as an explanation.
''Americans are not ready to have good Americans die bravely in a bad cause,''
the preacher commented caustically, ''but they are ready to have almost anyone
else die bravely in a bad cause.'')





Beyond the rejection of the Vietnam War itself, there is virtually no trace of
the rebellious hostility to America - the ''mother country,'' it was
sardonically called - that ultimately cut off the protest movements of the
Vietnam era from any chance of grass- roots support. At the last peace rally I
can remember covering in those days, late in 1971, the Government was denounced
for ''war crimes'' and ''genocide,'' and debate centered on the question of
whether American society as a whole should be resisted as ''evil.'' Essentially
this was a question of tactics; that it was evil was taken as a given.

Conveying the mood of disillusion that prevailed in that period to today's
undergraduates is not much easier than conveying the mood of 17th-century Salem,
Mass. James Matray, a 36-year-old historian, participated as a student in the
60's protests. Today he teaches a course on the Vietnam period at New Mexico
State University at Las Cruces to students he describes as being mostly ''tabula
rasa'' on the subject. Usually, he says, it is more difficult to explain to his
students the position of those who, like himself, resisted than to explore the
position of those who supported the war. ''What's so disturbing about the
college students today,'' he comments, ''is the absence of the moral yardstick
that we applied.''

What grips today's students about Vietnam is the experience of people who went
through the war, the personal choices of soldiers, not Presidents. ''I have high
respect for the people who went,'' a sophomore named Diane Watts comments when I
raise the subject of Vietnam at Southwest Texas State University, Lyndon B.
Johnson's alma mater. ''It may not have been the right thing to do, but at least
they gave their lives up for the Government.''

The most popular course at the University of California at Santa Barbara, where
Vietnam is taught in the department of religious studies rather than history,
focuses mainly on the nature of the decision to serve and its consequences. The
873 undergraduates enrolled in the course hear relatively few academic lectures.
Instead, they are present as witnesses to encounter sessions at which
individuals whose lives were shaped by the era - mainly vets - unpack their
anger, fears and dreams.

I heard about the course from John Wheeler, an official at the Securities and
Exchange Commission whose own odyssey ran through West Point, business and law
school, a staff job in Vietnam and a theological seminary, and who now has
undertaken the cause of ''healing'' as a moral avocation. When Wheeler lectured
at Santa Barbara, he spoke about Vietnam as an experience of ''self-giving'' on
the part of the soldier but took what amounted to an agnostic position on the
war itself. ''I don't think the jury is in on Vietnam,'' he said, ''and I
promise you that I don't think I know the answer.''

His earnestness and tentativeness, or perhaps the combination, earned him an
emotionally charged standing ovation lasting more than a full minute. At the
next lecture, the Santa Barbara students did the same for a vet named Shad
Meshad, whose testimony took them from his first confrontation with the war's
brutality - a home movie shown by the instructor of Meshad's Reserve Officer
Training Corps class featuring the instructor in the act of mutilating a
Vietcong corpse - through the whole cycle of suffering and alienation. When he
was through, dozens of students rushed to the stage to hear more.

A young woman told me it was the best lecture she had heard in the course. I
asked what she liked about it. ''The gory details,'' she replied,

mentioning in particular the anecdote about the film. I wondered why this was.
She found it hard to explain, so I'm still wondering. My guess is that her
answer said nothing about politics, that she was expressing the emotions of fear
and pity, which Aristotle said were appropriate to tragedy.  IT'S NOT THE STU

dents who speak of the

''lessons'' of Vietnam. That's left to those who pursue the old debates. Was it
that we limited our use of power, used it arrogantly or used it at all? Was the
military kept from ''winning'' the war, or did it lack a strategy? What did we
mean by ''winning,'' anyhow? It is a mark of how unresolved American feelings
about the war remain that you get answers that are diametrically opposed when
you raise such issues with the two members of the Senate whose political careers
are most conspicuously rooted in the war.

Jeremiah A. Denton Jr., an Alabama Republican, and John F. Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat, were both highly decorated Navy officers. Senator
Denton, a career man shot down over North Vietnam on his 12th mission in 1965,
survived more than 7 years - including more than 4 years of solitary confinement
punctuated by torture - as a prisoner of war. Senator Kerry, a lieutenant 19
years Denton's junior, became a spokesman for Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

The essential error on the American side, the Alabaman believes, was to fail to
use decisive force early enough. ''If we were bombing Hanoi in July 1965, the
month I was shot down, at one-tenth the level that we bombed it in December
1972,'' he contends, ''the war would have been over.'' The United States
confronts a similar test of will in Central America, where, he says,
''unilateral war shouldn't be in the cards but may be necessary.''

Senator Kerry, by contrast, describes his stand on Vietnam as ''a central part
of my political existence.'' The ''clear lessons'' of Vietnam are apparent to
the voters, he contends. Kerry had a landslide of his own last November in the
midst of the Reagan avalanche. ''They have come to understand that we should not
have been there,'' he says. ''When we commit our forces, the goal should be
achievable. When we do it, let's do it democratically.'' With Central America in
mind, the freshman Senator is looking for ways to strengthen the War Powers Act
of 1973, which was intended to check a President's ability to commit American
power without Congressional approval.

Periodic attempts by the Reagan Administration to repeal the act have foundered
because the very suggestion provokes fears of ''another Vietnam.'' In what
proved to be one of the most misguided assessments of the entire war,
then-Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara wrote early on: ''The greatest
contribution Vietnam is making - right or wrong is beside the point - is that it
is developing an ability in the United States to fight a limited war, to go to
war without the necessity of arousing public ire.'' Now public ire is seen as a
potential threat to any war effort. Hence the conclusion of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and Caspar W. Weinberger, the Defense Secretary, that we should only fight
wars the public has endorsed, which makes the Joint Chiefs heirs to one of the
main antiwar themes.

But then such paradoxes are part of the general inheritance.

Dan Moore, a veteran now employed making Cadillacs at the Fleetwood plant in
Detroit, readily acknowledges that he tried to avoid service in the war. He
went, finally, but managed to stay offshore in the Gulf of Siam on a Navy oiler.
He does not think the war was justified, but he now dwells on ''strength.''

''I don't think we can spend enough time thinking about being strong,'' Dan
Moore says. ''I wish our President had acted when they bombed our embassy in
Lebanon. He wasn't strong enough. And when they shot down that 007 plane, we did
nothing. It sometimes makes my mind go on the blink to think if we're really,
really ready.''

Plainly, the revulsion from the Vietnam War and the chasm it opened in American
society have made room for the prevailing mood of nationalism, but it can also
work the other way. Paul Melhercik, the personnel director for an electronics
company, also tried to avoid the war. He has a sports car in the garage of his
home in a St. Louis suburb with the license plate OLDVET, but he says it stands
for ''old Corvette,'' not ''old veteran.'' Melhercik voted twice for Richard M.
Nixon, twice for Ronald Rea- gan, and believes in ''a strong military, a strong
defense.'' Yet he is dead set against intervention in third-world conflicts.
''What we learned in Vietnam,'' he says, ''is we can't fight other people's
wars. I don't know why, whether we don't understand their cultures or what, but
we can't be the world's policeman. Another culture doesn't play by the same
rules.'' At which point Charlene Melhercik, his wife, interjects, ''You mean our
rules.'' I N THE AMERICAN MIND THERE

are, after all, two, three, many Vietnams.

There is also the real country, which was always remote, even to many who served
there. ''You could lose all respect for the Vietnamese, till you fought beside
them, touched them, lived with them,'' remarks Alan (Doc) Cornett, whose
experience of Vietnam comes as close as any American's to telling the story of
the war.

He can remember, when he was new to Vietnam, contemptuously hurling C-ration
cans at the heads of Vietnamese civilians from a speeding truck.

But he had been trained in the language and two of its dialects, and soon he was
operating on his own as a Special Forces medic attached to a South Vietnamese
unit. His Vietnamese counterpart became his best friend and, over a period of
three years, he grew attached to his friend's family, then engaged to his
friend's sister. They were married in a Vietnamese ceremony, but then the
colonel in command of Cornett's unit refused to process the papers necessary for
the marriage to be recognized by the Army. Cornett had committed the sin of
''fraternization,'' the officer said. He had ''gone native.'' He would not be
allowed to bring a Vietnamese ''prostitute'' home. Instead, he was to consider
himself confined to base.

Not long after that, Cornett went home in handcuffs to a court-martial and the
stockade for assaulting his colonel. The Army, with Solomonic tact, having
busted him to private for indiscipline, then brought his wife, Linh, to America,
and they were married again. Cornett stayed in and now, a graybeard with 20 of
his 41 years in the service, is a sergeant first class at Fort Benning. When he
thinks of the war, he is one of the tiny minority of Americans who think first
of the South Vietnamese. ''We deserted them, you know,'' he says.

Others still think of the Vietnamese with guilt and resentment, or a mixture,
guilty resentment. In a long afternoon's conversation over beer at the V.F.W.
post in the Appalachian coal-mining town of Cumberland, Ky., the talk turned to
hatred. ''We didn't like ourselves, we didn't like any people there,'' said Sam
Gilbert. ''We just built up a general hatred.''

''Slant eyes,'' another vet said, sounding nostalgic, as if he had remembered
the name of a song.

''Just about every Vietnam vet hated the Vietnamese,'' remarked Eddie Sturgill,
a union official, speaking in a sad, ruminating voice. One of the vets
remembered how his unit used to fire rounds over the heads of peasants working
in the paddy fields, ''just to see them hit the water.''

''To see how big a splash they made,'' another said.

''You know, if we went to Central America, we'd hate those people, too,'' Eddie
said.

What concerns me,'' he continued, ''is when people say, 'You couldn't do it. You
lost the war.' ''

''We didn't lose no war when I was there,'' exploded Roy Tippett. ''We done our
objective.''

''Did they take it when you was there, Possum?'' asked Ronnie Johnson,
embroidering Tippett's point. ''Did they kick you out?''

James Boggs, known as Possum, had to be treated for alcoholism and depression in
a psychiatric hospital after he left the Army. Of the many terrible memories he
has had to learn to accommodate, the worst was of the day in the A Shau Valley
when a Cobra gunship, mistaking his platoon for North Vietnamese, dropped its
nose and swooped down, killing eight. He answers the question with a
noncommittal shake of the head. Later Possum says, ''I ain't got no feelings
when it comes to funerals, cause of 'Nam.''

I went back to Washington at the end of my trip and spent three hours at the
Vietnam Memorial on an unseasonably balmy Sunday afternoon. Specifications in
the design of the monument required that it be apolitical, but the feelings it
inspires may have political meaning for the American present. No doubt these are
diverse, but I did not get a sense that many visitors find an explanation, let
alone a justification, for the deaths. On the contrary, the impact seems to come
from the names themselves: the remarkable particularization and specificity of
the 58,022 names etched in granite and chronicled in directories the size of
phone books (83 more names than were there when it was dedicated). From what I
could surmise, most visitors come away with a sense of waste as well as
sacrifice.

''Sometimes,'' said Bill Schorndorf, a former marine who visits the memorial at
least twice a week, ''I pick a name and try to imagine what he was like.'' He
wasn't the only one who seemed to be doing that. ''Look,'' a man from Virginia
said to his son, ''there's even a Yamashita.'' I checked the directory. Five
Americans named Yamashita died in Vietnam. (If there is a next time, probably
there will be Troungs and Nguyens: 700,000 refugees from Indochina have reached
America since the fall of Saigon.) NATIONS DON'T build monuments to their
defeated allies or victorious enemies, so there is nothing at the memorial to
remind you of the Vietnamese. Of the people with whom I spoke when I visited the
monument, only Bill Schorndorf even mentioned them, and then only after I had
brought up the subject indirectly by asking whether he thought it had been a
''noble cause,'' as President Reagan called it. ''The idea when we went in there
was right,'' he said, ''but I don't think the people wanted to be saved, at
times.''

A balanced historical judgment would have to be more exact. It would have to ask
why, if that were the case, they didn't want to be saved. It would also have to
ask whether there had ever been any real relationship between the wishes of the
Vietnamese and our decisions. But if this was not a historical judgment, it
seemed to be the judgment of many Americans. We seem to be inclined to forgive
ourselves for having gone there; inclined also to say that if things didn't work
out, it wasn't our fault. That may not be a balanced judgment but it is still, I
thought, a recognition of history and of limits.

That is what our supposed loss of innocence after Vietnam was said to have been
all about, but we don't reward leaders who talk of limits. Five days after his
enormous election victory last November, President Reagan spoke at the Vietnam
Memorial and took up the theme of self-forgiveness. ''We can forgive ourselves
for those things that may have been wrong in the conduct of the war,'' the
President said. His words seemed to have been chosen very carefully, and to
imply that the results could have been different; that the mistakes were in the
conduct of the war and not, as most of those who voted for him appear to
believe, in the war itself.

But even a President with a huge, freshly renewed mandate would not want to do
more than touch on that theme. He had not got where he was by arguing over the
past. So he spoke about ''healing'' and moving forward, offering balm for wounds
that still pain.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Vietnam veterans

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WAR AND THE ARTS

BYLINE: By Samuel G. Freedman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3971 words


Samuel G. Freedman is a New York Times culture reporter.


EARLY IN THE FILM ''UNCOMmon Valor,'' the father of an American soldier who is
missing in action, years after the Vietnam War, goes in search of his son's
Marine buddies. One by one, the father enlists them to join him on a mission to
Indochina to find and free his son. ''There's a lot of unfinished business,'' he
tells them.  ''Over there.'' That brief moment reveals a great deal about the
way the Vietnam War is affecting the popular culture and fine art of America
today. ''Uncommon Valor'' represents the vanguard of art that declares America
was right in Vietnam, that replaces recrimination with congratulation. And the
film's image of returning to the Vietnam War attests to a national obsession
that goes beyond history and politics: a need to complete the ''unfinished
business'' of Vietnam, to make individual sense of it.

That compulsion, coming after years of avoidance, has taken the form of an
outpouring of paintings, poems, songs, plays, films, novels, sculptures and
television shows about the war. Much of the recent work has been created by
veterans, and virtually all of it concerns them. Americans devour it all, hungry
in part for a genuine reconciliation and in part for a feel-good to dispel the
self-doubt of the 1960's.

The depictions of the war and its domestic aftermath range from the imposing
Vietnam Veterans Memorial to the intimate poetry of Michael Casey, from the high
art of Lanford Wilson's play ''Fifth of July'' to the mass appeal of
television's ''The A-Team.'' Vietnam literature now numbers several hundred
volumes. An exhibit of art by Vietnam War veterans, titled ''Vietnam: Reflexes
and Reflections,'' has been touring the country since 1981. ''Tracers,'' a drama
about the war written and performed by a troupe of veterans, has played to sold-
out houses and critical acclaim in Los Angeles, Chicago and New York. In the
guise of Tom Selleck on television's ''Magnum, P.I.'' and Chuck Norris in two
''Missing in Action'' films, the Vietnam veteran is a hero, a hunk.

For creative artists as well as purveyors of pulp, war has always provided the
essential ingredients of human drama - life and death, bravery and cowardice,
loyalty and betrayal. ''War is the best subject of all,'' Ernest Hemingway once
wrote. ''It groups the maximum of material and speeds up the action and brings
out all sorts of stuff that normally you have to wait a lifetime to get.''

To the usual chemistry of combat, the Vietnam War added even more volatile
elements. Vietnam was America's ideological civil war, pitting hawk against
dove, hard hat against peacenik. Patriotism gave way to revulsion, to a
questioning of the national character. And most important for the men who fought
the war - as it seems to be for the country - Vietnam had no clear ending,
neither victory nor surrender. Their art is a search for that final, missing
piece.

''For anyone who's been through an extremely traumatic experience,'' says W. D.
Ehrhart, a Vietnam veteran and a poet, ''there's a driving need to explore it,
to understand it. There is a turmoil inside. Those of us who could, articulated
it with writing, painting, whatever. The veterans who had trouble with drugs,
who had bad marriages, who couldn't cope, were part of the same thing. People
like me were lucky to have a constructive way to channel that energy. My own
experience is no longer inconclusive. The national experience is still
unresolved, but, personally, I've closed the circle.''

FROM THE VETERANS HAS COME A VIEW of the war dramatically different from the one
propounded by the antiwar artists of the 1960's and early 70's. The new vision
can be measured in the distance from ''M*A*S*H'' to ''Magnum, P.I.'' on
television, from ''Who'll Stop the Rain?'' to ''The Deer Hunter'' on film, from
''Alice's Restaurant'' to ''Still in Saigon'' in song, from Leon Golub to Roger
Brown in art.

Some of the art and popular culture that subscribe to a conservative view of the
war - ''Uncommon Valor,'' for instance - argue outright that American
intervention in Vietnam was moral and justified. John M. Del Vecchio's novel,
''The 13th Valley,'' recalls World War II literature in its description of
American valor and victory on the battlefield. Although Brown's paintings do not
directly address the Vietnam War, they mock the kind of left-wing
national-liberation movement that the United States fought there. The title of
one piece accuses Latin American intellectuals of directing ''their Marxist
terrorist movements from safe quarters in Mexico City and Columbia (sic) while
their Indian peasant recruits do the fighting and dying. . . .'' The visual
images in many of the latest Vietnam War films recall television newscasts
during the war - tortured captives, crippled children, weeping widows. But now
these people are shown as the victims of Communist despots, not American
imperialists. This is true even of a politically liberal film like ''The Killing
Fields.'' While implying that American bombing contributed to the ferocity of
the Khmer Rouge, the film is unsparing in showing the Khmer Rouge's genocide in
Cambodia.

More common than a political or polemical outlook, however, is the calculatedly
apolitical one. Rather than raise the still-divisive issue of American
intervention in Vietnam - was it right or wrong - much of the current art and
popular culture concentrate on the experience of the American soldier, both in
the field and back at home. The war criminal of the 1960's is the hero of the
1980's. At the most extreme (the karate-chopping

movie star Chuck Norris, for instance), he is the

gung-ho hero Vietnam has lacked since ''The

Green Berets'' and Sergeant Fury comic books.

The veterans on the television shows ''Magnum,

P.I.'' and ''The A-Team,'' who use the teamwork

and guile they acquired in Vietnam to fight

crime in America, typify a second, more moderate approach. The most frequent
image of all is

the survivor-as-hero, the soldier who fought

under insane conditions in Vietnam and then rebuilt his life in an ungrateful
America. The simplicity of that stereotype accounts, no doubt, for

much of its appeal. The survivor-hero may be a

far cry from Audie Murphy or Sergeant York,

but he is far more palatable to the public than the

heroin-shooting, shotgun-slinging, suicidal veteran of the first wave of post-
Vietnam War culture - which itself followed the ''war criminal''

caricature of soldiers during the antiwar movement.  If anything, the current
image of the Vietnam veteran facing a ferocious enemy on behalf of a Government
he distrusts adds to his

fictive stature. ''It strengthens the hero

image,'' says Alan Brinkley, an associate professor of history at Harvard who
specializes in

20th-century American history. ''He's someone who's been through the fire and
come out

stronger, someone who's been tested by failure, someone who's been betrayed -
either by

his leaders for not being allowed to fight without restraints or, more
moderately, by his

country for being sent at all. That's a theme in

a lot of the literature.'' Veneration of the veteran is the lowest common
denominator in the cultural equation; it

has become the point of consensus for Americans - and artists - who widely
disagree on

almost anything else concerning the Vietnam

War. This helps explain the phenomenon of

Bruce Springsteen's song ''Born in the U.S.A.'' The song tells a story that was
inspired in

part, Springsteen has said, by the death in

Vietnam of the drummer in his first band. A

small-town boy goes to fight in Vietnam. His

brother, who had fallen in love with a Vietnamese woman, is killed at Khe Sanh.
The surviving brother returns to the United States and cannot find a job. He
turns to the Veterans Administration for help and gets excuses. ''Nowhere to
run,'' Springsteen concludes, ''ain't got nowhere to go.'' Yet when he breaks
into the song in concert, his audiences break out American flags.

Ron Kovic, the disabled Vietnam veteran who wrote the autobiography ''Born on
the Fourth of July,'' may have explained that seeming contradiction when he
recently told Rolling Stone magazine: ''One thing that Bruce's music teaches us
is that even with all the things that happened in that war, with all the
suffering, we can still love America. We can love it for the good things, not
the bad.''

Consider another paradox. A 1980 Veterans Administration poll asked Vietnam
veterans which feature films portrayed them most favorably. The highest ratings
went to John Wayne's ''The Green Berets'' and to ''Coming Home'' - which starred
Jane Fonda, an actress who personified American sympathy for North Vietnam
during the war. But the popularity of these two apparently incompatible films
makes sense; both celebrate heroism. ''The Green Berets'' offers victory in
combat. ''Coming Home'' offers victory at home, as a paraplegic veteran
overcomes his handicap to build an independent life and win the love of a
beautiful woman. For all the political differences in the two films, the veteran
in ''Coming Home'' could well have been a soldier in ''The Green Berets.''

''At first, Vietnam frustrated America because we had no Iwo Jima, no Patton, no
MacArthur,'' says John Milius, who co-wrote ''Apocalypse Now'' and produced
''Uncommon Valor,'' but never served in Vietnam because of a medical deferment.
''There were

will complete a remarkable turnabout in American culture. During most of the
Vietnam War, the artistic response to American soldiers ranged from ambivalence
to outrage. Popular culture showed a curious oblivion to the war. Or perhaps it
was deliberate escapism. In the second week of May 1968 - the week with the most
American deaths during the war - the No. 1 song was Bobby Goldsboro's lachrymose
''Honey'' and the most popular television show was ''Rowan & Martin's
Laugh-In.''

But Vietnam politicized American fine artists to a de

Most of the politicized artists urged American withdrawal from the war and their
recurrent images included domestic protest and Vietnamese pain. The plight of
American soldiers in Vietnam was not equally evident, and it was also obscured
by the class divisions the war created in American society. With college
deferments from the draft, it was largely the children of poor and working-class
parents, not of the intelligentsia, who fought in Vietnam. But the
intelligentsia made the art.





Such artists as Jane Fonda, the singer Joan Baez and the author Susan Sontag
visited Hanoi during the war and saw firsthand the destruction by American
bombs. Clemens Starck's 1965 poem ''On a Clear Day'' likened the American
intervention in Vietnam to Egyptians pursuing the fleeing Moses. ''The Vietnam
Songbook,'' a 1969 collection of protest songs, bore the dedication: ''To the
people of Vietnam, whose struggle for liberation embodies the hopes of all
humanity.'' Draft resistance became a favorite theme in songs, from Arlo
Guthrie's deadpan ''Alice's Restaurant'' to Phil Ochs's anthemic ''I Ain't
Marchin' Anymore.''

The nightly footage of parents heaving with grief and children charred by napalm
provided striking images for visual artists. The response grew as extreme as the
''body art'' of Chris Burden, Vito Acconci and others, who had themselves bound,
shot and tortured to illustrate human suffering. Much more common, however, were
evocations of Vietnamese anguish. Peter Saul's 1967 painting ''Saigon,'' one of
the major pieces of antiwar art, showed the American soldiers symbol

''I felt as bad for our soldiers as I did for the Vietnamese,'' says Baranik, a
World War II veteran. ''They suffered. They were miserable. But the way we felt
about American soldiers did not translate itself into art. There was clearly
greater suffering by the Vietnamese. They were being napalmed. They were having
their culture destroyed.''

It seemed easier, and more politically acceptable, for artists to identify with
American soldiers by distancing them from Vietnam. The major antiwar films of
the Vietnam years - adaptations of the novels ''Catch-22'' and ''M*A*S*H'' -
were set in World War II and the Korean War. Both films sympathized with
individual soldiers while criticizing the war itself. A 1973 episode of the
television series ''M*A*S*H'' showed the doctors tending to Korean civilians
whose village had been mistakenly shelled by American troops. ''Look,'' a
demoralized Hawkeye Pierce told a general during the epi

The Vietnam War also affected culture in subliminal ways. Along with student
activism, drug use, sexual freedom and other factors, it catalyzed and unified
the counterculture.

''Take the play 'Hair,' one of the icons of the counterculture,'' says Alan
Brinkley of Harvard. ''There's almost nothing in there about the war, and yet
it's hard to imagine that show taking the same form without the war.'' Joan Baez
suggests that the most important artist in the antiwar movement was Bob Dylan,
even though he ''never took a stand, never was on a march.'' ''The important
thing was not the content of the songs,'' she says, ''but the context of the
times.''

Vietnam was not only the first war fought on television, but the first one
fought to a rock-and-roll soundtrack. Much of the music crackled with its own
kind of violence, and Jimi Hendrix's songs, in particular, directly echoed the
sounds of sirens, gunfire and

Some of the most arresting moments in Vietnam-related art fuse images of war and
music. A soldier in ''Tracers'' plays his M-16 like an electric guitar. Napalm
ignites a jungle as The Doors sing ''The End'' in ''Apocalypse Now.'' As early
as 1972, pop musicians like Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield began singing about
the painful readjustment of Vietnam veterans, and the subject re-emerged a
decade later in the songs of Dan Daley (''Still in Saigon''), Huey Lewis
(''Walking on a Thin Line'') and Billy Joel (''Goodnight Saigon'').  WHEN SAIGON
fell in 1975, it was as if those last helicopters left behind not only Vietnam
but memory itself. A

The post-Vietnam art that did sustain itself commercially was notable for its
harrowing view of the war. ''Apocalypse Now'' abounded with images of cruelty
and madness - soldiers surfing amid an air strike, helicopters attacking to the
strains of Wagner, a Green Beret colonel playing God to Montagnard tribesmen.
David Rabe's Vietnam trilogy, which appeared between 1969 and 1977, showed the
war turning soldiers against themselves and their friends. In ''Sticks and
Bones,'' a blind veteran

Such art was impassioned and original, but before long the Vietnam veteran as
junkie, emotional cripple or ticking time bomb became a stock character in
American culture. The stereotype made many veterans angry enough to finally tell
their own stories, stories they had held inside for years. John M. Del Vecchio
has said that his disgust with ''Apocalypse Now'' spurred him to write ''The
13th Valley.'' ''Taxi Driver'' was the turning point for Thomas Bird, the
artistic director of the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theatre Company, which was
founded in 1978 and which produced ''Tracers.'' ''That movie didn't explain
anything about Travis Bickle,'' he says. ''It was enough that he had served in
Vietnam for him to be a psychopath.''

The flood of literature by and about veterans was a key factor in altering how
American

America, meanwhile, began to turn to the right. Neil Young, whose 1970 song
''Ohio'' eulogized the students slain at Kent State, last year endorsed Ronald
Reagan for President. High-school walls that had carried peace signs a
generation earlier bore the message ''Nuke Iran.'' It is difficult to say which
came first - the conservative upsurge or the rehabilitation of the Vietnam
veteran - but each trend nourished the other.

''There's a need to show we have the will and the character we had before
Vietnam,'' says William Alexander, a professor of English at the University of
Michigan who teaches a course on ''Vietnam and the Artist.'' ''A need to rethink
ourselves to the basic American good guy.'' THE VOLTE-FACE CAME IN the late
1970'S. Two of the finest books about the war - ''Dispatches,'' a memoir of the
war by the journalist Michael Herr, and ''Going After Cacciato,'' a novel by the
Vietnam veteran Tim O'Brien - appeared respectively in 1977 and 1978. Without
endorsing the war, both wrote movingly about the men who fought in it. ''I think
that those people who used to say that they only wept for the Vietnamese never
really wept for anyone at all,'' Herr wrote, ''if they couldn't squeeze out at
least one for these men and boys when they died or had their lives cracked open
for them.''

In 1979, ''The Deer Hunter'' won the Academy Award as best picture and Jon
Voight and Jane Fonda took the Oscars as best actor and actress for ''Coming
Home.'' Suddenly, Vietnam was not only a safe subject but a trendy one. Both
films sent out particularly strong messages. Although ''Coming Home'' included
an antiwar speech by Voight's character and the political awakening of Fonda's,
it simultaneously seemed a mea culpa for the excesses of the movement. Here was
''Hanoi Jane,'' after all, playing the wife of an American soldier.

''The Deer Hunter,'' the epic of three young steelworkers who go to war
together, represented a return to a World War II type of cinema. The only
atrocities in the film are committed by Vietnamese Communists, who resemble the
evil ''Japs'' of 1940's B-movies. They throw a hand grenade into a bunker of
women and children; they make their American captives play Russian roulette. And
while one of the Americans perishes and another loses his legs, the film ends
not in sorrow but in affirmation, their friends singing ''God Bless America.''

Several movies and television shows have gone even further. ''Uncommon Valor''
is a ritualized re-enactment of the war, with a draft, boot camp and combat in
the Asian jungle. Only this time the Americans win, and this time they are
fighting the good fight. ''No one can dispute the rightness of what you're
doing,'' their leader says on the eve of the rescue mission. In a recent
two-part episode of ''Magnum, P.I.,'' the three veterans return to Indochina to
liberate a leader of the anti-Communist resistance.

Interestingly, such films and shows have inherited from the antiwar movement a
distrust of the American Government. The C.I.A. tries to stop the veterans from
undertaking their mission in ''Uncommon Valor.'' Chuck Norris in ''Missing in
Action'' rescues M.I.A.'s even as American senators are holding feckless
negotiations with the Vietnamese for their release.

The antiwar movement has come in for skeptical treatment. The Sixties survivors
in ''The Big Chill'' are all disenchanted with their liberal values. A ghetto
teacher has become a writer for People magazine. A legal-aid lawyer has gone
corporate. The inference is given that a friend who committed suicide started
his downhill slide by turning down a fellowship for political reasons. The
central character in David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly'' - the most incisive examination
yet of America's post- Vietnam malaise - is Eddie, an embittered idealist trying
to numb his political conscience under drink, drugs and women. Writers who
dodged the draft or received medical deferments have created a genre of
breast-beating magazine essays, notably Christopher Buckley's ''Viet Guilt'' and
James Fallows's ''What Did You Do in the Class War, Daddy?''

The literature and visual art created by veterans, however, is more personal
than polemical. ''When you think about novels about the war, they're rarely
political,'' says Tim O'Brien. ''Because the issues you confront are personal,
not political. Staying alive, burning a village, watching the bombs fall. The
primary things one cares about in battle aren't the political issues. It's being
scared, being brave. Those are things

that go back to Homer. Those are the ancient things.''

The absence of a common political cause largely defines Vietnam literature and
separates it from a lot of American war fiction. Much Vietnam literature makes a
conscious connection to the disillusioned writing that emerged after World War I
from the British and from the American expatriate Ernest Hemingway. O'Brien
opens ''Cacciato'' with a quotation from Siegfried Sassoon. Ehrhart cites the
poet Wilfred Owen as a major influence. Allusions to Hemingway's ''A Farewell to
Arms'' appear in several novels. Even in the film ''Apocalypse Now,'' the
character Kurtz recites T. S. Eliot's ''The Hollow Men,'' a poem of post-World
War I sorrow.

Why the affinity between these writers of World War I and Americans of Vietnam?
''An absence of clear purpose is the easiest answer,'' O'Brien suggests. ''A
loss of na"ivete.'' Ehrhart says: ''There is a sense of being in a war without
moral purpose or physical gain. In World War I, you were in the same trenches
every day. In Vietnam, you patrolled the same villages every day.''

If the best Vietnam literature took its tone from post- World War I writers, it
shared its style with such modernists as Alain Robbe- Grillet. The action in the
Vietnam novels is usually fragmented, the dialogue riddled with military jargon,
pidgin Vietnamese and American black patois. The theater of war is drawn so
realistically and in such detail - fog, swamps, snipers; pizza parlors and Dairy
Queens airlifted in to create a semblance of home - that it becomes absurd,
surreal. In that context, gallantry seems besides the point. Survival is all.
(There are exceptions, of course; Del Vecchio's ''The 13th Valley'' and James
Webb's ''Fields of Fire'' both portrayed traditional valor.)

Of all the cultural forms, visual art most closely parallels fiction in its
depiction of the soldier's Vietnam. The exhibit ''Vietnam: Reflexes and
Reflections,'' which includes 120 paintings, photographs and sculptures by 63
veterans, is distinctive for its uniform anguish. The images in the exhibit -
which has earned the praise of art critics in Chicago, Washington and New York -
include the skull of a G.I. impaled on a stake, a rural mother receiving the
news her son is dead, a soldier cradling a dead Vietnamese child.

Not only does this art stand apart from the triumphal evocations of World War
II, it also departs from the fairly traditional fare in the official armed
services Vietnam archives. ''I see an awful lot of agony in the art,'' says
Sondra Varco, the executive director of the Vietnam Veterans Arts Group, which,
founded in 1981, organized the exhibit. ''There is no feeling of victory. These
people don't feel like heroes.'' THE QUESTION REmains whether the totality of
individual artistic responses to the war amounts to a national response.
Certainly, a period of healing is under way. But the healing is partly
self-deception, for it does not acknowledge the fissures that remain from the
war. ''The phase now,'' says the playwright David Rabe, ''is to make up a
tolerable explanation for Vietnam. Our appetite is for a substitute answer, not
the real answer. We'll salve ourselves.''

This is a nation, after all, that could not agree on a single memorial to the
Vietnam War in Washington. It needed both the somber wall, engraved with the
names of the fallen, and a statue of three soldiers, innocents who look one year
out of the backfield of a high-school football team.

''Those monuments are the closest thing we have to a common text,'' says Gordon
O. Taylor, a University of Tulsa English professor who has studied Vietnam
literature on a Guggenheim Fellowship. ''I think of them as a kind of narrative
that we as a nation are still learning how to read.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of painting by George Skypeck (Martha Swope Associates/Susan
Cook) (page 51); photo of scene from 'Tracers' (Martha Swope Associates/Susan
Cook) (page 51); photo of man in tree (Lee Gross/Marvin Lichtner)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'FOR US, THE WAR IS OVER'

BYLINE: By Michael Norman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 64, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4942 words


Michael Norman, a metropolitan reporter for The Times, writes the ''Our Towns''
column. He is preparing a book about the men he served with in Vietnam.

I WANTED TO FORGET ALMOST EVERYTHING ELSE, but never, never the names. They
stayed with me - long after the smell of the field and the echo of the guns,
long after that moment when a rainstorm was finally just a rainstorm and not the
assault of a jungle monsoon. My uniforms lost their fit. My rifleman's eye took
on glasses. But I always remembered the names.  I married a nurse who went on to
become a professor. A son was born, a sweet boy with blue eyes who learned how
to spell ''squirrel'' and ''please.'' I began a career, wandering the provinces
in search of boat builders and bald eagles and neighbors who quarrel over dogs.
In short, I came home quickly from the war - no drinks with the boys down at the
Legion hall, no parades or veterans' protests in the streets. But I tried, tried
often during the last 16 years, not to forget the names.  I remembered the dead.
''We die with the dying,'' wrote T. S. Eliot. ''See, they depart, and we go with
them.'' Jim Payne of Glendale, Calif. Jim Parsons of Warsaw, Mo.  Tommy Gonzales
of Beeville, Tex. It was, in part, a matter of duty, one marine keeping alive
the memory of others - semper fidelis. I remembered the living, as well. And one
day, in the early spring of 1984, I set out to find them.  We were Golf Company,
Second Battalion, Ninth Marines, some 220 infantrymen. The overall casualty rate
for the Marine Corps in Vietnam is estimated at 25 percent.  During 1968, the
year of the Tet offensive, Golf Company took part in more than 25 major combat
operations - some of the heaviest fighting of the war. The cost was high.  Some
of us walked from the field when our 13-month tour was done. Others were carried
out wounded or dead. None of us saw the end. We finished our watch before the
war was over. Our fathers had an epilogue, but for us there was to be no
shipboard signing of the peace, no chance to return to the battlefield and watch
the plowman cut furrows in the mortar pits.

I wanted to make an end of it, but did not know how. Then, last year, I dug my
old letters and pictures from the plaid satchel in the attic. I made a list of
the names. I went in search of the men I once kept close, 11 men now spread
across the world from Seattle to London.

They drive trucks now, sell stocks, counsel children. Our old company commander
is still in the corps, a logistical officer at Naval Headquarters in London. He
does not have his handlebar mustache any more and his hair is beginning to gray.
But he looked good to me. They all looked good to me.

My impressions, however, my feelings, do not mirror the dozens of studies and
thousands of pages of evidence on Vietnam veterans. So many of them, the experts
say, are still plagued by the war - unemployed, angry, lost.  Others make the
headlines: ''Convict Seeking Freedom Blames Vietnam for Slaying.'' And Americans
believe what they read. In a New York Times Poll in February, 72 percent of
those surveyed said that Vietnam veterans have more emotional problems than
veterans of World War II.

Yes, my evidence is scant and clouded by friendship.  Eleven men is not a
generation. And of course, my comrades - like many combat marines - did not come
home whole. One, hobbled by his wounds, became an alcoholic. Another, half
blind, cut himself adrift. But in the end, they were as I remembered them -
resilient. They are not bitter; they have healed themselves. For us, the war is
over.








 HE HAD A SONG, an old Hank Williams tune, and when the mood struck him, as it
often did, he would add an extra measure of syrup to his voice and warble:
''Hear that lonesome whippoorwill. He sounds too blue to fly. . . . '' He had a
laugh, too, a deep belly laugh, and sometimes, trading jokes of an afternoon, he
would perch on the edge of his fighting hole and throw his head back and howl.
He liked being on stage. He seemed bigger, stronger, louder - all Texas.

But now, 16 years later, Craig Belknap was hanging back, almost out of sight at
the airport arrival gate. He was wearing an expensive blue blazer with gray
trousers and his shoes had that boot-camp shine. His dark beard, a new addition
since Vietnam, was neatly trimmed and yet the eyes, the look, was the same.

When I set out to find the small clan of comrades I once counted as friends, I
thought of Craig first. He had been our ebullient center, the purveyor of
bonhomie and cans of Pearl beer his folks sent from home.

Craig was wounded on April 19, 1968, in a battle for a bridge along Route 9, the
road to Khe Sanh. A bullet had shattered his right hip. An explosion, from a
mortar shell or a mine, had mangled his hand. As I approached the lead tank,
they were dragging him out in a bloody poncho. ''Wait a minute,'' he said to his
litter bearers, pausing beside me. He turned his head, smiled. ''Hey, Norman,''
he said and gave me the thumbs-up sign. I had the feeling that if Belknap could
fall, no one was safe.

At the airport in Texas, I spotted Belknap before he spotted me. I remembered
the years after the war and the guilt that in part kept me from calling him. I
had come home whole.

He picked me out of the crowd now and was smiling. He looked prosperous, secure.
And then he began to move. His right leg and foot were canted outward at an odd
angle, as if his hip could not hold them in line, and he limped - badly. What
used to be his strong right hand was a claw. Only two fingers were left, and the
thumb was stiff and disfigured. I winced and drew a deep breath, then grabbed
his bad hand and pulled him into an embrace.

''Goddamn,'' he said, his voice soft, his eyes beginning to water. ''Goddamn,
Mike, it's good to see you.''

''We made it, boy,'' I said. ''We made it.''

It was a Friday morning in July and Dallas was sweltering. We stopped first at
his office, a rehabilitation center for women addicted to drugs and alcohol.
Craig was the executive director. Then we headed out of the city to the flat,
brown suburb of Mesquite.

This was his weekend with his children, 5-year- old Barrett, a slight boy with
dark hair, and 9-year- old Amy, with ebullient eyes. They live with Craig's
first wife in Waco, 90 miles to the south.

Craig's house, a large one-story ranch, was set on a side street. Barrett
positioned himself on the coffee table in the spacious living room and looked me
over carefully. Jean, Craig's second wife, knelt down next to him. ''Barrett,''
she began, ''this is Mike Norman, Daddy's friend. He was in Vietnam with Daddy.
You know what that means?'' She expected the child to make the obvious
connection: Here was another marine. But he seemed perplexed. ''Vietnam?'' he
said. ''You mean he was shot, too?''

After dinner, Craig and I talked late into the night. ''I've often thought of
walking that road again,'' he said. ''What happened there is such a giant piece
of what I am. It's like being adopted. You want to know where you came from.
Maybe I just want to see the place at peace.''

Craig, who is 37 years old, was born and raised in Waco where he met Jean and
his first wife, Patti. He came home to Waco after the war and long months of
operations, including the amputation of a second finger.  He tried to return to
college, but he was impatient with classwork and with the notion of becoming a
lawyer. And he began to drink, a binge, as it turned out, that would last for
nine years.

Jean, his high-school sweetheart, used to visit him at home where he was
healing. ''I would go over there and he would begin his day with a glass of
Scotch,'' she said. ''He kept drinking and drinking. He was a joke. He lost all
his friends. He was just stumbling from the alcohol and the disability. He was
pitiful. People didn't want to be around him. That's when I cut our relationship
off.''

He married Patti, an elementary-school teacher, in 1970 and signed up with a
trade school to learn livestock management. ''I wanted to be a cowboy,'' he
said. ''I bought a truck, boots, the whole thing. I threw myself into it.
Needless to say there were no jobs for a 90 percent disabled veteran with no
farming or ranching background.'' And the drinking continued.

He turned to real estate next and passed a test for his broker's license. ''For
the first six months, I burned them up. Then I didn't sell anything else for the
next six years.''

He went to work for an acquaintance, tending bar. One day, ''I was complaining
about my life, how I couldn't make any sense of it, and this guy turns to me and
says, 'You don't got any fire in your belly. You got that damn Government check
for your disability coming in and that wife working. You got no reason to do
anything.' And my drinking was getting worse and worse.''

In April 1977, Craig checked himself into a detoxification program after a bout
of delirium tremens. He has been sober ever since. He started work as an
alcoholism counselor in Waco, then landed his current job in Dallas. Along the
way, he and his first wife divorced. Jean's first marriage also ended. The two
met at a high-school reunion and fell in love again.

His seemed the classic case. The United States Senate Committee on Veterans'
Affairs in 1981 issued a 900-page report with the following: ''Combat exposure
is associated with self-reported drinking problems among whites. . . . Military
duty in Vietnam had a negative effect on post-military achievement. . . . Most
Vietnam veterans deal with the war by resigning themselves to self-pity or self-
blame.''

But Craig stopped the slide. He has controlled his alcoholism. He has fashioned
a career. He has established a home. And there are times when he even sees
himself whole. ''I was walking by a store window the other day,'' he said, ''and
I saw myself limping. I said, 'Is that me?' ''

No man who looks at him can say he is the better for having served. He cannot go
hiking. He does not play golf - one of his passions before the war. He is far
from an invalid, however. He tends his own yard. And one morning, on the front
lawn, I played the field and shagged Barrett's hits, and Craig, steady on his
feet, pitched. Still, Barrett will soon become impatient with such small games,
and Craig knows that, with his limp, he will not be able to keep pace.

A few months after my visit to Texas, Craig came East to spend a week with me.
On a Friday morning, we walked through the ''Van Gogh in Arles'' exhibit at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. I kept my eye on him in the crowds and it was clear,
very clear, that the long time standing left him in pain. Craig did not
complain. He rarely does. He speaks, instead, of the common toll and how, for
him, Vietnam has come to have a new and unexpected meaning. ''Whatever hurt
we've endured,'' he said, my last night in Mesquite, ''the mental anguish, the
physical pain, all of that - and even if we don't solve any riddles or get any
relief from what we carry around - it really doesn't matter. We've always got
each other, you and me and the rest of the guys. Our friendships will last until
the day we die. We're not going to lose each other again. That may be the
ultimate thing about Vietnam, that whatever happened to us there is
inexplicable, but what it did for us as men is worth the price. I know where you
all are now. It's a peaceful feeling.''

DAVE TROY WAS A cautious man - and with good reason.  Three months before I
arrived in Vietnam, he had been wounded in the neck. When the wound healed, they
sent him back to the meat grinder. This time, he dug his holes deeper than most
and kept his head low.  One night, not long after I joined the unit, we were
alone manning a post along the barbed wire at Camp Carroll, a forward combat
base.  The compound was on a general alert. It was early in 1968, during the Tet
offensive. The rain was incessant. We had our ponchos over our heads. I thought
I heard a noise beyond the wire. ''Should we check it out?'' I asked him, the
seasoned marine. ''You want to go check it out, you go 'head,'' he said. ''I'm
gonna stay here.''

I did not understand his timidity then. I was fresh from the States, humming the
Marine Corps Hymn. Later, after the battle on Route 9, I too was reluctant to
check those noises beyond the wire.

Dave was a landsman: I was from New Jersey; he was from Yonkers. His accent made
me feel at home. We both left college for the Marine Corps and the war. And we
both felt we had something to prove. ''One of my biggest fears,'' he said, ''was
that under pressure I wouldn't do the right thing.'' He did, of course - under
fire, when it counted most.

Dave was the unit's self-appointed gadfly. He poked fun at the corps and needled
the officers, particularly a tall redheaded lieutenant who gave us all a bad
time. The man had more bravado than good humor. One day by the wire, Dave jumped
to attention as the officer passed. No one showed military courtesy in the
field, and the officer was not amused by the mock display of respect. But we
were. The look on his face set us laughing.

In truth, Dave owed the corps. Among other things, it earned for him, after
years of silence, some recognition from his father - ''a stoic Irishman from the
other side,'' Dave said - who fought the Black and Tans in 1921.

''My father and I never had any relationship. He wasn't a bad man. He just
didn't show his emotions. He was at work the day I came home from boot camp. I
wore my uniform and went to where he was. It was the first time I ever saw my
father smile at something I did in my entire life. He actually turned around and
said, 'You're a man.' I was 21 years old.''

Our reunion was warm but tentative. I had invited Dave and his wife, Sheryle, to
New Jersey for dinner. They lived in Mahopac, N.Y., at the time, but Hertz had
just transferred him to new offices in Parsippany, and they were in the state
house-hunting. They arrived just before dusk. I was standing on the front lawn
surveying the day's yard work. Dave grabbed my hand and flashed a broad smile,
but he did not move to embrace. ''The Irish curse,'' he explained months later.
''You don't touch.''

I have seen him and talked with him often since that first night in June around
my table, probably more often than most of the others. As it turned out, we
still had much in common. We returned from the war and finished college, began
marriages of long standing, picked careers early and have kept to them, even
discovered golf at the same time and plan to walk a course together when the
weather lifts. But our visions could not have been more disparate. I was
burrowing into the past. Dave was still laughing at it.

After Vietnam, he wanted to be an agent with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, but settled for a job as a claims adjuster and investigator for
the Allstate Insurance Company. He hunkered down for nine years and worked his
way up the line, then switched to his current company where he recently had been
given responsibility for building a new sales division. Along the way, he and
Sheryle had three children, two girls and a boy.

Yet this march from the battlefield to a comfortable office took longer than it
might have. Dave, and the rest of us as well, learned defiance in Vietnam.
Through luck and guile, we had survived. Our survival bred in us a kind of
benign arrogance, a belief in our own judgment, a belief so strong that we were
unwilling to take the word of any authority as inviolable. This made for some
rough going when we first returned.

''At my first job,'' Dave said, ''when I saw a jerk or an idiot, I would walk up
to him and say you're a jerk or an idiot. A lot of the time, my success was
directly proportional to what did not come out of my mouth. And I didn't feel
very good about it. It cost me at my first job. I could never be a good soldier
there.''

He is 39 years old. He has learned control. We all have.

Dave kept his sense of humor, though - his uncanny ability to turn the most
insignificant of incidents into a story. The war, of course, gave him his best
material. For a time, he kept the seeds of these tales in a small green diary.
After a brutal operation at the end of May 1968, an operation in which the
batallion marched around in a circle, then got caught in the open by enemy
gunners, Dave recorded this:

''Finally, in the afternoon, we got word to be ready to move. . . . Packed up
and move to LZ. First on choppers. First (to arrive) at Quang Tri. Tired, dirty
but happy. Then I heard something. Had to clear my ears. Heard band playing
Marine Corps Hymn. Laughed myself sick.''

And now, as we sat down to dinner for the first time since the war, he began the
great comic monologue of his life, war stories delivered at weddings, at the
office, at dinner parties and in bars - over and over again. ''Remember
operation starvation?'' he began. ''Were you there for that? No, you joined us
later. Well, anyway . . . .'' The troops ran out of chow, he said, and spread
mayonnaise on leaves just to have something to eat. And on it went.

I knew that Dave thought I would be a receptive audience for these stories and
at first I was. After all, I was part of them, and the tales were funny. But as
I listened to the stories over the months that followed, I became uneasy. Dave
seemed to reduce the war to sight gags - falling off a tank, eating leaves for
breakfast. But Vietnam was still raw for me, no laughing matter.

One night I told him so. Why, I asked him, why did he have to play Golf
Company's comic Boswell. ''I think,'' he said, slowly, ''that fear - fear is the
greatest source of comedy. And I was afraid. The stories are a release. I don't
bottle the war up. If I had bottled it up, I would have exploded 10 years ago.
You have to let it go. You have to see the humor.''

The next time he launched into a story, I could listen - and laugh with him.


HE HAILED from Oklahoma, but often, after the war, his home was a campsite or
the side of the road. He wandered the West - New Mexico one season, Idaho or
Wyoming or Oregon the next. He kept a running diary in spiral- bound notebooks,
a record of the peripatetic life.  He put himself on watch, the sentry with a
compelling need to see: ''Fifteen Springs, N.M. The first real rain since our
arrival came last night and we are still dry and in one piece. The rains here
are not threatening as in Oklahoma but rather gentle.

''Crossed the valley and headed west this morning after a breakfast of dried
beef and fried potatoes. We walked through lush meadows of grass sometimes
knee-high.

''Now as night falls the clouds are breaking and birdsongs fill the air.''

On the company roster he was listed as Williamson, Michael T., but to us he was
''Squeaky,'' tall and beanpole-thin, with a dry wit and a voice that cracked
when he tried to yell. He seemed at home in Vietnam, in ''The Bush,'' as we
called it. In fact, he spent the years before the war working in a bowling alley
and had no more knowledge of the jungle than the rest of us.

I located him, as I had found the others, by following leads in my old letters
and logs, then combing military records and telephone books. We talked on the
telephone in early summer. The next day he wrote me a letter:

''After 16 years, it was quite a trip talking to you. The amazing thing is that
my wife and I just discussed the possibility of once again seeing someone from
the old unit. Damn, it's just unbelievable.''

His epithet, like Belknap's laugh, was his mark. ''DEY-mmm, Troy,'' he would
say, drawing out the word for emphasis, ''deal me another hand.'' It was just a
word, but it was his word, and he put it to wide and varied use. Several hours
after Belknap was wounded, Squeaky and I huddled against an embankment on Route
9 and began to review the day's losses. ''Damn, Norman,'' he said.

A month after my trip to Mesquite, we huddled again - by a campfire and an ice
chest filled with beer. Squeaky and his wife, Georgia, had picked me up at the
airport in Tulsa that morning and we drove south for three hours to the cool,
green mountains of eastern Oklahoma. The small white aluminum trailer that is
their home was nestled in a stand of trees in a national forest surrounding
Cedar Lake. The campsite was not far from 10 acres of wild land to which they
had recently taken title. ''THE PLAN,'' as Squeaky called it, was to clear part
of the 10-acre tract, run electricity and water in, then build a house that
would serve as home base for their wanderings.

He was 36 years old, still lean and bony - an old wire hanger with clothes
drooped over it. And he still had that back-country look. But there had been a
change. Like Belknap, he had come home on a litter.

Four months after the battle on Route 9, he was walking patrol, on point. He
heard a noise and suspected an enemy ambush. He yelled a warning, started back,
then turned to face the enemy and provide cover fire for his comrades. That was
when the enemy set off a hand-controlled mine that blew him off his feet.

Shrapnel severed the optic nerve in his left eye and tiny pieces lodged in the
right. He lost sight in the left eye, but through two cornea transplants over
the years, doctors managed to save the other. His second transplant was
performed by a civilian doctor after the Veterans Administration had told him he
was likely to go blind.

He was angry at the V.A., but in the end he was able to laugh at the system:
''After my second transplant, I filed a claim. The Department of the Navy sent
me back a letter asking me for the name and address of the person who caused my
injury. I wrote back and said all the gooks looked alike to me, but they might
write Hanoi and ask. I said if they found out they should write me back and give
me the name and address of the man who did it. I'd like to pin his ears to his
head.''

Same Squeaky. He went to college after the war and earned enough credits for a
bachelor's degree and a start on a master's. The plan in those years was to earn
a doctorate in Chinese studies and foreign policy and then put on professor's
robes.

But he tired of the academic life and went to work for two-and-a-half years in a
state employment program counseling Vietnam veterans. Then, sick of what he said
was the ''crying of cooks and office clerks who never heard a shot fired,'' he
left.

He was having trouble with his eye. He was disaffected - angry at the system and
out of step with everyone else. He began to drink and take pills - the old
story. He read Jack Kerouac, let his hair grow and wore beads. He lived off his
Government disability payments and spent most of his time wandering, ''kicking
back,'' as they say in Oklahoma. Along the way he married three times, twice to
his second wife.

Then he met Georgia. He trimmed his hair somewhat, stopped the hard drinking and
drugs. He did not lose his wanderlust, but he and Georgia adopted THE PLAN and
looked for a piece of land they could afford. Georgia, who had ''kicked around
some'' on her own, she said, liked the idea of a lifelong retreat.

Before Craig's second transplant, his sight worsened. He could see only rough
forms and broad outlines. In 1980, he wrote in his diary: ''Must learn to find
new meaning, unseen beauty, in the morning. Perhaps I can erase the haze, the
clouds, the rainbow lights from my mind and learn to see in memory. Strange,
however, that I cannot even recall what it was like to see perfect. I wonder if
people who go totally blind forget completely what sight is all about. For a
year or more I have waited for my sight to clear.''

Georgia became his eyes for a time. She trained herself to soak up detail and
pass it on to him. ''I wanted him to have the picture of the golden eagle
circling the mountain,'' she said. ''I wanted him to have the delicacy of the
flowers and the power of the river.''

They are both dedicated observers now. And they work hard at their job. ''In the
summer in New Mexico,'' he said, ''Georgia and I would hike 20 miles during the
day. There was nothing but her and me and the coyotes yelping at night.''

And if they are adrift, it is by design: ''I'm not running from society. I don't
have any goals as far as a career. I don't have anything I need to accomplish
that will make me any happier. Right now, all I'm interested in is that land and
living a real calm life.''

His right eye has cleared now and he says he has little fear it will reject the
second cornea or that his sight will one day fail. But on Jan. 16, 1983, he made
the following entry in his diary:

''Elephant Rock. Last Night's Dream: I was in an eye doctor's office staring at
the vision chart on the wall. The doctor was surprised that I was able to read
beyond the 20/20 line, indicating that my vision was far superior to most
people. . . . ''

But even if his sight falters again, it seems unlikely Squeaky will lose his
ability to see - his special vision, which is in fact 20/20, unclouded by the
past. His wandering has been put to good use. What better way to replace the
echo of the guns than with coyotes yelping in the night.







 HE REUNION HAD been planned for weeks. Dave had business in Dallas and his
appointments coincided with my visit to Oklahoma. On our last morning at Cedar
Lake, Squeaky and I broke camp before dawn and drove east to Fort Smith, Ark.,
where we caught a short flight to Dallas.  In the early evening, we gathered for
dinner at Craig's home in Mesquite. Dave joined us around dusk. ''Hey, Hoss,''
said Craig, as Dave entered his living room, ''we've been listening to Hank
Williams and shedding a little tear. You joined us just in time.''

''Look at that hair!'' said Dave, the businessman, when he caught sight of the
wanderer from Oklahoma. And then the war stories started.

The next night, Craig arranged for us to visit some of his friends who had a
billiard table and a refrigerator full of beer. Craig had told them about our
reunion. He said they were anxious to meet us. ''I figure we can hire ourselves
out on the social circuit now that Vietnam veterans have become popular,'' he
said, deadpan.

We decided to team up for a few games of eight ball, Dave on my side, Squeaky on
Craig's. ''What do you say, Squeaker?'' bellowed Craig. ''You think a cripple
from Texas and a one-eyed Okie can beat these Yankees? You make sure you keep
the right eye open, y'hear.'' And then he threw back his head and howled.

Later, we gathered in Craig's kitchen. Jean left us to ourselves - the remnants
of Charlie Squad, First Platoon, Golf Company. Craig put a bottle of Bailey's
Irish Cream between Dave and me and gave Squeaky a beer. He brewed himself a
fresh pot of espresso, then settled into his seat.

We argued politics at first. We used to talk about poker hands and car engines
and California girls. Now we argued over Reagan's national policy and full
employment and foreign adventures. Vietnam had aged us, given us a stake in the
country. And three of us had sons. We tracked current events. We watched for
signs of a new war. We remembered our own.

Yes, we talked about the dead. Craig, Squeaky and Tommy Gonzales were friends.
Tommy and Craig fell to the road at the same time. And everyone remembered Jim
Payne. I, in particular, had reason. He had taken my place in the column that
morning on Route 9. I was a hundred yards back when he was shot.

''I'll never forget that face,'' said Squeaky. ''He was leaning against a rock
after he got hit. He looked like a ghost. He was just so goddamn white.''

Craig stiffened in his chair. ''Look,'' he said, clearing his throat. ''I want
to bury all those people. I want to stop crying about them. I want to put it to
rest. I want to get on with our lives. I want to put the others aside and pick
up with us, the living.''







 I HEAR THEIR VOICES REGULARLY NOW.  They call me on the telephone and send me
letters. Soon, I will have their pictures in a frame that will hang in my home.

Some of us are likely to stay close. Others will simply send cards at Christmas.
It is hard to keep up with the living. They have to be tracked. They change and
leave the past behind.

But now there is no urgency, no imperative, in the contact. I know they are
well. I know they are healed. I fear no relapse. For us, Vietnam has an end.
And, finally, we have our epilogue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael Williamson and villagers (Michael Norman) (page 71);
photo of Michael Wiliamson (Michael Norman) (page 70); photos of Dave Troy
(Michael Norman) (pages 68-69); photos of Craig Belknap (The WACO News
Tribune/Paul Currier) (page 67); photo of Craig Belknap (The WACO News
Tribune/Paul Currier) (page 66); photo of Craig Belknap, Dave Troy, Michael
Williamson and Michael Norman (Pamela Berry) (page 65)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT AMERICANS THINK NOW

BYLINE: By Adam Clymer; Adam Clymer, an assistant to the executive editor, is in
charge of polling at The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 925 words


TEN YEARS AFTER THE END OF the Vietnam War, the lessons it once seemed to teach
about placing restraints on the use of power are losing effect. Americans are
increasingly prepared to use troops, whether in El Salvador or in Europe, and
are about equally divided on employing the Central Intelligence Agency to
overthrow unfriendly governments, a New York Times Poll shows.

The war itself is even less popular today than when Saigon fell, but the poll of
1,533 adults last month showed that its legacy of distrust of government and the
military is wearing away. The unquestioning faith of the early 1960's has not
returned, but there is a trend of steadily growing trust - highest among
college-age youths, 59 percent of whom said Washington could be trusted to do
the right thing all or most of the time. Among everyone else, only 45 percent
thought so.

Those same 18- to 22-year-olds were also among the most likely to share
President Reagan's endorsement of the Vietnam War as a ''noble cause,'' and to
believe it ''taught us that military leaders should be able to fight wars
without civilian leaders tying their hands.''

Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that restraints on the use of
power will grow even weaker as the confident post-Vietnam generation gains
political importance. That growing trust is critical: a general faith in
government helps overcome doubt on specifics, especially in foreign affairs.

Still, there is no blank check for adventurism, in general or in specific
situations, such as the invasion of Grenada. The 47 percent who trusted
Washington all or most of the time is notably more than the 35 percent found by
the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan in 1974, when
the war, racial troubles and Watergate had combined to flatten traditional
faith, but it is much less than the 76 percent in 1964. Grenada is more
intriguing. When those interviewed, by telephone from Feb. 23 through 27, were
asked to rate Washington's handling of recent foreign-policy situations on a
scale of 1 to 10, Grenada got an average rating of 5.66. But another kind of
activism, the Camp David Middle East negotiations of the Carter years, did even
better, at 6.45.

However far this trend ultimately goes, the mood now clearly differs from that
of the mid- 1970's. To test changes in attitude, last month's Times Poll
repeated many of the questions employed in a national poll the Chicago Council
on Foreign Relations conducted in November 1974.

When asked if United States troops should be used in a list of crises, support
was higher in 1985 in every case. The biggest change occurred when respondents
were asked about an invasion of Western Europe. In 1974, 40 percent favored
using troops and 40 percent did not; this time, 54 percent were in favor and 32
percent opposed. The 18- to-29 group, presumably the fighters, now divide 55 to
37 percent in favor. In 1974, they split evenly. (Past Times polling, however,
suggests that draft-age youth may become less enthusiastic if war seems less
hypothetical.)

Support for using United States troops in El Salvador, if all else failed to
stop Communism, was not an issue in 1974. So when last month's poll found 47
percent supporting their use and 43 percent opposed, the best measuring point
was a June 1983 Times/CBS News Poll that showed 32 percent in favor and 57
percent opposed.

One step short of committing troops is deploying the C.I.A., and last month's
poll found that 44 percent approved the C.I.A.'s working ''secretly inside other
countries to try to weaken or overthrow governments unfriendly to the United
States.'' Although 46 percent disapproved, the difference is statistically
insignificant, within the poll's margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3
percentage points.

As for the Vietnam generation itself, those now aged 30 through 38, the sense of
alienation remains strong. Where 55 percent of the public, and just 48 percent
of those 18 to 29, say ''the government is pretty much run by a few big
interests,'' and not for the benefit of all, 61 percent of the Vietnam
generation say that. On many questions, the theme seemed to be, ''Don't trust
anyone, if you're over 30.''

This 30-to-38 group, despite its dovish reputation, is also the most hawkish.
More than anyone younger or older, they support using troops in Western Europe
and are convinced that the Soviet Union is a real and constantly growing threat
to the United States. They are also quite favorable to using the C.I.A. to
undermine unfriendly governments.

But the Vietnam generation did not get there through any revisionist views of
the war itself. Only 20 percent of its members now feel the United States ''did
the right thing in getting into the fighting in Vietnam,'' while 73 percent say
it should have stayed out. As a whole, the public responded almost identically,
with 19 percent saying the United States' role was right and 73 percent
disagreeing. In 1972, as both war and protest wound down, the Michigan poll
found 29 percent agreeing and 57 percent disagreeing.

The Vietnam experience is deeply contradictory. For example, many people say the
war was immoral but still believe it taught us that we must sometimes back
unwholesome governments because Communist regimes are worse. One indisputable
lesson is how little many in the United States know, or are willing to remember,
of the searing Vietnam War. In the latest poll, just three Americans in five
could say the United States sided with South Vietnam.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of poll results on questions concering America's participation
in Vietnam

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 393 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


GREAT RIVER: The Rio Grande in North American History, by Paul Horgan. (Texas
Monthly Press, $14.95.) Running from Colorado to the Gulf of Mexico, the
1,900-mile Rio Grande is the nation's second longest river. J. Frank Dobie wrote
in The Book Review in 1954: ''Paul Horgan is an artist, which means that he is a
master of proportions, perspective and details. His book is an unfoldment of
life with streches of narrative.'' ''Great River'' won a Pulitzer Prize for
history.

PRIVATE PARTIES, by Jonathan Penner. (Avon, $3.95.) This collection won the 1983
Drue Heinz Literature Prize for short fiction. Most of the 14 stories are about
the conflict between new money and old values and how it affects siblings. Edith
Milton wrote here that ''some of these stories are very funny indeed.  But
behind their comic surface there is always the deeply serious proposition that
life is both mad and heroic.''

THE MIND-BODY PROBLEM, by Rebecca Goldstein. (Laurel/Dell, $4.50.) Renee is a
philosophy graduate student facing a classic dilemma of highly educated women -
reconciling ''the outer place of bodies and the inner private one of minds.'' In
1983 Caroline Seebohm observed here that the first 50 pages of ''The Mind-Body
Problem'' were ''so clever and funny that I had to put the book down and go to
the fridge to cool off.'' ''Mrs. Goldstein teaches philosophy at Barnard,'' she
concluded. ''How many philosophy professors could have written such a terrific
first novel?''

INVISIBLE MEN: Life in Baseball's Negro Leagues,

 by Donn Rogosin. (Atheneum, $7.95.) Between 1920 and 1950, a major black
enterprise in a racially segregated America was the Negro baseball leagues that
trained Jackie Robinson, Roy Campanella, Willie Mays, Monte Irvin and others who
had no idea when black men would be able to enter the major leagues. In 1983 our
reviewer, Robert Lipsyte, observed that ''Invisible Men'' is rewarding history,
told ''with fresh scholarship and from a contemporary perspective.''

BEYOND GOD THE FATHER: Toward a Philosophy

of Women's Liberation, by Mary Daly. (Beacon, $8.95.) In her 1973 work, Mary
Daly postulates a new theology free of ''the roles and structures of
patriarchy,'' which ''have been developed and sustained in accordance with an
artificial polarization of human qualities into the traditional sexual
stereotypes.'' Our reviewer, Betty Gray, said the book ''is a focus for
confronting the overwhelming male tradition that has frustrated and is
frustrating not only women but also men engaged in living in the modern creation
in relationship with a Creator who became not man but, as Miss Daly insists,
Be-ing.''

OLD MONEY, by Lacey Fosburgh. (Pocket, $3.95.) The heroine of this 1983 novel is
the great-granddaughter of a financier. She is a successful photographer who has
alienated her family. Her father disinherits her, although she had thought
theirs was a special relationship. ''Old Money,'' our reviewer, Carolyn See,
said, ''is old-fashioned in the best sense. You look up from its pages expecting
to see the branch library of your childhood. Certainly the enchantments to be
found here take you back to an unskeptical childhood set of perceptions about
fiction.''

THE SABRES OF PARADISE, by Lesley Blanch. (Carroll & Graf, $9.95.) The
mid-19th-century ruler of Daghestan, the Imam Shamyl, stemmed the tide of
Russian imperialism in the Caucasus for 20 years, destroying eight armies the
Russians sent against him. Robert Payne wrote here in 1960 that Lesley Blanch
''has provided a gallery of Russian portraits and in the course of her story
outlined a history of Russia through most of the 19th century.''

UNCIVIL SEASONS, by Michael Malone. (Dell, $3.95.) Two detectives set out to
solve the murder of a North Carolina state senator's wife. One officer is the
senator's nephew. Evan Hunter remarked here in 1983 that Michael Malone has
''created two of the most memorable police detectives ever to appear in mystery
fiction. . . . Mr. Malone has written a rattling good mystery; he has also
written an excellent novel.''

THE INVENTION OF SOLITUDE, by Paul Auster. (Avon, $3.95.) The author, a
translator of contemporary French literature and a critic, writes regretfully
about his lack of closeness to his father from the time his parents divorced
until his father suddenly died 15 years later. He divided his 1982 book into two
parts, one factual, the other reflective. Our reviewer, W. S. Merwin, wrote that
the first part ''contains some ambitious and illuminating passages'' and the
second ''moving, delicately perceived portraits of lives and relationships.''

A COUNTRY SUCH AS THIS, by James Webb. (Bantam, $3.95.) The three main
characters of this 1983 novel are Naval Academy graduates. One becomes a pilot
in Vietnam, the second an Air Force missile expert, the third a marine in Korea.
After military service they become an F.B.I. man, a preacher and a congressman.
Our reviewer, David Evanier, called this work ''a long essay disguised as
fiction, distinguished by energy and raw power.''

THE TURNING POINT: Thirty-Five Years in This Century, by Klaus Mann. (Markus
Wiener Publishing, $9.95.) This is the autobiography of Klaus Mann, the son of
Thomas Mann. In 1942 our reviewer, Lorine Pruette, said: ''A sensitive,
cultivated European looks at his world, his life, and describes them in apt and
telling phrase. Toward both his attitude is not so strong as despair, but rather
one of alienation. His book is a commentary upon evil times.''

CITY OF NIGHT, by John Rechy. (Grove, $4.50.) ''City of Night,'' originally
published in 1963, was written about what our reviewer, Peter Buitenhuis,
described as ''the half-submerged world of homosexuality, the community of
hustlers, lesbians, queens and other deviates that live on the fringes and in
the center of the urban societies of America.'' He said that despite John
Rechy's literary mannerisms, it ''is a remarkable book'' that ''should be
regarded more as sociology than as a novel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jonathan Penner

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
