
                               1 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 791 words


Books of The Times Those Little Magazines By JAMES ATLAS
THE PUSHCART PRIZE, V: Best of the Small Presses. Edited by Bill Hender- son.
608 pages. Pushcart. $17.95.

Joseph Epstein, one of our sterner literary critics, announced in Commentary
magazine that we were enduring ''a distinctly second-rate literary era.'' There
are no great writers in America, he contended, and literature is marginal to the
nation's life.

By those criteria, Mr. Epstein's indictment may well be justified.  Productivity
is another matter. There seem to be more aspiring writers than ever, and more -
as Bill Henderson's Pushcart anthologies have demonstrated during the last five
years -who possess a considerable measure of talent.

Crowd of Reputations

Drawn from the little magazines that appear in such profusion - many of which
are listed here, from the Agni Review to Zirkus - these annual volumes have more
or less taken up where the American Review left off. Like the American Review,
which ceased publication in 1977, ''The Pushcart Prize'' consists of short
stories, poems and essays; includes the work of established and beginning
writers, and has a faintly subversive character. Its audience would seem to be
primarily the young, yet among its contributors are many of the best writers in
America. Looking through the index of the first five volumes, one finds John
Ashbery, Saul Bellow, John Gardner, Christopher Lasch and a crowd of lesser but
significant reputations.

Like all interesting literary journals, ''The Pushcart Prize'' is eclectic and
uneven - perhaps more so than most, given the process of selection. A committee
of writers and editors drawn from the publishing and little-magazine worlds
nominate its choices. The number and diversity of journals represented and the
sheer length of it are impressive. Still, a certain identifiable sensibility has
managed to declare itself, a faint echo of styles and attitudes characteristic
of the 1960's. The poetry is attenuated, selfreflective and obsessed with the
unconscious. The stories tend to be forthright about sex, written in the
vernacular and concerned with people who live on the margins of society. The
essays are mystical, oracular and contemptuous of the modern industrial world.

Yet for every contribution that reflects such literary strategies, another
willfully resists them. The poems by John Hollander and Charles Wright are taut,
austere meditations that have nothing in common but their originality. ''Scenes
From the Homefront,'' Sara Vogan's autobiographical story about the conflict
between her patriotic father and her draft-eligible brother during the Vietnam
War, is written with a simplicity that owes more to Sherwood Anderson than to
any contemporary; and Asa Baber's haunting story about a stranger who insinuates
himself into a suburban household and literally devours the unsuspecting
couple's children has nothing in common with any story I've ever read. The two
minor novelists in Cynthia Ozick's story are said to be devoted to ''accuracy,
psychological realism and earnest truthfulness; also to virtue, and even to
wit.'' The same could be said of the stories in this volume.

Portentous Essays

The essays, by contrast, are invariably disappointing. From David Bosworth's
foolish meditation on ''The Literature of Awe,'' with its labored cliches -
''Art is experience'' and ''The problem is as old as civilized man'' - to
Richard Vine's spurious generalities - ''In affairs of the flesh, as in affairs
of the world, we have each lived our Calvary and our Buchenwald, each been by
turns victim and executioner, Nazi and Jew'' - these essays induce the
''exasperating and potentially fatal ennui'' Mr. Vine ascribes to our universal
condition. Even their titles - ''Institutional Control of Interpretation,''
''Some Food We Could Not Eat: Gift Exchange and the Imagination'' - are
portentous.

The only two lucid critical works in this collection - ''Codex White Blizzard''
by Ed Sanders and ''Of Living Belfry and Rampart: On American Literary Magazines
Since 1950'' by Michael Anania - address the problem of our current literary
surplus in their own idiosyncratic way. Mr. Sanders proposes, among other
measures, that ''the writing of more than 75 poems in any fiscal year should be
punishable by a fine of $500 per 10 additional poems.'' As for Mr.  Anania's
essay, only the title is long-winded; the rest is a shrewd, considered defense
of the little magazine as a literary institution.  American literature ''has
taken its vitality from its own extreme edges,'' he says, ''since its center is
too often lifeless and boring.'' The Pushcart anthologies, for all their
occasional selfindulgence, go a good way toward vindicating his argument.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Bill Henderson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART PEOPLE;
Peter Saul, wild and funny

BYLINE: By Grace Glueck

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words


PETER SAUL has been called the Mel Brooks of art, and not without reason. Taste
and subtlety are not the prime ingredients of his wild, funny and often raunchy
paintings, done in raucous Day-Glo colors, a rubbery comic-strip style and
pegged to topical events. Take ''Subway,'' for example, a very large canvas on
view in the Saul show that opens tomorrow (through Jan. 30) at the Allan Frumkin
Gallery, 50 West 57th Street. Its theme is crime underground, and it shows a
manic mass of policemen, victims, muggers, thieves and rapists around a crashed
subway train, all depicted in clinical detail. The heavily armed police are
giving more than they get.

''This is a more right-wing painting than I'm known for,'' says Mr. Saul, a
slim, intense chain smoker who wears his chestnut hair Prince Valiant style. ''I
decided it would be the best way to handle the subject. Actually, I hardly ever
ride the subways and haven't been a crime victim. But I like the heat that comes
from topics talked about by a lot of people.''

Now 46, Mr. Saul is celebrating his 20th anniversary with the Frumkin Gallery,
an artist-dealer marriage that's quite rare in the business. ''He's generous,
persistent and loyal,'' says Mr. Saul of Mr. Frumkin, the kind of remark so
seldom put out in the New York art world that several persons overhearing it
paused in wonderment. (Mr.  Frumkin, on midwinter vacation, was not available
for rebuttal.) Anyway, since the Saul canvases started appearing at the gallery
in 1961, he's achieved a reputation for a special, funky brand of
social-political-sexual satire - particularly in a series of paintings on the
Vietnam War remarkable for their ferocity. More recently, he's been taking off
on artists like de Kooning, Duchamp and Delacroix. Their reputations, however,
have survived the Saul assault.

''I guess I'm kind of a moralist,'' Mr. Saul says. ''My work does have a
psychological and social meaning, though it's not very clearly thought out. I
paint violence and gore because I'm visually interested in them and also as a
comment on American society. But because it's only paint and canvas it's
harmless, and therefore somewhat funny. I burst out laughing when I paint it,
and yet I'm completely serious.''

A Saul bete noire is the sobriety with which the New York art world regards
itself. ''They lust for seriousness, so they get involved in boring stuff - the
blank walls done by Rothko, Newman and so forth. I only like material of real
visual interest - people with their clothes off, someone getting killed,
tabloid-type stuff. I guess in New York they're afraid to talk about humor in
art, because then people get to the point where they don't want to write a
check.''

He is pleased to think that his style and subject matter repel the ''elite,''
that is, ''artists, students, intellectuals - anyone who needs to feel superior
in intelligence, sensitivity and education.''

''I don't have those needs,'' he continues, ''all my anxieties revolve around
sex and money.'' Yet, he holds, the ''hot air and pretentious baloney of the
'elite' excites me very much.''

''I love tearing into it with the energy of a housewife destroying bathroom
germs.'' The Saul destiny as an artist was never in doubt. Born in San
Francisco, the budding painter was taken by his parents, at the age of 5, to a
Picasso show. ''It caused a kind of riot. A lot of people were furious, shaking
their fists at Picasso, because times were hard, I guess, and he was lounging
over there in Paris making easy money. But even at that age, I was terribly
impressed with the excitement. I wanted to be an artist and cause riots, too.
And then, as time went on, to my parents' dismay it became evident I couldn't do
anything else but art.''

What's the next stop for Judy Chicago's ''The Dinner Party,'' the giant banquet
table honoring women's achievements throughout history? Its current turn at the
Brooklyn Museum (where its stay has been extended) is over Feb. 1, and after
that, its future is unclear. But then, that's par for the project's course. It
was originally scheduled for a tour of three institutions, the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art, the Seattle Art Museum and the Memorial Art Gallery in
Rochester. The last two canceled out, however, and after the San Francisco
showing, where it packed in record crowds, ''The Dinner Party'' languished in
storage for several months.

Then it was invited for a three-month stint at a suburban branch of the Houston
University system, after that to the Boston Center for the Arts Cyclorama and
then to the Brooklyn Museum. At each stop, though there has been critical cavil,
the show has generated interest and attendance, with some exhibitors even making
money.  Though Brooklyn says it won't really recoup its close-to-$75,000
installation costs (some $40,000 of which was raised by local supporters of the
project), ''The Dinner Party'' has drawn a solid attendance of 200 people an
hour (because of the small viewing space, Brooklyn has had to turn people away),
and it is estimated that by closing date 100,000 visitors will have seen it.

''It's reinforced the new audiences attracted by the museum with our earlier
shows of women artists and women architects,'' says Michael Botwinick,
Brooklyn's director, ''and we've benefited tremendously by the visibility that
the piece has brought us.''

But there's always the problem of the next booking. ''They all say the work is
too big or it isn't 'art,' or they want us to raise the money for its
appearance,'' reports Miss Chicago, who believes the problems of showing and
housing ''The Dinner Party'' evince the low status of ''women's achievements in
our society.'' Yet there's evidence that the ''Party'' is by no means over.
Groups in Akron, Chicago (Miss Chicago's hometown) and Baltimore are actively
working to bring it to their cities, and in fact the Akron group, the Ohio
Chicago Art Project, has penciled it in for a showing from the end of April
through the summer.

The Rosa Esman Gallery, 29 West 57th Street, with its ''Russian Revolution in
Art - 3'' exhibition opening next Tuesday, will show a video cassette of ''The
Victory Over the Sun,'' a Futurist play by the Russian poet Khlebnikov. The
play's scenery and costumes were designed by Kasimir Malevich, the Russian
Suprematist artist whose work will appear in the show. Though the exhibition
will run through Jan. 31, the hourlong cassette, a re-creation done by the Los
Angeles County Museum of Art last September, will be available only through next
Saturday; viewing time, 5 to 6 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Peter Saul

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A DRAFT SOLUTION

BYLINE: By Kenneth M. Quinn

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES


One of the first decisions that Ronald Reagan will face as President will be
whether to continue draft registration. It will be a tough choice. Will he
listen to defense advisers who counsel him to retain the present system, or
fulfill his campaign pledge to end peacetime registration? Is there a way out of
this seeming dilemma?

There may be, through a voluntary registration system in which each person would
choose whether to participate in the draft of not.  It would work something like
this: On their 18th birthday, all young men and women would be required to fill
out, at the local post office, a form providing for standard biographical
information but also indicating whether they wanted to be eligible to be
drafted.  Those opposed to military service on principle, against a peacetime
draft, or simply not wishing to spend time away from their careers, could check
the box marked ''no,'' and would be excused from service.

Individuals who believe a draft is necessary to ensure peace and who are willing
to defend their country would make themselves eligible to be called.

The chief risk in such a system is that at first so few persons may check the
''yes'' box that the manpower pool would be inadequate if a draft call-up were
necessary. Moreover, if only a small number signed up, that might be an untimely
message both to our friends and adversaries that America is not prepared to
defend its interests.

The plus side is that this type of voluntary system would allow draft
registration to continue; would enable the Selective Service System to have a
list of all 18-year-olds (including those who checked the ''no'' box) in case a
compulsory universal draft were needed in an all-out war; and, perhaps most
importantly, would cast service in the armed forces in a positive light.

One legacy of the Vietnam War era is that military service has come to be viewed
by many as something to be avoided, or, at best, endured. Many, perhaps most,
persons comply with the registration laws for negative reasons: They do not want
to get in trouble with the law, or fear embarrassment. The compulsory nature of
the draft, imposed by the President and Congress in far-off Washington, only
reinforces these negative feelings.

If the draft were optional, the burden of the decision would shift to the
individual. No longer would anyone be forced to defend the country. Rather, each
would have to make a personal choice about what obligation is owed one's country
and one's fellow citizens. Those deciding to participate in the draft would thus
be making a positive choice for positive reasons. This process should lead to a
significant change on the way military service is viewed.

Another attractive feature of a voluntary registration system is that it would
offer an opportunity to resolve the question of whether women should be included
in the draft. Opening the process to females would give young women the chance
to decide for themselves whether they want to be drafted or not. Women who
believe they should stand beside men in full equality could make themselves
eligible. Those not in favor of compulsory service for women need only mark
''no'' to be true to their beliefs. This compromise, which allows each side to
retain its basic principles, would seem far preferable to an all-ornothing
decision that the United States Supreme Court may hand down in the spring. If,
however, Congress or the Court did decide that women should not be included in
the draft, the voluntary registration system could be applied just as
effectively to males alone.

One other element could be added to this ''voluntary system'' to make it even
more acceptable: drafting only for the Army Reserves and National Guard, both of
which are considerably understrength. In contrast to the previous draft, which
required two years of active duty, induction into the Reserves would mean only a
few months of basic training and then returning home and attending one weekend
drill a month and two weeks of summer training each year. Family separation
would be minimal and civilian careers could continue with only a slight
interruption.

By combining these two approaches to the draft - voluntary registration and
drafting for the Reserves - it may be possible for Ronald Reagan to fulfill his
campaign pledge, satisfy his defense advisers, defuse the controversy over
inducting women into the military, and strengthen the National Guard and the
Reserves, all at the same time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Kenneth M. Quinn is administrative assistant to Gov. Robert D. Ray of Iowa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES CONFRONTING CONGRESS ON RETURN TOMORROW

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


Congress returns to Washington Monday, with Republicans sharing power with the
Democrats for the first time in nearly a generation and with all the lawmakers
facing an economy that continues to produce high interest rates, inflation and
unemployment.

The swearing-in ceremonies on Capitol Hill will come 15 days before Ronald
Reagan is inaugurated as President. Political analysts and officials from both
parties who were interviewed in recent weeks generally agreed that the two
rituals might mark the beginning of a conservative, Republican-dominated era in
the capital. But much depends, they also agreed, on how the new leaders deal
with the pressing problems of the economy.

The first item on the agenda of the 97th Congress will be confirmation hearings
for the Cabinet chosen by Mr. Reagan.

Debate Could Slow Hearings

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the new majority leader, wants to complete the
confirmation process by Jan. 20, Inauguration Day, but that plan could be
thwarted by debate over the nominee for Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig
Jr.

While Mr. Haig is likely to win confirmation, Democrats have vowed to question
him closely on his roles in planning strategy for the Vietnam War as an aide to
Henry A. Kissinger on the National Security Council and in managing the White
House as President Nixon's chief of staff in the last days of the Watergate
scandals.

The only other Reagan nominees likely to provoke controversy are James G. Watt,
who was named to head the Interior Department, and Raymond J. Donovan, named to
become Secretary of Labor. Mr. Watt, head of a legal foundation in Denver that
fought Interior Department regulations, has been assailed by environmental
groups as too probusiness and pro-development. Mr. Donovan faces questioning
about the record of his New Jersey-based construction company in the areas of
safety and labor relations.

Next, the Budget

When the confirmation hearings are finished, the lawmakers will have to start
grappling with the Federal budget and revisions proposed by Mr. Reagan as he
tries to reconcile his campaign promises to cut taxes, increase military outlays
and eliminate deficits.

President Carter's last major act before leaving office will come on Jan. 15,
when he presents his budget for the fiscal year 1982, which begins next Oct. 1.
The Carter team, which said in the campaign that Mr. Reagan was making economic
promises he could not fulfill, is reportedly drafting a tight budget of $750
billion that projects a deficit of $30 billion.

The new President then gets to make revisions in the budget before Congress
starts mulling over the document. The outlook is for a fierce and protracted
battle on Capitol Hill as lawmakers try to fashion a ''broad, middle-ground
consensus,'' in the words of Representative James R. Jones of Oklahoma, the new
chairman of the House Budget Committee.

Meanwhile, Congress will have to deal with the leftovers from the 1981 budget.
Five of 13 major appropriation bills did not pass in the last session and must
be brought up again. Several contain controversial provisions that blocked their
progress last year, and the same fights are likely to recur. For instance,
conservatives support a clause that would prohibit the Justice Department from
pursuing lawsuits that could lead to the busing of schoolchildren for racial
integration, and liberals say such an amendment would be unconstitutional.

A Test on Military Spending

One of the earliest tests of the power balance in the new Congress is expected
to come over a request for supplementary financing for the Defense Department
for 1981. Mr. Carter is reportedly preparing a request of about $6.2 billion,
mainly covering increases in fuel costs and military pay.

But some Reagan advisers have been pushing the President-elect to propose a
supplement of at least twice that size. This bill would also allocate funds for
some new weapons systems that were rejected by the Carter Administration,
including the B-1 bomber.

Congress will probably also be dealing with various proposals for quick tax cuts
to stimulate the economy. Mr. Reagan is on record in support of a proposal that
would reduce tax rates for everyone by 10 percent a year for three years. But
Congress seems increasingly likely to limit any tax bill to one year and to aim
relief more directly at middle-@ and lower-income taxpayers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Report 2 Troops Slain Repelling Vietnamese Force

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 3


Vietnamese forces stormed across the Thai-Cambodian border and battled with Thai
troops today before being pushed back, according to Thai military sources.

It was Vietnam's first reported incursion into Thailand since June, when several
hundred Hanoi troops crossed the border, setting off a three-day artillery
battle that left about 200 dead.

The Thai sources said two Thai soldiers were killed and one was wounded.
Vietnamese casualties were unknown.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Veterans to Get Record Dividend From G.I. Life Insurance Policies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 3


Nearly four million veterans whose G.I.  life insurance policies are still in
force will share in a record $619.7 million dividend in 1981, according to the
Veterans Administration.

Because of higher interest rates earned by insurance funds, the amount to be
paid to policyholders this year is $53 million above the 1980 figure, S.W.
Melidosian, director of the Veterans Administration Center here, said yesterday.

Average payments to veterans with active policies will be $296 for those who
served in World War I, $168 for those in World War II and $67 for those in the
Korean War. Vietnam War veterans do not participate in the Veterans
Administration program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 ALBANY LEGISLATORS CONSIDERED LIKELY FOR REAGAN POSTS;
New York Political Notes

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 38, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


Two of the Republican legislators returning to Albany this week for the new
legislative session may not be there for long. Assemblymen Dominick L. DiCarlo
of the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn and John L.  Behan of Montauk, L.I., rank
among the leading New York prospects for appointment to Reagan Administration
posts, according to New York Republican leaders. Mr. DiCarlo, 52 years old, was
a leader of the Reagan campaign in the state. He has been recommended for a
deputy position in the Justice Department or possibly in the narcotics section
of the State Department. He was an assistant United States attorney before his
election to the Assembly. Mr. DiCarlo is considered one of the Legislature's
criminal-law experts and one of its most influential members. He has been at
loose ends since he lost a bid to be Assembly minority leader two years ago.

Mr. Behan, 36, has the backing of New York Republican leaders for the top
position or a deputy job in the Veterans Administration. He lost both his legs
in combat in Vietnam. The present administrator, Max Cleland, is also a disabled
veteran. Mr. Behan, who succeeded another Montauk Republican, Perry B. Duryea,
in the Assembly, has been a leader of the campaign to provide medical care and
counseling for Vietnam veterans who were exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange.

Mr. DiCarlo's chief New York political sponsor is George L. Clark Jr., the
Brooklyn Republican chairman, who has close ties to the new Administration. Mr.
Behan was initially sponsored by Anthony Prudenti, the Suffolk County Republican
chairman, who is working through Mr. Clark and William J. Casey. Mr. Casey, a
Long Islander, was Mr. Reagan's campaign manager and is his nominee to become
Director of Central Intelligence.

As Republicans prepare to enter Federal service, Democrats, including several
politically active New Yorkers, will be leaving their Federal positions because
of the change in administrations.

Among the Democrats are Robert F. Wagner, the former New York City Mayor and
current Ambassador to the Vatican; William J. vanden Heuvel, the deputy United
States representative at the United Nations; Carl McCall, who gave up his State
Senate seat to become alternate representative at the United Nations; Alan K.
Campbell, director of the Federal Office of Personnel Management, and Victor
Marrero, Under Secretary of the Housing and Urban Development.

Thomas K. Bolan, the politically influential Manhattan lawyer who was an early
Reagan supporter, has been rumored for the Vatican ambassadorship but he said he
had ''no interest in any position'' in the Reagan Administration.

Robert Morgado, Governor Carey's chief aide, who had talked of leaving
government, has apparently not secured a private industry job to his liking. But
with the resignation of two key Carey aides, he is said to be consolidating his
power in the Carey administration.

One of those who resigned, Dr. Kevin Cahill, was the Governor's family doctor,
friend and special assistant. Dr. Cahill had often clashed with Mr. Morgado. The
other resignation came from Richard Brown, the Governor's counsel. Mr. Brown
worked with Mr. Morgado but nevertheless represented an independent and
politically astute counter to Mr. Morgado. Mr. Brown left voluntarily to return
to the State Supreme Court bench. His successor, John G. McGoldrick, a
Republican and a political newcomer, is a Morgado choice. Another Morgado
favorite, Carol Opton, who heads the Governor's New York office, has been
assigned to accompany the Governor in many of his public appearances along with
his usual companions, a press aide and his friend, Tom Regan.

Two New York Democrats, Joseph F. Crangle, the Erie County Democratic leader,
and Patrick J. Cunningham, the former Bronx Democratic leader, who was
instrumental in bringing the Democratic National Convention to New York City,
have often been political competitors. Now, they are competing again as
candidates for Democratic national chairman next month. Both are former
Democratic state chairmen.

Mr. Cunningham has been closely associated with Robert S. Strauss, the former
national chairman and an early supporter of President Carter's renomination. Mr.
Crangle has been identified with the Kennedy wing of the party. Several other
Democrats are also maneuvering for the national chairmanship, but New York is
the only state with two contenders.

The three New York City Congressional Districts represented by Democrats who are
minority-group members and another city district with a large minority
population had the sharpest drops in population of any districts in the state,
according to 1980 census statistics. The census figures are being disputed by
the city and minority-group leaders.

The populations in the districts of Representatives Shirley Chisholm in
Brooklyn, Robert Garcia in the Bronx, Frederick W.  Richmond in Brooklyn and
Charles B. Rangel in Manhattan plummeted by margins ranging from 101,943 to
150,314, or up to one-third of the districts' population, compared to the 1970
census. Of the four, only Mr. Richmond is not a member of a minority group, but
two-thirds of his constituency is made up of minority-group members.

Despite the drop in population, the three other representatives are almost
certain to hold their seats because even geographically expanded districts would
have a majority of black and Hispanic residents. In addition, the Justice
Department, under the Voting Rights Act, will monitor the reapportionment of the
Congressional Districts to insure minority representation. Mr. Richmond's
district was also drawn with the goal of a minority representative but he was
able to win when minorities in his district split.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DICK CAVETT: 'I LOVE IT WHEN THE ICE GETS THIN'

BYLINE: By CAREY WINFREY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1566 words


If there is one encomium Dick Cavett loathes, it is being told he is the only
intellectual on television. ''I spend half my life denying I'm an
intellectual,'' he says, ''and can easily prove it.''

But when Sir John Gielgud, the distinguished actor and director, dropped by the
Channel 13 studios last July for what turned out to be a four-part interview,
one of the first things Mr. Cavett did was turn the tables on him.

''Gielgud is often cited,'' Mr. Cavett says, ''as the exception to the theory
that actors are not only often not intelligent but certainly are not
intellectual, that in fact intelligence stands in their way because an actor has
to be a kind of empty vessel that is capable of being filled with other
personalities. When I mentioned his alleged intellectuality, Sir John said, 'Oh,
no! I don't know where I got that reputation. I love to read Jacqueline Suzanne
and Harold Robbins.' He even denied ever having read Jane Austen.''

Mr. Gielgud will be Mr. Cavett's guest for four consecutive evenings on Channel
13 beginning tomorrow night at 11.  Mr. Cavett also reports that on one of these
programs Mr. Gielgud expresses palpable frustration at not being able to
persuade Marlon Brando to do ''Hamlet.'' Since Mr. Gielgud has directed Richard
Burton in the role, Mr. Cavett asked him how Mr. Brando's ''Hamlet'' might
compare with Mr. Burton's. Mr. Gielgud's answer: ''I think Marlon would have
been more...original.''

Once hailed as an original himself, Mr. Cavett's star went into partial eclipse
in the mid-70's. After being nibbled into nothingness by ABC-TV program
schedulers, his late-night talk show was laid to rest in 1974.

Following a series of CBS specials the next year, the reviews of which are most
charitably described as expressing more sorrow than anger, Mr. Cavett's return
to the talk format in 1977 was heralded as something less than triumphant. The
Times' John J. O'Connor described the new public-television offering as ''a talk
show in the familiar rut of minimum substance surrounded by plugs for guests'
latest ventures.'' Ratings were poor. Perhaps too many viewers agreed with the
Times reader who wrote a letter suggesting that Mr. Cavett's ''cute and innocent
act has been all too noticeable and boring for quite some time.''

Now in his fourth public-television season - and his 44th year - Mr. Cavett
appears to be coming back into favor. Recent multi-part interviews with the
likes of Jonathan Miller, the late Jed Harris, G. Gordon Liddy, Richard Burton
and Harold MacMillan have boosted ratings, attracted new viewers and generated
considerable comment.  In reviewing the Harold MacMillan interviews two weeks
ago, Mr.  O'Connor noted that ''Mr. Cavett generally manages to snare most of
the most interesting people living in or passing through New York....(He)
deserves credit for maintaining the overall quality of his guest list.''

On his part, Mr. Cavett makes no special claims for his low-keyed brand of chat.
Asked to define his variation on the theme, he says, ''I just strike more notes
on a certain area of the keyboard.'' He takes a benign view of the other
practitioners of the genre. ''I don't think I have any enemies among them,'' he
says. ''We're all sort of working the same side of the street.''

While he agrees that the program, as he puts it, ''has hit its stride this year
in a way that it hadn't before,'' Mr. Cavett still waxes nostalgic for those
heady nights of yesteryear when he used to play David to Johnny Carson's Goliath
(in this version, Goliath invarably won) in the battle for Neilsen ratings.

''Sure, I'd love to do a talk-show format with variety and the whole thing
again,'' he admits. ''Earlier this year, I hosted - I guess that inevitably has
become a verb - the (Merv) Griffin show one night, and stepping out to that
huge, applauding audience with the live music and the big laughs made me realize
just how much fun that is. It would just be wonderful if you could work out some
best of two possible worlds. There's no reason why public television, properly
constituted, couldn't have its own Carson show. It doesn't have to be
highbrow.''

Not that public television, as currently constituted, doesn't have other
advantages. ''I doubt if there's anywhere on commercial television, except at 4
A.M., that I'd be able to talk at length to Eudora Welty or John Cheever as much
as I'd like to,'' Mr. Cavett points out. ''And it's not only a pleasure for the
people who are the fans of those people to see them, but also for the many
people who say, 'I've never heard of Eudora Welty, but since I saw her on the
show, I've read everything she's written.' So, in that sense, it's good.

''But most of the same pressures and inherent tensions and fears and concerns
exist on public television to different degrees. The concern is still the number
of viewers and people claiming to know what viewers will want, as if anybody
knew.'' An added frustration: erratic scheduling, even on public television.
''Finally, I just told them you needed a lawyer and a secretary to find out when
the show is going to be aired,'' he says with a mirthless laugh.

One thing that he misses about days gone by has less to do with the medium than
with the times. ''It's too polite now,'' he says. ''I miss the excitement of the
Nixon, Watergate, Vietnam years. There were more rogues then, and almost nothing
could be said that wasn't controversial or upsetting in some way. Not too long
ago, I interviewed Clare Booth Luce and she began by referring to 'remarks you
made about my late, revered husband.' I loved that, because I yearn for danger.
I love it when the ice gets thin and when it gets a little edgy or prickly.''

After more than a decade of interviewing just about every celebrity in sight,
Mr. Cavett is entitled to be more than a bit jaded. But he insists that that
isn't the case. ''Just when I come to the point where I say this has got to stop
for awhile, something will come up that makes me think this is about the best
job you could ever have, that it's ludicrous to get paid to sit and chat with
people you'd be glad to be doing it with anyway.''

He counts among hold-outs he would most like to interview: Greta Garbo, J.D.
Salinger, Mike Nichols, Frank Sinatra and his one-time mentor, Jack Paar.

Mr. Cavett reiterates his view that his job relies heavily on acting, the
profession he first set out to conquer, ''simply because of the artificialities
of the host's role. You have to be aware of so many things that you can't
possibly be aware of. So, you're almost never sitting there just talking, except
for those times when you have a breakthrough and really are having a
conversation.'' Sometimes it takes the form of feigning interest, ''not so much
out of phoniness but just not wanting to spoil it for the viewer who may be
enjoying the person or the show or the subject.''

When his early acting career foundered, Mr. Cavett became a writer for Mr. Paar
and other talk-show hosts. Eventually, he turned to performing as a stand-up
comedian in nightclubs. ''There's something odd about my career,'' he says. ''I
never aimed at being a talk-show host or interviewer or any of that. One night
recently, I emceed the opening of the new Metropolitan Center in Boston, and it
was back to being a comedian. As I was killing this huge audience and getting
enormous laughs, I suddenly remembered that's what I set out to do with a
nightclub comedy act. And this audience - some of them - were discovering a
talent they didn't know I had. It's very confusing.''

Appearing as Charley in ''Charley's Aunt'' in a Williamstown, Mass., production
two summers ago, Mr. Cavett suffered another career-identity confusion. ''They
were doing turnaway business,'' he recalls, ''and it was great fun and I
thought, 'No, no, this is what I do. The other thing is the act.'''

Are we hearing a hint, perhaps, of mid-life crisis? ''Let me count the ways,''
he replies.

Mr. Cavett has played himself in several movies, most recently in Robert
Altman's as yet unreleased comedy ''Health.'' He regards the summer of 1977 that
he spent as Tom Courtenay's replacement in ''Otherwise Engaged'' on Broadway as
''among the happiest weeks of my life. I loved every single minute of it. I wish
I could have done it for a year.''

He would particularly like a meaty movie role. ''I don't have any illusions
about my qualities as a serious actor,'' Mr. Cavett says.  ''But I could do a
comedy well and I'd love to do it. It was great fun making the Altman movie.''

And if he ever gets a workable idea, he would like to write fiction. ''I'd love
to do a screenplay,'' he says, adding that he is tortured by the fact that his
friend Woody Allen is bursting with more plots than he has time to put on paper.
''What is the line, 'I have fears that I may cease to be before my pen has
glean'd my teeming brain'? Well, with me it's, 'Fears that I may cease to be
before somebody gives me an idea to set my dormant pen to work.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dick Cavett

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Suit Allowed On Agent Orange

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 321 words


By Margot Slade and Eva Hofffman Vietnam veterans claiming injuries from
exposure to Agent Orange claimed a legal victory last week, but could yet lose
their battle against the defoliant's manufacturers. Federal District Court Judge
George C. Pratt ruled that the veterans could sue the chemical companies in a
class action in Federal court, access to which had been denied in a previous
Federal appeals court decision. But the judge also allowed the possible immunity
of the manufacturers from all liability.

Calling the decision ''great,'' Leonard L. Rivkin, national trial counsel for
one of the principal defendants, Dow Chemical Corporation, pointed to Judge
Pratt's ruling that sovereign immunity protected the military and the Government
from countersuits initiated by the chemical manufacturers. Mr. Rivkin noted, as
did the judge, that the ''Government contractor defense'' dictates that if the
companies supplied what the Government specified, they may also be immune from
liability.

Victor John Yannacone Jr., lead counsel for the veterans, said the legitimacy of
the companies' claim, to be adjudicated later this month, is not that simple.
''We insist the manufacturers had a nondelegable responsibility to warn the
Government of the existence of the toxic agent, dioxin, as a contaminant in the
herbicide,'' he said, ''and to advise those using Agent Orange of dioxin's
toxicity and veterans exposed to it of its possible harmful effects.''

His clients' entry to the Federal courts, said Mr. Yannacone, was provided by
Judge Pratt's ruling that since citizens of one state suing citizens of another
state is a Federal matter, and since by law, corporations are ''people,'' the
Agent Orange product liability battle could be joined at the Federal level, and
as a class action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NO MANDATE TO RENEW THE COLD WAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


By Gordon E. Cannon

To the Editor: Norman Podhoretz's Dec. 23 Op-Ed article, ''Haig, and Reagan's
Mandate,'' contains several sweeping generalizations that need response.  First,
he asserts that Mr. Reagan's victory was a mandate for a ''restoration'' of the
United States' ability to stem Soviet expansionism. There is no consensus among
our foreign-policy-making elite on the dimensions of the current Soviet threat
and no agreement on the call for a new cold war, and there is certainly no
coherent consensus for a new cold war among the electorate.

Second, Mr. Podhoretz asserts that current Vietnam imperialism destroys the
moral foundation of the U.S. antiwar movement. With the exception of a small
faction of Marxist ideologues, the post-1967 antiwar movement was based, not on
any perception of Hanoi as a nonexpansionist, democratic polity, but on the
reality that there was no favorable cost/ benefit ratio involved, that the war
was corroding our civic values and that it provided a rationale for a dangerous
domestic role for our police/intelligence bureaucracies. These concerns were
important in the 1965-1975 period, and they are important now.

Third, Mr. Podhoretz asserts that General Haig's loyalty to Richard Nixon was an
act of virtue. This is a very strange definition of virtue. Indeed, moral
leadership is a virtue, and such moral leadership should have led General Haig
to refuse to carry out certain orders from his superior.  GORDON E. CANNON
Altamount, N.Y., Dec. 24, 1980

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE MOOD OF THE CAPITAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


By James Reston WASHINGTON, Jan. 3 -We have a New Year and will soon have a new
President in Washington, but the mood of the capital is still dominated by the
habits and quarrels of the past and wondering anxiously about the future.

If ever a city needed a pause for reflection, this is it, but it has a hard time
adjusting to this halftime between the old Administration and the new. It didn't
even have much fun over New Year's - only a hangover without a celebration.

Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan are about the only ones who have recognized the
facts. Carter has authority he cannot use. His broken shoulder is a symbol of
his crippled final days, so he went to Camp David and to the Georgia-Notre Dame
Sugar Bowl game in New Orleans.

Reagan has no authority now, so he stayed home for a little rest and skull
practice in the sunshine, and went to Walter Annenberg's modest hideaway for New
Year's, appearing now and again for smiling pictures with his wife, but avoiding
the awkward questions of the frustrated reporters.

There is something to be said for this cautious, judicious leaving alone, but
Washington is not yet accustomed to Reagan's comfortable ways. It expected a
''take-charge'' guy, and instead got a lot of unfamiliar Reagan ''spokesmen,''
who insisted on being ''anonymous'' but went on television to proclaim what
Reagan intended to do to correct the economy and tame the Soviets, probably
without more than a clue about what he'd do when he came to town.

So there are arguments here now about Reagan's cabinet appointees, their past
records and his vague role in their selection. He has seemed remote from the
process and casual, yet he has been dogmatic and even pugnacious in his comments
on the hostages in Iran on his way to his dentist, tailor, and butcher shop.

Incidentally, it would probably be a mistake to assume that he denounced the
Iranians as criminals, barbarians and kidnappers by accident, or without the
advance knowledge of the Carter Administration. As he said, he didn't want
officials in Teheran to imagine that they could avoid their crimes by waiting
for his Inauguration.

It will take some time for politicians, civil servants, the press and foreign
governments to adjust to Reagan's style. Many new Presidents have come in here
proclaiming that the problems of governing the republic and defending freedom in
the world are beyond the capacities of any man or the expectations of the
people, and therefore that he must rely on a ministry of talent in a cabinet or
collective form of government.

The difference with Reagan is that he really seems to mean it, and intends, as
he has demonstrated during this transition period, to share authority and
responsibility and rely more than any President since Eisenhower on the
judgments of his colleagues.

This is the issue now before the Democrats in the Senate, which has the
constitutional obligation to advise, consent, confirm or reject the new
President's cabinet appointees. Recognizing Reagan's reliance on his cabinet, do
they insist on a prolonged inquiry into the qualifications of his appointees or
merely check them for fatal flaws, give Reagan the cabinet he wants and judge
his appointees later by their performance?

The guess here is that the Democrats in the Senate will go through the motions
of questioning Al Haig as Reagan's chosen Secretary of State, but spare the
republic one more long and devisive argument about Vietnam, Watergate, Nixon and
other disasters of the past.

As Winston Churchill once said, if we open up all the old arguments of the past
we shall lose the future. Maybe at the turn of the New Year and a new
Administration, we need a moratorium on bringing up the quarrels and
personalities of the past. If we recognize in law a statute of limitations -let
the past be past - surely we need such a rule in politics.

For the problems of domestic and foreign affairs facing Ronald Reagan in the
next four years are as daunting and dangerous as anything this nation and the
rest of the free world have faced since the Depression and the last World War.
They cannot be resolved by one party, one ideology, or one nation alone, but
require cooperation rather than confrontation within the nation and the
alliance.

Whether or not you like Reagan's approach to his staggering responsibilities, or
his theory of collective government, he is entitled to put his ideas and his men
to the test, and should not be denied his honeymoon.

For the moment, Washington is in too big a hurry to get on the way before it
knows where it's going. We have a few more weeks for waiting and thinking.
Carter is still in the White House, listening unavoidably to the saws cutting
wood for the Inaugural stands being erected before the White House door, like a
scaffold for his execution.

Later on, there will be time for Reagan to come to town and proclaim his vision
of the future and introduce his team. Meanwhile, Washington under snow this
weekend, recklessly beautiful, is waiting restlessly and hoping for the best.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.S. AND MEXICO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


By Richard S. Fagen

STANFORD, Calif. - When Ronald Reagan meets with President Jose Lopez Portillo
of Mexico tomorrow, the President-elect is likely to find that his
administration is headed for a clash with Mexico on Central America. Mexican
perspectives on what is happening there, and what ought to happen, are
dramatically different from those of Mr.  Reagan's advisers. This is
particularly the case regarding violencetorn El Salvador.

The recent murder there of three nuns and a Roman Catholic lay worker from the
United States only temporarily halted, but did not end, our slide toward deeper
military involvement in support of what Washington likes to call the security
forces. And, if the words of Mr. Reagan's advisers on Latin America are taken
seriously, increased aid for the Salvadoran military seems a likely, early move
for the new administration.

As we should have learned from Vietnam, but perhaps did not, escalation, from a
few advisers and a limited amount of hardware to a much-deeper involvement,
generates its own momentum. The scenario is familiar: A weak government becomes
increasingly dependent on our support for survival; marginal military aid does
not enable it to defeat leftist insurgents; Washington identifies survival of
the beleaguered regime as a key United States national interest and a test of
our will; more military aid pours in; there are more failures; there is more
aid...

In El Salvador, escalation of our involvement might not at first involve our
combat troops. Some Guatemalan and Honduran military officers have already
suggested that they are willing to help out with men and equipment. However,
this could be done only with our approval and with the Pentagon playing a key
coordinating and logistical role. Then, if the countryside proved as difficult
to pacify as past experience suggests might be the case, the Marines would be
the logical next step.

Any foreign troops in El Salvador would spell disaster, not only for El Salvador
but also for the United States' Latin-American policy. Even if the troops were
not from the United States, no one in Latin America would be fooled. The
conflict would be internationalized, and, with or without the Marines, we would
be militarily involved. Stepped-up Cuban activity in support of the insurgents
not only would be legitimized under such circumstances but also made inevitable.

The caution exercised to date by the Nicaraguans would become untenable; they,
too, would have to offer military support to the Salvadoran left.  Other
Central-American countries, even if not involved militarily in helping the
Salvadoran left, would be deeply affected. Costa Rica's democratic system,
currently facing its most serious political and economic difficulties in years,
would be further polarized. In Panama, the still-fragile arrangements for the
canal would be severely stressed, if not shattered, by civil disturbances that
would be sure to follow internationalization of the violence in El Salvador.

But the greatest damage would probably be done to United States relations with
Mexico. In part, this is because our crucial relations are so delicate, complex,
and historically troubled; and, in part, it is because Mexico, newly oil-rich,
is now more than ever determined to steer an independent, nationalistic course
in its international relations, as its intention to terminate fishing agreements
with the United States suggests.

Mexico's long and, at times, warm relationship with Fidel Castro's Cuba, its
strong backing for the Sandinist-led Government in Nicaragua, and its sympathy
for the opposition Democratic Revolutionary Front in El Salvador are more than
simple expressions of nationalism and independence. They are policies rooted in
a deep, historically conditioned understanding of the social forces at work in
the Caribbean and Central America. They are based on the belief that, in the
long run, regional stability is best served by an end to right-wing, repressive
military rule in Central America - whether naked military repression, as in
Guatemala, or repression dressed up with a fig leaf of civilian respectability,
as in El Salvador.  Mexicans, heirs to their own revolutionary tradition,
understand that such changes cannot always be accomplished peacefully. They also
do not automatically fear the leftist orientations of the regimes that may
emerge. Mexican policy-makers find it much easier to live with stable,
Sandinist-type governments to their south than with volcanos of the Guatemalan
sort.

Our policy in El Salvador is already a sore point between the United States and
Mexican Governments. If our military involvement escalated, the sore point would
become badly infected. Mexico cannot be pressured or sweet-talked into inaction
in the face of a United States-led internationalization of the Salvadoran
conflict. To think otherwise is to misread history and to underestimate Mexico's
resolve to act in defense of its principles and interests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard R. Fagen, who was president of the Latin American Studies Association in
1975, is professor of political science at Stanford University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK TALK

BYLINE: By Ray Walters

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


Soap. A growing number of Americans, more at ease with graphic images than with
the printed word, aren't turning to books for their entertainment these days.
Naturally, it's a situation that greatly concerns residents of Publishers Row.
Little wonder that they'll be closely watching an experiment Pocket Books
inaugurates this week when it stuffs the mass-market racks with ''And Baby Makes
Three'' by Winifred Wolfe ($2.50), a 160-page paperback described on its cover
as ''an original novel in pictures - the soap opera that fits into your
pocket.'' In 338 black-and-white photographs and wisps of dialogue in the
margins around them, the book narrates a domestic crisis in a young Manhattan
family reminiscent of ''Kramer vs.  Kramer'' and ''Ordinary People.''

But isn't this just another version of the fumetti, those newspaper strips
telling stories through photographs and cartoonstyle balloons that have long
been favorite reading matter in Italy, Spain and South America? And hasn't the
idea already been tried by a number of American paperback publishers during the
past three years, with ''photonovels'' tied to ''Grease,'' ''Alien'' and other
films?

Well, yes, concedes Winifred Wolfe, the originator of the experiment, but there
are significant differences. Miss Wolfe is an old hand at the soap-opera genre,
having served as head writer for ''As the World Turns'' and other major daytime
television serials during the past 10 years. With her husband, producer-agent
Jack Gordun, she enlisted 20 actors and actresses with followings among
soap-opera fans to play the parts in her story. With a crew of a dozen veteran
photographers and makeup people, they roved the New York scene for several
months, taking the thousands of pictures from which the final selection was
made. ''Our story is one that Americans can relate to,'' Miss Wolfe says. ''And
our pictures are posed by actors, who give them a sense of movement that the
models employed by the European fumetti-makers cannot.''

Why do the Gorduns think that their version of the fumetti will succeed while
photonovelizations of Hollywood films have been - with the exception of
''Grease'' and one or two others - failures at the checkout counters? ''When you
photonovelize a movie,'' says Mr.  Gordun, ''you have only the shots made during
its filming to draw on. We make whatever pictures are necessary to tell our
story well.  Moreover, the success of a movie photonovel depends on how the
movie does at the box office - a chancy business at best.''

More light in the kitchen. Last week, we quoted from an article in a 1900 issue
of this Book Review in which the editor expressed his hope that some good
cookbooks might be published to ''illuminate the belt of darkened kichens 3,000
miles wide across America.''

We didn't have space then to remark on the role that the trade paperback has
played in illuminating American kitchens. Nearly half of the 3,500 cookbooks
currently in print are in this format, with almost every publisher offering a
selection ranging from regional cuisine to ethnic cuisine to guides to the use
of food processors and other new gimmicks.

Trade paperbacks first became staples in American bookstores, particularly those
in college communities and neighborhoods with a youthful population, during the
1960's. Since then, as Judith Jones, cookbook editor at Knopf, has observed,
''thanks to their attractiveness, relatively modest price and easy
accessibility, they have introduced several generations of Americans to the fun
of culinary adventure.''

Health fare. Recently we've received five new trade paperbacks that share a
common theme:

- ''The Quick and Easy Vegetarian Cookbook'' by Ruth Ann Manners and William
Manners (Evans, $4.95).  - ''The New Vegetarian Cookbook'' by Gary Null
(Collier, $7.95).  - ''The Jack Sprat Cookbook'' by Polly Zane (Harper/Colophon,
$6.95).  - ''Eating What Grows Naturally'' by Martin and Kathlyn Gay (And Books,
$5.95).

- ''The Vegetarian Times Guide to Dining in the U.S.A.'' (Atheneum, $8.95).
America, it would seem, is being caught up in a new movement. We queried Paul
Obis Jr. of Oak Park, Ill., publisher of the newsletter Vegetarian Times, about
its extent and significance. He tells us that the present movement started in
the early 1970's, when idealistic veterans of the Vietnam generation gave up
eating meat because such fare necessitated the slaughter of animals, was not as
good for one's health as natural foods and was relatively inexpensive. No one
knows how many practicing vegetarians there are in the country today, but a
notion is offered by the fact that last year 6,500 health food stores did a
nearly $1.5 billion business.

There are now 60 books in print dealing with vegetarianism, but three have been
doing more than their share in making converts:

- ''The Vegetarian Epicure'' by Anna Thomas (Vintage, $6.95) is a collection of
262 recipes that promise ''to bring vegetarian cooking to new heights.'' It has
sold nearly 700,000 copies since 1972, largely through word of mouth.

- ''The Vegetarian Epicure Book 2'' (Knopf, $6.95) continues in the same spirit
and has sold some 300,000 copies since 1978.

- ''The Moosewood Cookbook'' by Mollie Katzen (Ten Speed Press, $7.95) is a
collection of recipes from the popular Moosewood cooperative restaurant in
Ithaca, N.Y. Although first published in 1977, most of its sales - more than
250,000 copies - have been in the past 12 months.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE DEMOCRATS ALTER THEIR DEMAND FOR HAIG DOCUMENTS

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Senate Democrats preparing for the confirmation hearings of Alexander M. Haig
Jr. have sent the White House a second letter asking for information about him,
this time narrowing the request to specific controversial periods of his career.
The Carter Administration will try to provide at least some of the tapes and
documents requested, Jody Powell, President's Carter's press secretary, said
today.

The Senate Democrats have also sent a second request for files to Richard M.
Nixon. The former President's attorney, Herbert J.  Miller, said today that the
request was still ''so broad as to create substantial difficulty.'' But Mr.
Miller said that he was seeking to meet with Senator Claiborne Pell, the senior
Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, to narrow the panel's request still
further. He said, ''If there's anything like a reasonable request, I don't think
there would be any difficulty'' in getting Mr. Nixon not to oppose release of
materials.

A representative of the White House counsel's office said that the office would
direct various Government agencies to begin tomorrow to identify and locate the
material requested. The official, who insisted that his name not be used, said
that various privileges against disclosure might bar release of some of the
material. But he said he expected that some of the material would be furnished
to the Democrats on the Foreign Relations Committee before it begins hearings
Friday on Mr. Haig's nomination as Secretary of State.

Powell Sees Progress

Mr. Powell said in a telephone interview that he wanted to make it clear, in
contrast to the impression created when Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr. Carter's
national security adviser, refused to act on

Pell-Brzezinski letters, Page B9
the Senate Democrats' first, more general, request for files, ''that we had this
other letter, and things are moving forward.''

The exact scope of the Democrats' latest request, which is reported to cover one
and a half typed pages, could not be determined. Mr.  Pell said that the request
covered memoranda and specific tapes ''pertaining to various aspects of General
Haig's career.'' But neither he, Mr. Miller nor White House officials would say
just what they were.

However, one White House source said that the Democrats on the committee were
seeking materials on Mr. Haig's connection, in two periods of White House
service, with bombing in Cambodia, wiretapping of Government officials and
reporters, Vietnam peace negotiations, policy regarding the deposed Government
of Salvador Allende Gossens in Chile and Mr. Nixon's defenses on the Watergate
scandal. Other subjects are also covered in the request.

Hoping for Cooperation

Mr. Pell said, in a telephone interview from his home in Newport, R.I., that he
hoped Mr. Powell's comments, in the interview and on the CBS News program ''Face
the Nation,'' indicated that the White House would be more helpful than Mr.
Brzezinski's response to their first request had indicated.

The original letter asked the National Security Council, headed by Mr.
Brzezinski, for ''all documents, records and other information that may be
relevant'' and in particular for ''all documents, correspondence or memoranda
authored by or directed to General Haig between 1969 and the present.''

In 1969 Mr. Haig became deputy to Henry A. Kissinger, Mr. Nixon's national
security adviser, and he later was named White House chief of staff. Under
Presidents Ford and Carter, he served as commander of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization forces in Europe.

Mr. Brzezinski questioned yesterday whether an exhaustive inquiry into Mr.
Haig's record would be in the national interest. ''I am not going to take part
in an exercise to emotionalize this issue, to give a color to this issue,'' he
said in an interview. Earlier in the day, on Cable News Network, he had said
that he would not cooperate with ''some indiscriminate witch hunt'' against Mr.
Haig, whom he called ''qualified'' to be Secretary of State.

Mr. Brzezinski said, however, that he wanted to be ''helpful'' as long as the
request was made quite specific and the White House counsel was satisfied that
the doctrine of executive privilege was not violated.

If Republicans Hold Back

Both Mr. Powell and the official from the counsel's office indicated that one
concern raised by Mr. Brzezinski, the suggestion that nothing would be supplied
if it was not requested by the full, Republican-controlled committee, would not
be a problem. They indicated a preference for a full committee request, but
indicated that they would not turn down the Democrats' request if the
Republicans held back.

Despite the cheerful face that all sides were putting on in today's
developments, they are facing a tight time schedule.  With the hearings
scheduled to begin Friday, it may take at least that long to locate the
voluminous materials requested and to determine whether various privileges apply
and whether to invoke them. Moreover, the legal requirements to consult former
Presidents about material affecting their administrations, even though their
wishes do not necessarily bind the Carter Administration, will take more time.

Until now the matter has not been handled with great speed.  The Democrats'
first request was made on Dec. 18. Mr. Brzezinski replied on Dec. 24. Mr. Pell's
second letter arrived at the White House Wednesday, the representative of the
counsel's office said, but it did not get to the counsel's office until
Saturday.

The official in the counsel's office said that the Carter Administration was not
likely to claim executive privilege against disclosure of materials that related
to charges of illegal or unethical conduct. He said that that would apply to
materials relating to Watergate and to wiretapping. Moreover, he said, the older
the materials were, the less important it might be to claim privilege.  But he
said that more recent materials, such as those relating to Mr. Haig's service as
commanding general of NATO, might be withheld because they involved state
secrets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thai Troops Placed on Alert After Raid by Vietnamese

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 77 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 4


Thai troop reinforcements were rushed to the tense border with
Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia today and put on alert against another cross-border
raid by Hanoi's troops.

The military action followed a Vietnamese attack yesterday in which two Thai
soldiers were killed and one was wounded. Between 50 and 60 Vietnamese soldiers
reportedly opened fire on a Thai patrol half a mile inside Thailand. Vietnamese
casualties were unknown.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE IMPORTANCE OF NORMALIZING U.S. RELATIONS WITH HANOI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


To the Editor:

There is a bold, significant international move that the new Reagan
Administration should take which will be practical and constructive: normalize
relations with Hanoi. By persisting in its refusal to do this, the United States
perpetuates world tensions and problems. Further, we are acting against our own
national selfinterest.v.hat could normalization mean?  Economically, American
business would get a chance to trade profitably in Vietnam, just as our allies
do.  On the humanitarian level, a normalized American presence in Vietnam could
help lead to improved conditions for people in Indochina. They need food and
technology. We have both. They don't, in part because we destroyed much of what
they had.

Morally, we have an unfulfilled obligation to the people of Indochina. The
United States, the country most conspicuously present in Vietnam's destruction,
is the nation most conspicuously absent during reconstruction. By refusing to
normalize relations, we continue the legal banning of trade, aid, development
and exchange programs. We thus make the rebuilding process even harder.
Certainly we should help those who flee Indochina. But we should also try to
restore the shattered society they are fleeing.

The arguments presented by Daniel C. Arnold and R. Sean Randolph (''Don't
Recognize Hanoi,'' Op-Ed Dec.23) are similar to the negative rhetoric voiced by
the old China lobby before Richard Nixon chose to alter our policy toward
Peking. Messrs. Arnold and Randolph contend that our continuing not to recognize
Hanoi contributes to ''geopolitical balance'' and serves our interest in a
''stable, secure Southeast Asia.'' The opposite seems more accurate: our policy
contributes to instability and imbalance.

Politically, normalization could diminish Vietnam's great dependence on the
Soviet Union, thus readjusting the balance of power more in our favor in
Southeast Asia. It could also help prevent further conflict between China and
Vietnam. The Chinese are less likely to reinvade Vietnam if their American
friends are on good terms with Hanoi. The Chinese need what America now
provides, in terms of trade and geopolitics, and are unlikely to give up these
advantages if the U.S. chooses to recognize Hanoi.

Not all of Indochina's misery today is Hanoi's fault. In recent years our policy
has been to ''squeeze'' Vietnam, to isolate it, perhaps even to help make
conditions worse there than that tragic nation would otherwise have endured. It
seems clear that Vietnam dominates Laos and Kampuchea now, as it has over the
centuries. But to use that as an argument against normalization in 1981, or as a
reason to back the genocidal Pol Pot, only fosters continued unrest.
Normalization would help signal to China that we will no longer bolster its
murderous ally.

The Indochina war was, is and will be a bitter experience for many Americans.
Someday we will have to come to terms with what we did there. Candidate Reagan
declared our role in that war ''a noble cause.'' President Reagan should
consider an even more noble cause - peace. The war is over. Let the peace begin.
And that means normalization of relations with Hanoi.  ROBERT RICHTER New York,
Dec. 25, 1980 The writer, a former producer at CBS News and ABC News, produced
the independent documentary ''Vietnam: An American Journey.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PRESERVING U.S. INTERESTS IN THE THIRD WORLD WHEN REGIMES THERE ARE FLOUNDERING;

by Richard E. Feinberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When, after his inauguration, a pro-United States regime in the third world
starts floundering, the best course for Ronald Reagan may be to let history
sweep it away.

The new President will inherit formal and informal security commitments toward
more than a score of third-world governments, many of which have an unsure hold
on power. None is certain to fall, but recent history and the laws of
probability suggest that more than one will face collapse in the next four
years. Developing countries ruled by friendly but less-than-stable Governments
include El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Paraguay, Uruguay, Egypt, Kuwait,
Morocco, Tunisia, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia, Zaire,
Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand.

When a third-world government is in jeopardy, outside assistance may be able to
save it. But only a case-by-case analysis can determine whether our interests
are truly vital and endangered, whether a helping hand could keep the sinking
government afloat, and how expensive the bailout exercise would be. In general,
the cost would be prohibitive whenever a regime's base has withered but its
opposition enjoys broad and passionate support.

When pump-priming would be costly and of dubious value, we should instead
reassess our commitment to the disintegrating regime and consider untying
ourselves from a loser. The overthrow of the Shah was traumatic for the American
people because the Carter Administration visibly and repeatedly identified our
prestige with the Shah when nearly all the Iranians opposed him. His fall
vividly demonstrated American impotence.

In contrast, President Carter's political fortunes were hurt far less by the
downfall of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in Nicaragua. Mr.  Carter avoided equating
United States interests with those of the inevitably declining autocrat, and
quickly labeled the successor Government ''acceptable.'' The United States has
succeeded in retaining some political influence in Nicaragua, and our economic
and strategic interests have not been seriously threatened.

Nicaragua illustrates the alternative of distancing ourselves from a spent
regime and extending friendship toward emerging winners.  This strategy sharply
increases the chances of preserving the United States's core interests, since
new rulers are less likely to hate us if we have not backed their opponents to
the bitter end.

When a pro-United States third-world regime next faces collapse, Ronald Reagan
will be peppered with arguments for remaining loyal to it. A great power, he
will be told, must prove its reliability in every case, or other nations will
not seek its protection. The abandonment of one ally, the argument will go, will
be seen as threatening the safety of all others -the domino effect.

The long history of personal relations between the threatened ruler and America
officials and private citizens may have created strong psychological bonds that
will influence the arguments presented to Mr. Reagan. If he is persuaded by the
arguments and emotions, he may satisfy his sense of honor, but he will be unable
to defend United States interests as he and his advisers have identified them.

Under these conditions, he should respond to his advisers that the rest of our
global ties will not unravel if we ''switch horses'' in a single country. All
Asia did not topple after Vietnam, nor Africa after Angola, nor Latin America
after Cuba. Just as South Korea did not sever relations with us after we ended
formal diplomatic ties with Taiwan, and Saudi Arabia did not run when we failed
to save the Shah, other friendly countries will not cut bonds of lasting value
to themselves.

Mr. Reagan should justify the the strategy of ''switching horses'' by explaining
that the United States has interests that it will protect in certain countries,
not commitments to save particular rulers in those countries from domestic
upheaval. He should add that the United States cannot afford to waste dollars in
volatile, lessimportant developing countries just to try to exercise control.
America's place in the world will be better protected by devoting its limited
resources to guaranteeing the strategic nuclear balance, to defending genuinely
vital interests such as Israel's security, and to rebuilding our industrial
power.

If we are to avoid the agony of another Iran, the President will require both
the decisiveness to write off long-established but nolonger-useful relationships
and the self-confidence to overrule sentimental advisers. The ultimate cost of
remaining loyal to doomed rulers is likely to be the support of the American
people. If Mr.  Reagan followed that course, his Presidency could be undermined
by failed efforts to keep untenable commitments in distant lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard E. Feinberg, who was the Latin-American specialist on the State
Department's policy-planning staff from May 1977 to January 1980, is a resident
associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and is writing a
book on United States policy toward the third world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

2 FROM RADIO JOIN PBS PROGRAM

BYLINE: By C. GERALD FRASER

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 448 words


Two correspondents from National Public Radio will join the regular staff of
''The Lawmakers,'' a weekly Public Broadcasting Service television program
devoted to Congressional activities. The program will begin its second season at
10 P.M. on Friday on WNET.

Cokie Roberts, whose major radio assignment during the recent Presidential
campaign consisted of interviewing voters across the nation, and Linda
Wertheimer, National Public Radio's chief correspondent for the Presidential
campaign, will serve with Paul Duke, the regular correspondent for ''The
Lawmakers.''

The participation of the radio correspondents marks the first such major
collaboration between public radio and public television.  National Public Radio
produces two major daily news programs: ''Morning Edition'' and ''All Things
Considered,'' an evening news program. There is no equivalent national public
television news staff or news program.

Produced by WETA, the PBS station serving the Washington area, ''The Lawmakers''
will present portions of floor debates from the House of Representatives,
coverage of committee hearings and profiles of Senators and Representatives as
well as commentary.

Charles McDowell of The Richmond Times-Dispatch and former Representative Otis
Pike of Long Island, now a syndicated columnist for the Newhouse newspapers, are
the commentaters. The propgram's political adviser is Norman J. Ornstein,
professor of political science at the Catholic University of America and adjunct
scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.

King's Anti-War Speech

The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s speech ''Why I Am Opposed to the Vietnam
War'' will be broadcast in its entirety next Sunday at 1:30 P.M. on the WABC-TV
program ''Like It Is'' as part of the program's observance of Dr. King's
birthday. It was delivered first at his Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta in
April 1967, and marked the first time the civil rights leader voiced a protest
against the war.

In the speech, Dr. King discussed the United States' involvement in the war and
the parallel between the Vietnam conflict and the struggle of black Americans.
He also talked about third world nations and United States foreign policy. Dr.
King's anti-Vietnam War stand was attacked in some quarters on the ground that
black civil rights leaders should not concern themselves with foreign policy.

''Like It Is,'' which is produced by Gil Noble, will also discuss the campaign
led by Stevie Wonder, the composer and singer, to make Dr. King's birthday, Jan.
15, a national holiday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEEKING TO CLARIFY CANADA'S ENERGY POLICY

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Jan. 4


American officials, concerned with the continental impact of Canada's new
nationalistic energy policies, have quietly initiated a series of discussions
with their Canadian counterparts.

At the latest meeting, a five-hour session held in Washington Dec.  17,
Americans pressed the Canadian delegation for more detail and explanation on the
tough energy policy outlines announced Oct. 28 by the Liberal Government of
Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau.

The plan, involving a complex set of policy and tax rules, aims at dramatically
increasing Canadian ownership of this country's petroleum industry, now about 72
percent controlled by foreign companies, mostly American. Already there are
signs that some large oil companies are having second thoughts about their
future in Canada.

Signs of Canada's mounting economic nationalism were evident in last winter's
election campaign. But Mr. Trudeau's moves, which involve billion-dollar buyouts
of several unnamed foreign oil companies and discriminatory taxing of oil
companies with less than 50 percent Canadian ownership, surprised many
investors.

Mounting Concern

But they stem from a steadily mounting concern over foreign control here,
especially in vital energy areas. The problem has its roots in Canada's early
days of nationhood, after the British created the nation in 1867 more to thwart
the physical expansion of the United States than to answer any Canadian
stirrings for independence.

The 3.8 million square miles of Canada, the world's second largest country, are
rich in many resources, from fish and furs to fossil fuels. But the country has
always been short of people and capital, both of which were actively sought
abroad.

To protect its infant industries, Canada erected tariff barriers.  Slowly,
American companies opened operations in Canada, more to get preferential
Commonwealth tariffs than to tap the small Canadian market. Officials welcomed
the branch plants, their investments and their jobs.

American investment in Canada built to a flood after World War II, especially in
resource exploitation to serve Middle Western factories. America had the venture
capital and the markets; Canada had the ores and workers. It seemed a good
match, and United States investments grew to around $45 billion today. That is
three-quarters of all foreign investment here.

Many Advantages

There have been many advantages. Government studies show that foreign-controlled
companies are more profitable than Canadian companies (one-third of the
companies here are controlled by foreigners and they make one-half of all the
profits); they have twice the product turnover of Canadian competitors, and they
pay their employees better (about $1,300 a year more in manufacturing, for
instance.)

But there are drawbacks. Because the companies often answer to a foreign
headquarters, they also have differing priorities. As one result, Canada is the
only Western industrialized nation to spend less than 1 percent of its gross
national product on the research and development that can lead to new products,
new investments and new jobs. That kind of work is done by foreigners back in
their native lands.

And when hard economic times come, the Canadian branch plants often seem
expendable. Last fall, for example, Houdaille Industries, a Florida-based
company, closed its plant in Oshawa near here, wiping out what was once 600
jobs. That decision ignited a worker occupation of the plant.

'A Raw Nerve'

''Such moves touch a raw nerve,'' said J.M.S. Careless, a Canadian historian.
''Canadians can feel how vulnerable they are hanging on the end of someone
else's string. Few small nations grow up so interconnected to a big one.
Canadians can't shape their national identity in isolation. They always have to
consider the States. And at times they resent this greatly.''

Divided by geography, politics, traditions and even languages, Canada's feuding
regions, provinces and governments can rarely agree on who they are. But they
can almost always unite on who they are not - Americans.

This nationalism can be stirred by many things; such as Canada's distaste for
America's intervention in Vietnam, or American laws prohibiting United States
companies and their foreign subsidiaries from dealing with Cuba or China.

This kind of chauvinism has grown slowly since the early 1960's. In 1974, Mr.
Trudeau launched the Foreign Investments Review Agency to pass on foreign
investments and takeovers. And there was a flurry of cultural nationalism in the
mid-1970's, with laws favoring Canadian publications to the temporary detriment
of Time magazine and Reader's Digest, among others. By law, 40 percent of the
artists featured on Canadian radio stations must be Canadian. And Ontario has
set up a loan program to help local businesses buy foreign-owned companies.

A Volatile Topic

These days energy is a particularly volatile topic here. ''World Covets Our
Resources, Expert Warns,'' read one recent Toronto Star headline. Canadians
cannot agree on what price oil-laden Alberta should get for its resources but
they can agree that no one else should get them, which fits into the standing
argument of economic nationalists like Abraham Rotstein.

''You have these huge multinationals,'' said Mr. Rotstein, a political economist
at the University of Toronto, ''able to charge ridiculously high prices for
reserves in the ground that they found at a ridiculously low cost.'' He added:
''They can ship those profits home and exacerbate our perennial balance of
payments problem. Or they can use them to diversify within Canada and buy up the
rest of the country. We want that money used for the good of Canada, not
Exxon.''

So the Government will levy a consumer energy tax to finance the purchase
(nationalization has not been officially mentioned yet) of several multinational
oil companies here by PetroCanada, the Government oil concern. None have offered
to sell yet.

Although the proposed fiscal pressures favoring ''Canadianization'' are strong,
the political realities of the North American economy make any sharp breaks
unlikely. There is a $90 billion a year two-way trade. Canadian investors, drawn
by a market 10 times the size of their own, are funneling mounting sums into
United States operations. And Canada is reliant on United States military
defenses.

A former Canadian prime minister summed up the situation when he addressed an
American audience 43 years ago. ''We are not in the same boat,'' said Arthur
Meighen, ''But we are pretty much in the same waters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 6, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LOBBYING BODY TO

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


PUSH CONGRESS FOR A NUCLEAR EDGE OVER SOVIET By Juan de Onis

WASHINGTON, Jan. 5 - Early in the new 97th Congress, a bipartisan coalition
pulled together by the American Security Council, a political action group
concerned with national defense, will put forward a resolution committing the
United States to nuclear arms superiority over the Soviet Union.

In view of the new conservative makeup of the Congress and with President-elect
Ronald Reagan coming into office, proponents of the resolution expect a large
majority in favor of what they see as a national policy statement to increase
military spending.

Before the election, the American Security Council issued a voting index that
rated members of Congress by their votes on 10 security issues last year. Eight
out of 10 senators given low ratings were defeated, and 26 representatives given
an ''antidefense'' rating were unseated.

Their replacements are generally strong supporters of expanded military spending
to ''stop Soviet expansionism,'' as the text of the resolution proposes. The
voting index kept by the American Security Council on the Senate and House will
continue to single out ''antidefense'' incumbents in Congress.

Strong Support in Congress

The success of the American Security Council as a political action group since
it established its voting index in 1970 can be measured by the 232 senators and
representatives who have joined the Coalition for Peace through Strength, which
was set up in Congress under the lobbying group's auspices.

The coalition backs a draft resolution calling for a ''national strategy'' based
on ''overall military and technological superiority over the Soviet Union,''
adequate civil defense in case of a nuclear war and rejection of any arms
control agreement ''which locks the United States into a position of military
inferiority''.

''We are just interpreting what the polls say that a great majority of American
people want, regardless of party, and we expect Congress to reflect this desire
for preparedness,'' said John Fisher, a former executive at Sears, Roebuck &
Company, who is president of the American Security Council and a related
educational foundation.

Mr. Fisher now says that his group's national strategy committee, which includes
many retired senior military and intelligence officers, is working not just for
''some incremental change in spending, but a major change in national
attitudes.''

The Defeat in Vietnam

''Vietnam was not lost on the battlefield, but in the minds of people,'' he said
in an interview at the American Security Council Foundation's headquarters on an
800-acre estate at the village of Boston, Va.

Mr. Fisher said that the lobbying group, which maintains an office near the
Capitol; the security council foundation, and the modern communications center
at Boston, Va., were maintained by 230,000 dues-paying members who provided $4
million a year.

Members of the council receive a monthly publication, called Washington Report,
which discusses military issues, including opposition to programs that are
supported by the lobby group.

Opponents of those programs are described in Washington Report as ''the
antidefense lobby.'' Among organizations so identified in the December 1978
issue were the American Friends Service Committee, the National Council of
Churches, the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.

Origin of the Council

The 58-year-old Mr. Fisher, who flew 20 combat missions in World War II in B-24
bombers, joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation after graduating from Miami
University in his hometown of Oxford, Ohio. He later became a personnel
executive at Sears, Roebuck in Chicago.

Mr. Fisher attributed the idea of forming the council to Gen.  Robert E. Wood,
retired, then the chairman of the board of Sears, Roebuck & Company, who named
Mr. Fisher as the organizer in 1955.  There was initial support from other
corporations based in the Middle West.

By 1961, the council had moved its headquarters to the Washington area and had
attracted a number of prominent former generals, admirals and nuclear arms
specialists, including Dr. Edward Teller, a developer of the hydrogen bomb. In
1967, the council presented a major report to Congress, challenging Defense
Secretary Robert S.  McNamara's estimate of the strength of Soviet strategic
forces.

The report contended that the Soviet Union had already achieved ''approximately
equal strength'' in strategic forces, and since then the council has been
insisting on the need for greater Government military spending, above all on
advanced military technology.

Drive Against Arms Treaty

In 1979, the council led a major drive against ratification of the second treaty
to limit strategic arms, signed by President Carter and Leonid I. Brezhnev, the
Soviet leader, arguing that the agreement placed the United States in a position
of strategic inferiority.

The council prepared a film in support of its opposition to the treaty. Among
the prominent people in the film who criticized the Carter Administration's
policy on nuclear deterrence was Alexander M. Haig Jr., who has been designated
as Secretary of State. Mr. Fisher said that at least 50 million people had seen
the film, which was released through 200 local television stations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 6, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DOCTOR SAYS MARINE WAS DRIVEN INSANE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 505 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 5


A defense psychiatrist testified today that Pvt. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine
Corps was driven insane by watching the execution of South Vietnamese prisoners,
some forced to play Russian roulette, and that that caused him to collaborate
with the enemy.

''In my assessment, the result of that was to destroy his free will and
independent judgment,'' Dr. Robert Rollins, of Raleigh, N.C., said. ''And from
that point on, he was unable to execute any free will, and he did everything
they asked him to do.''

Dr. Rollins was the second psychiatrist to testify for the defense in Private
Garwood's court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy
in almost 14 years in Vietnam. Private Garwood private is the only American
Vietnam-era serviceman to be tried on such charges.

The psychiatrist testified that Private Garwood was emotionally more vulnerable
than other prisoners of war because of childhood experiences of poverty and a
broken home. Dr. Rollins is one of a series of psychiatrists the defense is
presenting in an attempt to show that Private Garwood was driven insane by
torture and was unable to distinguish right from wrong.

Harassed by Vietnamese Civilians

Dr. Rollins said the executions came at the end of a series of events that began
after Private Garwood was captured while driving a jeep outside Da Nang in 1965,
marched through the jungle for several weeks and harassed by Vietnamese
civilians before arriving at a jungle camp where South Vietnamese prisoners were
held.

Two South Vietnamese soldiers ''were required to play Russian roulette with the
idea that the survivor would live,'' Dr. Rollins said. He said other South
Vietnamese were ''shot to death with many rounds of automatic weapons fire.''

He said Private Garwood was told by his captors, ''We have complete control over
you, and you may be executed at any time.'' Private Garwood's mental condition,
Dr. Rollins said, is known to psychiatrists as an ''atypical dissociative
reaction'' in which a captive is driven to the point of identifying with his
captors.

The private did not see another American for nearly a year after his capture,
Dr. Rollins said.

'He Was Powerless Physically'

''He was not an emotionally strong person to begin with,'' the psychiatrist
said. ''He was isolated. He was wounded. He saw people tortured and executed,
and he was powerless physically.''

Dr. Rollins said that Private Garwood was abandoned by his mother at the age of
4 and that both his parents had had alcohol problems.  He was raised by his
grandmother who was on welfare, Dr. Rollins said, and joined the Marine Corps
after being placed in a detention home for stealing a car.

Dr. Rollins said that Private Garwood was suicidal and depressed.  ''He doesn't
see that he has any future,'' Dr. Rollins said. ''In some ways he feels death
would be better than life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER EXPECTS 6- MONTH DELAY FOR RENEWAL OF TALKS ON ARMS CURB

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


Caspar W. Weinberger, designated by President-elect Ronald Reagan to be
Secretary of Defense, said today that the new administration would need at least
six months before it could resume negotiations with the Soviet Union to limit
strategic arms.

Mr. Weinberger, appearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, declined
to reaffirm President Carter's commitment to defend vital United States
interests in the Persian Gulf with military force if necessary, asserting that
the way the commitment was made was ''extraordinarily clumsy and ill-advised.''

The Secretary-designate, who appeared to be assured of confirmation after a
three-hour, low-key hearing, said that the United States might have to resort to
nuclear weapons in a war.

In one of the few philosophical moments of the session, he said the United
States should fight wars only if they were vital to national survival, if the
American people understood and supported them, and if the United States fully
intended to win.

Concepts Not Described

Mr. Weinberger presented no comprehensive overview of his concepts of military
power and strategy and acknowledged that he had not yet had time to delve into
many issue of national security. His experience in that area has been limited.

Nonetheless, the hearing produced the first exposition of his thinking on
military matters and some specifics of policies that are just beginning to take
shape.

Mr. Weinberger repeatedly asserted, without giving detailed evidence, that a
''gap'' in the strategic balance had opened between the United States and the
Soviet Union. He said that plans must be made to close that gap before the
Administration would resume negotiating with the Soviet Union for a treaty
limiting strategic arms.

That treaty, known as SALT II, was submitted to the Senate by President Carter
more than a year ago but was withdrawn after the Soviet incursion into
Afghanistan in December 1979.

Some Principal Decisions

He said it would take a ''good six months'' before the new administration had
decided on policies concerning the MX mobile missile, a new long-range bomber
and other weapons and issues.

Mr. Weinberger said that President Carter's commitment to defend vital American
interests around the Persian Gulf had been made without consultation with
nations in the region or with allies. He also asserted that the United States
lacked the military power to carry out the commitment.

''I don't know what President-elect Reagan will do about the commitment to the
Persian gulf,'' he said, adding that he was not aware of any challenge to it.
Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, contended that Mr. Weinberger was
sending ''confusing signals,'' which Mr. Weinberger denied.

Senator Jeremiah A. Denton, Republican of Alabama, a retired admiral who was a
prisoner of war in North Vietnam, elicited a philosophical view of war from Mr.
Weinberger by asserting that the application of American military power in
Vietnam had been a ''spectacular failure.''

Mr. Weinberger said the the war was ''not vital to American national interests''
and that the United States should not fight in wars without intending to win.

Mr. Weinberger asserted that the United States should use ''every weapon and
resource available'' to win wars. Mr. Levin asked if that included nuclear
weapons.

If the situation was serious enough to commit American forces, Mr.  Weinberg
said, the United States must be ready to use ''the strengths we have.'' He said
it was possible to fight wars with conventional weapons but that the United
States should not advise opponents that certain lines would not be crossed.

Mr. Weinberger said he did not know whether Mr. Reagan would continue draft
registration, the second round of which began yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HAROLD UREY, SCIENTEST, DIES AT 87; WAR FOE'S WORK LED TO H-BOMB

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words


Harold C. Urey, a life-long critic of military force whose discovery of heavy
hydrogen opened the possibility of thermonuclear warfare, died Monday night at
his home in La Jolla, Calif.

Dr. Urey, who won the 1934 Nobel Prize in chemistry for his discovery, died at
the age of 87, apparently of a heart attack.  He had suffered progressive
symptoms of Parkinson's disease and cardiac disease in the last decade.

While Dr. Urey's scientific prestige rested on his discovery in 1931 of the
heavy form (or isotope) of hydrogen called deuterium, he made major
contributions to space exploration and to scientific explanations for the
evolution of the universe and the origin of life.

Lightning and Protein

In 1953, Dr. Urey and a graduate student, Stanley L. Miller, carried out a
landmark experiment demonstrating that earth's primordial ingredients could have
been forced by lightning discharges to combine into some of the basic chemicals
of life.

In the Urey-Miller experiment, electric sparks were passed through a heated
mixture of methane, ammonia, hydrogen and water, with the resulting formation of
four amino acids - the building blocks of protein.

''Urey was always goading and provoking us to do things like that,'' a former
student reminisced. ''He told me once: 'There are a lot of people around who are
smarter than me. But I pick only the most important problems.'''

Colleagues consider that Dr. Urey founded modern lunar science with his
speculations and deductions about the moon's geology.  One of his former
students, Dr. Gerald Wasserburg of the moon rock laboratory of the California
Institute of Technology, said yesterday, ''Harold had always had a love affair
with the moon.''

Explore Even at 'Great Risk'

Dr. Urey wrote in 1961: ''The space program is not only scientific in purpose
but also is an expression of man's insistent determination to do the nearly
impossible - to explore the unknown even at great risk. Therefore the proper
attitude of a scientist should be to try to participate in the program so that
scientific objectives can be attained along with the thrills of exploration.''

Dr. Urey sought to understand space from indirect evidence, especially the study
of meteorites.  Chemical analysis of meteoritic material enabled the scientist
and fellow researchers to develop a new field: astrochemical research.  Their
theories about the relative abundance of chemical elements in the universe
implied certain nuclear processes in stars and supernovas, and those in turn
shed light on the evolution of the universe.

''His great strength,'' Dr. Wasserburg said. ''was his belief that there was no
field of science which could not be profitably brought to bear on the moon, on
the solar system, on the universe. He invented and legitimatized whole new
fields of scientific endeavor.''

'In Dozens of Disciplines'

Another colleague, Glenn T. Seaborg, described Dr. Urey as ''a brilliantly
innovative scientist whose mind seemed at home in dozens of very different
disciplines.'' Dr. Seaborg, an atomic scientist who won a Nobel Prize for the
identification of the man-made element plutonium, said that Dr. Urey's wartime
research in isotope separation had been vitally important in the making of the
first atomic bomb.

Dr. Urey was remembered by another former associate as ''a Midwestern patriot
who hated political repression.'' Harold Clayton Urey was born April 29, 1893,
in Walkerton, Ind. His father, a teacher and clergyman, died when he was 6 years
old, and his stepfather was also a clergyman.

The youth majored in zoology as an undergraduate at Montana State University,
from which he graduated in 1917. He worked as a chemical engineer for a company
manufacturing war materiel in 1918 and 1919, and then turned to pure scientific
research.

He continued graduate study in physical and mathematical chemistry at the
University of California's Berkeley campus, which awarded him a doctorate in
1923.

He then spent two years at the University of Copenhagen working with some of the
world's leading atomic scientists and studying under Niels Bohr.

Joined Columbia in 1929

In 1924, Dr. Urey joined the chemistry faculty of Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, and in 1929 he joined Columbia University in New York.

It was at Columbia, working with George M. Murphy and Ferdinand G.  Brickwedde,
that Dr. Urey discovered heavy hydrogen.  Normal hydrogen has a nucleus
consisting simply of one positively charged proton. The number of protons in an
atomic nucleus determine what element the nucleus must be. But nuclei may also
contain large neutrons, electrically neutral particles that increase the weight
of a nucleus but not its elemental nature.

Dr. Urey believed that a form of hydrogen must exist containing a neutron in its
nucleus as well as the necessary proton. In a very subtle analysis of light
passing through water, Dr. Urey and his colleagues were able to discern a slight
difference between the spectrums transmitted by water made of ordinary hydrogen
and water made of the heavier forms of hydrogen called deuterium. Deuterium
exists in ordinary water at a concentration of 150 parts per million, and
tritium, containing two neutrons, is rarer still.

Deuterium and tritium are the forms of hydrogen used as fuel in the hydrogen
bomb.  Deuterium, combined with oxygen as ''heavy water,'' is also essential to
the operation of some nuclear reactors.  Dr. Urey once commented that at the
time of the discovery he thought that heavy hydrogen might eventually have
practical use in ''something like neon signs.''

Role in Uranium Separation

Dr. Urey's wartime research for the Manhattan Project facilitated the separation
of bomb-grade uranium 235 from unenriched uranium 238. The gaseous diffusion
process, in which different isotopes of uranium are prepared as gases and then
differentially diffused through membranes, was his main contribution.

After the war, Dr. Urey became distinguished professor of chemistry at the
University of Chicago, and in 1958 he joined the University of California at La
Jolla as professor at large.

Despite his contributions to nuclear research, Dr. Urey opposed the building of
nuclear reactors, whose waste he believed to be dangerous.

Remembered by one former colleague as ''sometimes stubborn, petulant and
fractious,'' Dr. Urey frequently embraced political causes.

A registered Democrat for most of his adult life, Dr. Urey joined various
political groups in the 1930's that opposed the Franco rebellion in Spain. In
1950, he publicly denounced the death sentence of the convicted spies Julius and
Ethel Rosenberg and strongly criticized Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.

He campaigned for an international ban against nuclear weapons (but warned that
the United States should never disarm unilaterally), and in the 1970's he joined
other scientists in calling for withdrawal from Vietnam.

He is remembered by co-workers as usually genial, fond of gardening and
notoriously absent-minded.  ''Even in his final years he had an incredible
capacity for scientific concentration, and when he concentrated, everything
around him was closed out,'' a friend said.

He is survived by his wife, the former Frieda Daum, and four children, Gertrude,
Frieda, Mary Alice and John.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Harold Urey

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHICAGO REJECTS MOVE TO CURB POLICE SPYING ON POLITICAL ACTIVISTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 6


Efforts by a group of citizens' organizations in Chicago to negotiate
court-approved agreements prohibiting unwarranted surveillance by the police and
other agencies have reached an impasse because of the city's insistence that the
police should be allowed to spy on any organization or individual it chooses.

The negotiations, which have been going on for two years, are an outgrowth of
lawsuits filed against the city by a group of organizations that said they had
been the victims of illegal spying by a special unit of the Chicago Police
Department that was used to keep track of politically active organizations and
individuals.

According to court testimony, the now defunct unit, known as the Red Squad,
conducted illegal operations against hundreds of political, civil rights and
civic organizations and individuals that had opposed the Vietnam War or
criticized the policies of the late Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago and the
police department. In some instances, members of the police unit infiltrated
organizations, gaining powerful positions in them and then sought to destroy
them from within.

The spying effort at times involved the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
Central Intelligence Agency and an Army intelligence unit.

Settlement in New York

In a similar case, the New York City Police Department recently ended a
nine-year-old court battle by agreeing to create a threemember board to oversee
all police intelligence gathering and surveillance involving political groups
and activists. All such police work by that department is to be conducted under
a formal set of guidelines aimed at safeguarding political activities covered by
the First Amendment, according to the settlement.

In the Chicago case, the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. agreed on proposed settlements
last month with the plaintiffs and submitted the proposals to the Federal
District Court here for approval. Under the proposals, the agencies would
promise to keep their surveillance operations within the law and to restrict
political spying on individuals and organizations.

A similar agreement with the Chicago police appeared to be near after Peter
Fitzpatrick, special assistant corporation counsel for the city and Richard
Brzeczek, the police superintendent, worked out a proposal with attorneys
representing the political organizations.

But that proposal was shelved when Stanley J. Garber, the newly appointed city
corporation counsel, asserted that the proposed agreement would unreasonably
hinder the police.

''The settlement imposed bounds on us not justified by prevailing legal
considerations,'' Mr. Garber said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Trial Told Vietnam Kept Mentally Ill Prisoners

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 6


Defense attorneys for Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood of the Marines asserted today that
the North Vietnamese did not free him as part of a 1973 mass release of American
prisoners of war because they excluded from the release prisoners who had become
insane or lost limbs.

Private Garwood's attorneys in his court-martial on charges of desertion and
collaboration with the enemy in nearly 14 years in Vietnam asked Col. R.@E.
Switzer, the presiding judge, to summon Lieut. Gen. John P. Flynn, retired, a
former prisoner of war, to testify.

The attorneys contend that Mr. Flynn, who lives in Windermere, Fla., would
testify about other mentally ill Americans who were not returned with the other
prisoners. Colonel Switzer did not rule on the request.

The defense says that Private Garwood was driven insane by Vietcong torture.
Maj. Warner Hellmer, the chief prosecutor, spent much of today's court session
attacking the credibility of a psychiatrist who backs that assertion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG AND REAGAN TALK IN CAPITAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 354 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


Alexander M. Haig Jr. conferred today with Ronald Reagan for the first time
since the President-elect chose him to be Secretary of State.

The one-hour meeting at Blair House allowed the two men to discuss in private
some of the most pressing foreign policy issues facing the next administration.
It also allowed Mr. Haig to reassert publicly a theme that he has repeated in
the to hide in the confirmation hearings scheduled to start Friday, and that the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee would be wasting its time and the taxpayers'
money if it devoted much time to looking for some wrongdoing in his past.

''I do not have any concern about the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's
principals or staff spending the next six months, if they want, reviewing
whatever is representative of my 35 years of Government service,'' he told
reporters.

Privately, Mr. Haig and his small staff, working in a suite of offices at the
State Department, are worried that the hearings might drag on for more than a
week, making it difficult for Mr. Haig to have his own aides chosen and ready on
Inauguration Day.

Choosing Senior Aides

Mr. Haig has devoted considerable attention to hiring those who would fill
senior jobs in the State Department. Because of concern that some of the
appointments might upset some senators, he has insisted that those asked to
serve not make it known until he is confirmed.

As a result, Mr. Haig has been a virtual recluse in the State Department and has
not spoken at length with Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie or other top aides
of President Carter.

Mr. Haig's right-hand man, who will be his executive assistant if he is
confirmed, is Sherwood Goldberg, a Philadelphia lawyer, who served under Mr.
Haig in Vietnam in the early 1960's, when Mr. Haig was an Army lieutenant
colonel.

Another former associate serving on Mr. Haig's interim staff is Harvey
Sicherman, a Middle East and national security specialist from the Foreign
Policy Research Institute of Philadelphia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE MORAL SLOTH OF GENERAL HAIG

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 237 words


To the Editor:

Norman Podhoretz's Dec. 23 Op-Ed article, ''Haig, and Reagan's Mandate,'' is
puzzling. I don't understand how he could ignore Anthony Lewis's prior column
(''Ghosts,'' published the day before) which makes the most devastating
argument, if by implication only, against Haig's appointment as Secretary of
State. We must conclude that Podhoretz deliberately avoids the central issue in
the uneasiness Haig's appointment provokes.

Opposition to Haig centers on his moral sloth, not on his ideas about Russia. A
man who claims to defend ''Christian-Judeo values'' and yet does not shrink from
''brutalizing'' North Vietnam for the sake of face-saving and meaningless treaty
concessions does not belong in power.

Mr. Podhoretz sees no contradiction here; what has happened in Indochina since
has ''drained the antiwar argument of its old persuasiveness.'' But moral issues
do not drain themselves so easily. Such insensitivity must have a deeper
motivation. Podhoretz's praise for Haig and appeal to the Reagan mandate show
not merely a hope to wash away such a taint on our foreign policy but a desire
to call such reckless policy ''strength'' and ''moral fortitude.''

For Podhoretz, then, Reagan's victory and the Haig appointment show that
Americans consider moral considerations ''dangerous and defeatist.'' Is this the
mandate Americans have given Reagan?
STEVEN M. ALBERT, Chicago, Dec. 23, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Who's In Charge?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


On the whole, the transition between the Carter and Reagan administrations has
gone fairly well, but on the question of how to deal with the American hostages
in Iran, there have been some problems.

Within a few days before the Inauguration of Ronald Reagan, the Carter
Administration sent what it regarded as its ''final'' compromise proposal for
the release of the hostages, attaching to it a deadline for reply of Jan. 16,
four days before the Inauguration.

The Carter Administration, recognizing that the consequences of this proposal
could probably not be dealt with before Reagan became President, asked Reagan's
people to consider the message to Iran before it was delivered. According to the
White House officials who drafted the compromise, Reagan's cabinet appointees
refused to have anything to do with it, or even read it without an order from
Reagan, which never came.

Alexander Haig got the point, but was obviously preoccupied with his own
confirmation problem. Caspar Weinberger was sympathetic, but passed it on to
higher authority. Edwin Meese listened but felt Iran was Carter's responsibility
and kept his distance from what he saw as problems of the past.

This is nothing new. Even in the depths of the 1930's Depression, during the
transition from Hoover to Roosevelt, when Hoover appealed to FDR for help in the
face of bank closings, Roosevelt refused to cooperate and left the crisis to
Hoover. Reagan has done the same thing, and now must deal with the consequences
of Carter's ''final offer,'' which he has refused to read.

There are other transition problems, still unresolved. Reagan's appointment
schedule is running late. He has chosen his cabinet, but within a few days of
his Inauguration the critical decisions about his sub-cabinet positions have
still not been made, and apparently there is a bit of a tussle within the Reagan
camp about their choices.

For example, should Reagan's appointees as Secretary of State and Secretary of
Defense - General Haig and Weinberger - be free to select their own deputies, or
should they be chosen by Reagan's victorious political allies?

Weinberger has chosen Frank Carlucci, a Foreign Service officer who has served
the Democrats in various high official and diplomatic posts, as his deputy
against the opposition of many conservative Reagan supporters.

General Haig has brought back to Washington Larry Eagleburger, who was Henry
Kissinger's principal administrative aide at State, and has most recently been
U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia. Haig's intention is apparently to have him as his
political secretary in the third ranking office of the State Department. And
Haig is also consulting with Walter Stoessel, former Ambassador to the Soviet
Union and Poland, on the organization of the State Department.

Whether Weinberger and Haig will get the deputies they want, however, remains
for Reagan to decide. There is not only opposition from the Reagan conservatives
to Carlucci at Defense, but also pressure for Haig to appoint as Under Secretary
a favorite Reagan California judge, whose ignorance of foreign affairs is
equaled only by his contested knowledge of the law.

Washington is puzzled by this Reagan transition, mainly because it seldom hears
from Reagan. Some departments of the Government have made the transition switch
easily. Weinberger and Secretary of Defense Brown, and Muskie and Haig at State
have worked well together, but on policy and on the other officials who have to
carry it out, there is still more than the natural confusion.

One suggestion here is that the officials now in charge at the subcabinet level
of deputy and assistant secretaries might stay on the job for a few weeks until
the new administration selects their successors, but this has not been met with
enthusiasm.

Meanwhile in Congress there has been a lot of noise about the transition, and
demands for tapes of Haig's private statements on Watergate and Vietnam, but
these is not likely to get very far.  Carter is in no mood to cause trouble for
Reagan. Haig has invited the senators to get any tapes they like about his role
in the last days of the Nixon tragedy, and doesn't want the help of Nixon, who
is apparently prepared to go to court if necessary to deny by executive
privilege access to Haig's private White House conversations.

Also, the new chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Charles Percy
of Illinois, has indicated that he does not want a Vietnam or Watergate replay
of Haig's role in Nixon's resignation, unless this is clearly relevant to Haig's
appointment.

There are exceptions, of course, and the confirmation process will undoubtedly
be rough, but there is a growing feeling here that the problems of the nation
are too serious to be left to partisan argument, and that Reagan should be given
a chance to choose the people and policies he wants, if only he will make up his
mind where he is going, who is speaking for him, and how he wants the Government
to work in the meantime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
General Ordered to Divulge 2 Names in Garwood Case

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 208 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 7


A military judge ordered a retired general today to divulge information that
Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps contends will support his story that
torture by the Vietcong drove him insane.

The ruling was handed down by Col. R.E. Switzer, who is hearing Private
Garwood's court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy
during the nearly 14 years he was held as a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

Private Garwood's attorneys asked that Lieut. Gen. John P. Flynn, who retired
from the Air Force and now lives in Windermere, Fla., be ordered to testify.
They said that General Flynn, the ranking officer in a Hanoi prisoner-of-war
camp, had information about three American prisoners who were driven insane by
torture and, like Private Garwood, were not returned when the North Vietnamese
released 550 prisoners of war in 1973.

Colonel Switzer delayed a decision on calling General Flynn as a witness but
said he would require the general to give both prosecution and defense attorneys
the names of two persons who knew the three American servicemen. Defense
attorneys believe the three servicemen are dead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATORS TO QUESTION HAIG ON 7 KEY AREAS

BYLINE: BY ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


Insisting they did not want to ''rehash Watergate, or witch-hunt,'' Senator
Claiborne Pell and other Democrats on the Foreign Relations Committee met for
two hours today to plan strategy for the confirmation hearings on the nomination
of Alexander M. Haig Jr. to be Secretary of State.

Mr. Pell, the Rhode Islander who is the committee's senior Democrat, insisted
Democrats had made no plans about what to do if the voluminous files and tapes
Democrats have asked for were not supplied by the Carter Administration. ''We'll
cross that bridge when we get to it,'' he said.

He said he hoped the material could be provided so the committee could weigh it
and decide on Mr. Haig by Inauguration Day.  But, with the knowledge that their
requests may not be met by then, the Democrats on the committee are approaching
Friday's hearings with no sign of great pleasure. At least one influential
member has been telling friends that he welcomed neither the nomination nor the
need to challenge it and thought that Mr. Haig would be confirmed. But even so,
he said, he feels a duty to ask questions about Mr. Haig's record.

Most Senators Are 'Prudent'

One knowledgeable Senator attributed the muted tone of public comments on Mr.
Haig, even from likely opponents, to the absence of any serious outside effort
to attack the nomination. ''Most of the senators are such, shall I say, 'prudent
people,''' he said, ''that unless they are given some encouragement, they won't
do anything.  They're afraid.''

But while there is no organized opposition, there has not been much support for
Mr. Haig from places where it might be expected. Even such backers as Senator
Henry M. Jackson of Washington called an exploration of Mr. Haig's record
''appropriate in our system of government.''

The records the Democrats are seeking might answer some questions, but the
records of many congressional hearings and court cases deal in detail with seven
issues that one or more Democratic senators have said need to be explored -along
with the normal questions any prospective Secretary of State might be asked
about the Soviet Union, Iran, El Salvador or Poland.

These seven issues span a decade of controversy, with most of them arising from
the days of Mr. Haig's service in the Nixon White House: 1. Wiretapping. As
deputy to Henry A. Kissinger on the National Security Council, Mr. Haig, then a
general, took to the Federal Bureau of Investigation the names of Government
officials and reporters to be wiretapped from 1969 onward.

He also studied the records on the tapping - whose subjects included Hedrick
Smith and William Beecher of the New York Times, Marvin Kalb of CBS News, and
Henry Brandon of The Sunday Times of London. Mr. Haig has said he was following
orders, but senators say they want to know if he will promise to resist illegal
orders if he gets any as Secretary of State.

Moves AGainst Allende

2. Chile and the so-called ''Track Two'' effort to topple the Government of
Salvador Allende Gossens in 1970. There was an effort involving the Central
Intelligence Agency to stimulate a coup against Mr. Allende. Knowledge of this
plan in the White House was apparently limited to President Nixon, Mr. Kissinger
and Mr. Haig.

Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, said today he wanted to know
''whether we can expect clandestine attempts to change governments'' abroad if
Mr. Haig becomes Secretary of State..

3. The bombings of Cambodia. These bombings were carried out in 1969 without
consultation with Congress, and they were denied by the Administration. Again,
Democrats say they view this issue as one on which to test Mr. Haig's commitment
to consult with Congress.

4. Vietnam peace negotiations. Mr. Haig made many trips to Vietnam while serving
as Mr. Kissigner's deputy, and was reportedly a strong advocate of the intense
bombing of North Vietnam in December 1972, an offensive some critics charged was
intended not to force concessions from North Vietnam but to impress a reluctant
South Vietnamese Government.

5. For all the public insistence that Watergate is not their focus, senators
make it clear they are interested in Mr. Haig's role in helping Mr. Nixon defend
himself. In October 1973, he told William Ruckelshaus, Deputy Attorney General,
that he had to fire Archibald Cox, the special prosecutor, because ''your
Commander in Chief is giving you an order.''

One Watergate tape that has been released includes a passage in which Mr. Haig
apparently advised Mr. Nixon, on June 4, 1973, to deal with charges by saying
''you just can't recall.''

Jaworski Comments Shift

Mr. Haig's most prominent activity in the Watergate defense was his dealings
with Leon A. Jaworski, who succeeded Mr. Cox. Mr. Jaworski speaks highly of the
general's role now, but in a 1976 memoir he was ambivalent. In some passages he
complained of Mr. Haig's efforts to obstruct him, but at another he conceded:
''Haig was the man on the tightrope. Nixon depended on him and Haig felt that he
had to support the President.''

6. The Nixon Pardon. On Aug. 1, 1974, General Haig told then Vice President Ford
that some people in the White House had said Mr.  Nixon might resign in exchange
for the promise of a pardon. When Mr.  Ford did pardon Mr. Nixon on Sept. 8 - a
step he had once told Congress he did not think the public would stand for - the
question of a ''deal rose.'' Mr. Ford made an almost unheard-of appearance
before a House Judiciary Committee to deny that there was any deal.  But efforts
to get General Haig to testify were blocked by the subcommittee chairman.

7. The Iranian revolution. As commander of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, General Haig was aware of a mission to Iran in January 1979 by his
deputy, Gen. Robert E. Heyser, which considered the possibility of staging a
coup against the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Former Ambassador William Sullivan
has said that General Haig was furious at the plan - but has declined to say
whether he objected to the idea of a coup itself, to involving the American
military at all, or simply to a lack of steadfastness behind the Shah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexmander M. Haig Jr.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PSYCHOLOGIST SAYS GARWOOD TOLD OF G.I.'S KILLED BY AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 8


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood, accused of collaborating with the enemy, says that he
saw American prisoners of war in Vietnam killed by United States bombs and
exposure to the defoliant Agent Orange, a military psychologist testified today.

The psychologist, Air Force Capt. Richard D. Wheatley, said he was convinced
that the 34-year-old marine was telling the truth.  Captain Wheatley was the
third medical expert called by the defense in Private Garwood's court-martial on
charges of desertion and collaboration. The defense contends that Private
Garwood was insane and not responsible for his actions.

In addition to disclosing previously unknown aspects of Private Garwood's
account of his 14 years behind enemy lines, Captain Wheatley also said his tests
had confirmed findings of civilian defense psychiatrists that Private Garwood
suffers from mental disorders.

Symptoms of Agent Orange

He said Private Garwood had told him that he had seen five to six Americans, as
well as Vietcong, die after direct exposure to Agent Orange.

Captain Wheatley said he had studied the psychological and physical effects of
Agent Orange and that Private Garwood's account had given ''exactly the same
symptom pattern of exposure to Agent Orange.''

''I thought his credibility was unimpeachable,'' Captain Wheatley said.  He said
that Private Garwood had told him that some of the Americans exposed to Agent
Orange died within 24 hours after periods of ''severe vomiting.''

Captain Wheatley said that Private Garwood had also told him that he and other
P.O.W.'s had been caught in a B-52 raid in May 1970 that killed American
prisoners as well as Vietnamese. Private Garwood said that he was one of only
two persons to survive the raid along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

Captain Wheatley described Private Garwood as the product of a starkly
improvished childhood in which he trapped snakes and small animals for his
family to eat. He also said that Private Garwood had impaired motor ability on
his left side, indicating that he suffered damage to his central nervous system
at a very young age.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PERCY AND CONSERVATIVES: SENATOR SEES NO TROUBLE

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


Charles H. Percy, an old Republican liberal who is the new chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, says he foresees no serious difficulties in
working with conservatives in the Reagan administration and in the Senate.

The Illinois Senator formally assumed the leadership of the committee Monday.
The post fell to him when his party won control of the Senate and Jacob K.
Javits of New York, the senior Republican on the committee, was defeated in the
November election.

Both friends and critics of the 62-year-old Mr. Percy discern a number of
daunting and difficult problems, and some of them consider his determined
optimism to be one of them.

''I think the main problem is adaptation to world responsibility'' on the part
of the 53-member Republican majority in the Senate after 26 years in opposition,
Mr. Javits said in a telephone interview. He expressed the belief that leading
the majority into ''the responsible courses required'' would not be easy, but he
said hopefully of Senator Percy, ''He's a tremendous salesman, you know.''

'Doesn't Want to Hear Bad News'

Another old friend of Mr. Percy, who was a highly successful businessman before
entering politics, saw that characteristic as a potential hazard, saying:
''Percy's salesman mentality blocks out all thoughts of rejection and doesn't
want to hear bad news. Once he starts selling he is always going to oversell.''

That friend and most other sources declined to permit the use of their names,
most of them being Senate staff members required to be anonymous or senators
eager to observe the rules of comity.

Members of President-elect Ronald Reagan's transition team also said anonymously
that they were astonished and angered by some of the statements Senator Percy
has made since mid-November, including those during a highly publicized trip to
Moscow to confer with Soviet leaders, a trip in which he appeared to undertake
the role of interpreter of Reagan foreign policy.

In an interview this week Mr. Percy disclaimed concern that ideological or
personal frictions would complicate his chairmanship.  He repeated a statement
made in November that ''for the first time in a long time we will be speaking
with a single voice in foreign policy.'' He added, ''My objective will be to
have the closest relationship with the administration that any chairman has had
in our time and to make the committee as bipartisan as any in our time.''

Possibility of Difficulties

After reflection Mr. Percy telephoned to offer a qualification, saying he
believed that difficulties could arise if the new administration failed to
consult in advance with the Senate on controversial policies and chose to evolve
programs and initiatives in secret.

The Senator discounts his ideological differences with the conservative wing of
his party, but those differences were deep and long-lived. His 1966 election
victory over Senator Paul H. Douglas, a Democrat, was attributed in part to the
perception that Mr. Percy was much more dovish toward the Vietnam War than Mr.
Douglas. Mr.  Percy had rejected the concept of military victory and had
recommended a series of unilateral cease-fires, bombing pauses and offers to
negotiate.

Subsequently, Senator Percy opposed President Richard M. Nixon on several vital,
highly sensitive issues, including the nomination of two conservative
Southerners to the Supreme Court, the antiballistic missile program and policy
in Southeast Asia and Chile. Mr. Percy introduced a Senate resolution calling
for a special prosecutor in the Watergate scandal and was generally critical of
Mr. Nixon's conduct in that matter.

The Senator has insisted that he sees no reason why such basic differences
should lead to personal tensions. He remarked this week, ''I think my
relationship with Nixon is as good as any Senator's could be.''

Signs of Inconsistency Seen

Even some of Senator Percy's closest political friends say they do not regard
him as especially consistent; since the election he appears to have begun making
some intellectual accommodations to Mr.  Reagan and his conservative team.

''On Communism,'' he said this week, ''I'm a hard-nosed guy.'' He added that he
had no problem with ''Reagan's philosophy of peace through strength.''

Mr. Percy and Mr. Javits provided the necessary Republican support for Foreign
Relations Committee approval of the treaty on strategic nuclear arms, which was
opposed both by conservatives and by Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., a moderate
Republican who is now the majority leader of the Senate. In voting for the
treaty in 1979 Mr. Percy said he believed that it served the national interest
and that ''opponents have been unable to convince me that this treaty contains
fatal flaws.''

During hearings on the treaty he said he had no desire ''to take us back to the
drawing board and to begin all over again - I think that would be a momentous
step backward.'' However, in a news conference Nov. 19 he said the treaty was
flawed. Then, and in Moscow, he seemed to support Mr. Reagan's position that it
could and should be renegotiated, although he said that much of it could be
preserved.

Complaint From Transition Team

Even though the Senator drew a distinction between discussions and full
negotiations, members of the Reagan transition team complained privately that he
had gone too far in Moscow in representing the President-elect as ready to open
discussions.

An unanswered question is how successful the new chairman will be as a
parliamentary leader. The outgoing chairman, Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho,
who was defeated for re-election, and Mr. Javits worked in close harmony to win
almost every major foreign policy battle of the last two years. Mr. Percy said
he had a similar record of success working with Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff,
Democrat of Connecticut, on legislation in the Government Operations Committee.
In a 1977 interview, however, Mr. Percy acknowledged that he had acquired ''a
loser's image'' during that committee's hearings into the banking practices of
Bert Lance, who resigned under fire as President Carter's Budget Director.

In a number of election campaigns in Illinois Mr. Percy has made conciliatory
gestures toward Republican conservatives only to disappoint them later. This has
left him with a mixed reputation on Capitol Hill. During the 1979 hearings on
the treaty on strategic nuclear arms, Senator Barry M. Goldwater, Republican of
Arizona, summarized those critical of Mr. Percy's consistency by saying on a
Senate elevator: ''How can you trust a Christian Scientist who wears a hearing
aid?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sen. Charles Percy

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Witness Says Garwood Got Rifle as Part of Torture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 197 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 9


An Air Force psychologist testified today that Pfc. Robert Garwood had admitted
carrying a rifle at a Vietnamese prison camp but had said he had it only because
his captors would not carry heavy things themselves.

Capt. Richard D. Wheatley, while testifying a second day in the Marine private's
court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy in
Vietnam, said the rifle had been part of Private Garwood's torture.

Defense attorneys have not denied testimony by several former prisoners that
Private Garwood wore a uniform of the North Vietnamese and carried a rifle while
in captivity. But they contend that the actions resulted from his deteriorating
mental condition.

Before the court-martial recessed for the day, Captain Wheatley said Private
Garwood had been isolated and ''pretty much left to rot'' in the prison camps.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, is accused of taking up the cause of the North
Vietnamese in the 14 years he spent in Southeast Asia. He disappeared in
September 1965 and returned to the United States in March 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR POINTS FROM APPEARANCE BY HAIG BEFORE SENATE COMMITTEE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 10178 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of the opening statement by Alexander
M. Haig Jr. before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in Washington
yesterday on his nomination as Secretary of State, as recorded by The New York
Times; from a written appendix that Mr. Haig submitted to the committee, and
from questions and answers in the testimony:

Opening Statement

Over the past 200 years, the United States has stood as the beacon of liberty
for the world. We have demonstrated that freedom and justice can thrive in a
democratic society. We have in this century been often called to shed our blood
for the nations of the free world. And in an ingenious and generous plan
designed by a great Army general and Secretary of State, George C. Marshall, we
helped after the most devastating war in history to rebuild Europe and
strengthen civilization.

Our record in this century is not perfect, but it should be a source of great
pride. Our successes were founded on a firm commitment to our ideals, combined
with a sense of the realities of human nature and international politics.

It is that combination that we must bring to bear on the decade ahead. If we do,
I believe that America and its people will stand, once again, as an example for
the peoples of the world and merit the highest judgments of history.

Our ideals must be reconciled with the reality we face. The United States must
pursue its vision of justice in an imperfect and constantly changing world full
of peril, but also full of opportunity.

Agenda Already Crowded

The world does not stand still for our elections - important as they are.
Complex issues already crowd our foreign policy agenda. The earlier the Reagan
Administration articulates its approach to these issues, the better served the
nations of the world and the people of our own nation will be.

It would be premature here to set forth definitive policies or offer detailed
programs. Both tasks require analysis and thoughtful consideration by the
President-elect and his advisers. But Presidentelect Reagan and I firmly believe
that American foreign policy should have some permanent bedrock.

The United States has been most effective in the world arena when the solid
foundations of its foreign policy have been recognized and understood by our own
people and by the nations with which we must deal.

Now, Mr. Chairman, let me describe the global environment in which our national
interest must be pursued: Every generation views its own perils as
unprecedented. Even so, there is now widespread agreement that the years
immediately ahead will be unusually dangerous for all of us. Evidence of that
danger is everywhere. In Europe, still the fulcrum of the East-West balance,
Soviet military power once again casts an ominous shadow over the efforts of an
East European people to assert fundamental freedoms of association and
expression.

Problems in Middle East

In the Middle East an uneasy peace continues to be punctuated by raid and
reprisal, with each such sequence threatening renewed and wider conflict.

At the head of the Persian Gulf, war between Iraq and Iran threatens the very
lifeblood of many national economies. Iran itself, once a major force for
regional stability, lurches from demonstration to demonstration, in a state of
near anarchy.

Meanwhile, not far to the east, 85,000 Soviet troops brutalize Afghanistan, in
the first major post-World War II use of Soviet troops outside the area the
Soviets have heretofor considered their sphere of influence.

In Asia, sworn enemies face one another along a 5,000-mile arc from Thailand to
the Manchurian frontier. On the Korean Peninsula, only a fragile truce persists,
nearly 30 years after the formal cessation of Korean hostilities.

Terrorism and Adventurism

In Africa, Southeast Asia, Central America and the Caribbean, turmoil and
violence stunt national development and invite terrorism from within and
adventurism from without, as millions of humans starve, and thousands of new
refugees seek shelter each day.

It's no wonder that the 1980's have been called the decade of crisis. Yet it is
precisely that sort of appraisal which I believe we must reject. The very term,
crisis, implies that events are out of control and that our nation can only
react. But the task of statesmanship is not simply to react to events. Those I
just described are merely current symptoms of a more fundamental world problem.
The task of statesmanship is to master the overall problem and thus minimize the
necessity of ricocheting from crisis to crisis.

Today we face a world in which power, in a variety of forms, has become diffused
over 150 nations. Adjustment of relations with, and among, so many separate
governments would be difficult enough even were they equally responsible, and
equally committed, to stability and peace. But many are willing to foment
instability and violence to achieve their objectives. That reality alone should
argue for better coordination of policy among all free nations.

Irrelevance of Boundaries

As I have underscored more than once to our allies in Europe, artifical
operating boundaries - self-imposed in a simpler era - are increasingly
irrelevant in today's needs to formulate and pursue policies together.

But the diffusion of power and its resulting instability are not the only
arguments for concerted allied action. Our collective vulnerability to
international unrest is also matched by a socioeconomic challenge that we all
share: The growing interdependence of our economies and our continued reliance
on foreign sources of energy and raw materials has stripped the West of the
independent and collective resilience which once allowed one nation's economic
strength to bolster another's momentary weakness.

The significance of the economic challenges we face cannot be overemphasized.
The potential for worldwide boom or bust is not unrelated to the diffusion of
power among many nations. Indeed, the decline in world oil supplies resulting
from the war between Iran and Iraq is stark testimony that instability may be
most likely precisely where its affect on world economies promises to be the
most debilitating.

Much of the fragmentation of power has occurred in the so-called third world - a
misleading term if ever there was one. If one thing has become abundantly clear
in the last decade, or so, it is that the commonality of condition, purpose and,
by extension, U.S. foreign policy, implied by that term, third world, is a myth
- and a dangerous one at that.

Mixing Diverse Nations

Recent American foreign policy has suffered from the misperception which lumps
together nations as diverse as Brazil and Libya, Indonesia and South Yemen, Cuba
and Kuwait. And which has too frequently produced attempts to cut the national
pattern to fit the foreign policy cloth.

This failure to tailor policy to the individual circumstances of developing
nations has frequently aggravated the very internal stresses which Western
policy should seek instead to diminish. Our difficulties in this regard have
hardly been lessened by our propensity to reply to these emerging states Western
standards, which resolutely ignore vast differences in their social cultures,
political developments, economic vitality and internal and external security.

These fundamental problems, the diffusion of power, the interdependence of the
allied community and the failure to recognize the variety among the so-called
third world nations, are made the more intractable by what is perhaps the
central strategic phenomena of the post-World War II era: the transformation of
Soviet military power from a continental and largely land army to a global
offensive army, navy and air force, fully capable of supporting an imperial
foreign policy.

Considered in conjunction with the episodic nature of the West's military
response, this tremendous accumulation of armed might has produced perhaps the
most complete reversal of global power relationships ever seen in a period of
relative peace.

Paralysis of Western Policy

Today the threat of Soviet military intervention colors attempts to achieve
international civility. Unchecked, the growth of Soviet military power must
eventually paralyze Western policy altogether.

These, then, are the fundamental problems which challenge American foreign
policy and the future of democracies, generally. To say that is not to diminish
the importance of other Western goals: the eradication of hunger, poverty and
disease; the expansion of the free flow of people, goods and ideas; the spread
of social justice, and through these and similar efforts, the improvement of the
human condition. It is simply to recognize that these desirable and critical
objectives are impossible to achieve in an international environment dominated
by violence, terrorism and threat.

The United States has a very clear choice: We can continue, if we wish, to react
to events as they occur - serially, unselectively and increasingly, in the final
analysis, unilaterally. One lesson of Afghanistan is certainly that few
symptomatic crises are capable of effectively rallying collective energies of
the free world. We may wish it were otherwise, but wishing will not make it so.

Alternately, we can confront the fundamental issues I have discussed. We can
seek, actively, to shape events and, in the process, attempt to forge a
consensus among like-minded peoples. Such a consensus will enable us to deal
with the more fundamental tasks I have outlined: the management of Soviet power,
the re-establishment of an orderly international economic climate, the economic
and political maturation of developing nations to the benefit of their peoples,
and the achievement of a reasonable standard of international civility.

Strength From Acting Together

Acting alone, each of these tasks is beyond even our power. Acting together, all
are in within the capacity of free nations.  I do not mean to diminish the
difficulties. They are formidable.  But our collective capacity to meet them is
also formidable. The challenge of American foreign policy in the 1980's is to
marshal that capacity.

If we are to succeed in this effort, the conduct of American foreign policy must
be characterized, above all, by three qualities: First, we must act
consistently. Specific issues may furnish the occasion for action, but they
cannot constitute the sole basis for policy. Once we accept that the specific
issues facing us today are merely surface manifestations of more fundamental
problems, it must also be clear that effective policy cannot be created anew
daily, and formed solely by immediate needs. To do so risks misperception by our
adversaries, loss of confidence by our allies and confusion among our own
people.

U.S. policy has been most effective in Europe and the Middle East, for example,
where consistent U.S. interests have been consistently pursued.

Second, we must behave reliably. American power and prestige should not be
lightly committed, but once made, that commitment must be honored. Our friends
cannot be expected to share in the burdens and risks of collective action if
they cannot count on the word of the United States. Our adversaries cannot be
expected to exercise prudence if they perceive our resolve to be hostage to the
exigencies of the moment.

Benefits of Association

Those whose posture towards us remains to be determined cannot be expected to
decide in favor of friendship if they cannot confidently assess the benefits of
association with us.

To be perceived as unreliable is therefore to become virtually irrelevant as an
influence for stability and peace and to leave the international arena to the
mercy of those who do not share our commitment to either.

Finally, and in some ways most important, American foreign policy must
demonstrate balance both in our approach to individual issues and in the
orchestration of policy directly.

By balance, I mean recognizing that complex issues invariably require us to
weigh, and somehow reconcile, a variety of pressures often competing. Thus, for
example, I believe that equitable and verifiable arms control contributes to
security. But restraint in the growth and proliferation of armaments will not be
achieved by policies which increase the very insecurities that promote arms
competition.

Shortsighted Economic Barriers

Domestic economic stability will not be enhanced by the establishment of
shortsighted economic barriers which undermine the multilateral cooperation
essential to the prosperity of all.

The assurance of basic human liberties will never be improved by replacing
friendly governments, which incompletely satisfy our standards of democracy,
with hostile ones, which are even less benign. And our commitment to peace will
not be furthered by abdicating the right to exercise military power only to the
most ruthless members of the international community.

Balance must also be struck in the orchestration of policy generally; in our
selection of the issues we choose to address; in the priority we accord to them,
and in understanding the relationship of individual issues, one to the other,
and each to our broadly based policies.

This form of balance has become known as linkage. And the President-elect
formally stated his commitment to it.

Increase in Interdependence

No mystical profession of faith is involved here. In a system ever more
interdependent in every sense, issues and policies which attempt to deal with
them are linked - whatever our preferences. That does not mean that every
negotiation must be a prisoner of the daily headlines. It does not mean that
specific relationships cannot be established in isolation from the climate in
which they must be maintained.

Consistency, reliability, balance: These three attributes are essential not
because they guarantee a successful foreign policy - nothing can do that -but
because their absence guarantees an unsuccessful one.

Unfortunately, as de Toqueville pointed out long ago, these are precisely the
qualities which a democracy finds most difficult to muster. This inherent
difficulty has complicated in the past decade, by the breakdown of foreign
policy by partisanship and by the development of unnecessary division between
the Congress and the executive branch and among the executive departments
themselves.

Conditions for Consensus

Our urgent task is to re-establish an effective foreign policy consensus. To do
so, I believe three conditions must be met: First, the constitutional
responsibility of the President for the conduct of foreign affairs must be
reaffirmed. The United States must speak to the other nations with a single
voice. To say that is no sense to argue for curtailing discussion or necessary
debate. On the contrary, I believe both are essential. But the authoritative
voice must be the President's.

The President needs a single individual to serve as the general manager of
American diplomacy. President-elect Reagan believes that the Secretary of State
should play this role.

As Secretary of State, I would function as a member of the President's team, but
one with clear responsibility for formulating and conducting foreign policy, and
for explaining it to the Congress, the public and the world at large.

The Assistant to the President for National Security would fill a staff role for
the President.  Second, an effective bipartisanship must be restored with the
Congress. By partnership I do not mean occasional, retrospective reporting. I
mean active consultation, exchange of ideas and proposals in a timely manner, in
an atmosphere of mutual respect, trust, confidence, recognizing the special role
of the Senate itself.

Responsibility in Partnership

The Congress can hardly be expected to allow the President the discretion he
requires, unless it is comfortable with the purposes towards which, and the
limits within which, that discretion will be exercised. The Constitution demands
it and good sense urges it. In turn, Congress must do its part. In a partnership
both sides must behave responsibly.

Finally, the most consistent articulation of policy is wasted if the
professionals who must execute it are divorced from its formulation, and if
their experience and skill are usurped in the name of confidentiality, haste or
political sensitivity.

The career personnel of the State Department and the Foreign Service are an
unmatched, intellectual resource. And they will be around long after the
President and the Secretary of State are gone.  If the United States is to act
consistently and reliably in the world arena, it must use its career
professionals. Their effective participation in policy-making is imperative.

Mr. Chairman, I have outlined what I consider to be the essential challenges,
qualities and requirements of a sound American foreign policy. In closing, let
me speak to our resources - which are considerable.

Although we have economic problems, we still possess the largest and strongest
economy on earth. It is within our power to revitalize our productive base,
maintain and expand our agricultural strength, regain commercial competitiveness
and reduce our dependency on foreign sources of energy and other raw materials.

Benefits From Other Nations

No American foreign policy can succeed from a base of economic weakness. Our
alliances enable us to draw on the strengths and the wisdom of some of the
world's greatest nations. Yet our alliances must be tended and adapted to new
problems not visualized by their creators. In the process, we must bear in mind
that the essence of any alliance is the core of shared commitment and shared
endeavor.

In the 1980's, we should not let ourselves become preoccupied with debates over
who is doing more. The challenges we face will require more from all of us. We
possess a full range of the instruments of effective statecraft: a Diplomatic
Corps second to none, economic and military assistance programs, a variety of
sophisticated cultural and informational resources and, of course, a military
power which no potential adversary can afford to ignore.

These instruments provide the United States with the unrivaled capacity to
influence the course of international events. Their maintenance or neglect will
declare American intentions far more clearly than any rhetoric you or I dispense
today.

Appendix to Statement

To assist the committee's review, I will describe briefly my activities during
1969-74.  Most of these events have been thoroughly investigated in general, and
my role in particular has been scrutinized meticulously. I have testified at
length under oath eight times concerning my role in many of these incidents.

I testified before this committee on July 30, 1974, concerning the 1969-70
national security wiretaps.  I testified again about those wiretaps in a lengthy
deposition in the lawsuit of Halperin v. Kissinger.  I testified before the
Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities on May 15, 1974,
during its investigation of the $100,000 Hughes campaign contribution given to
Bebe Rebozo.

I testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee on August 15, 1975, in its
examination of covert operations in Chile.  I testified before Judge John Sirica
on December 5 and 6, 1973, on the question of the 18 1/2-minute gap in one of
the Nixon tapes.  And I testified on three occasions before Watergate grand
juries, answering all their questions.  Others, including former President
Gerald Ford and former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, have also testified
on these and other issues at length.

None of these investigations have found any culpability on my part.

National Security Council (1969-1973)

Let me turn first to my years on the National Security Council staff.  During
those four years, I served first as one of two executive assistants to Dr. Henry
Kissinger, the assistant to the President for national security affairs, and
then, beginning in June, 1971, as deputy assistant to the President for national
security affairs.

In both positions I was responsible for reviewing materials before they reached
Dr. Kissinger's desk, being familiar with the matters that he was working on,
transmitting information to him, obtaining decisions from him, and seeing that
those decisions were carried out. In a typical 14-to-16 hours working day I
would:

- Review some 200 cables and dozens of intelligence reports, and read and
prepare memos directed to Dr. Kissinger or the President - work that often
required conferences with other N.S.C. staff members.

- Attend several meetings of White House groups on issues that included
legislation affecting foreign policy, Presidential trips, Presidential speeches
or foreign economic and trade issues.

- Meet with visiting groups or foreign officials when Dr. Kissinger was not
available.

Winding Up in Vietnam

I also had specific responsibilities to work closely with Dr.  Kissinger in his
negotiations with the North Vietnamese seeking an end to the war in Vietnam and
the return of U.S. prisoners of war, and to coordinate the extensive
preparations for President Nixon's visit to China in 1972.

My involvement in any of the countless issues that came to Dr.  Kissinger during
those four years therefore varied dramatically. At one extreme, I might quickly
read and transmit a document to Dr.  Kissinger or to the President. At the
other, I would prepare a substantive analysis of a foreign policy problem for
the President or Dr. Kissinger.

The three areas in which my role has been most intensely examined during my
N.S.C. days illustrate how different my participation could be. In two of these
areas - the F.B.I. wiretaps and the Chilean covert activity - my involvement was
quite limited. In the third - U.S. policy in Southeast Asia -I had a much more
substantial role.

With respect to wiretaps, during 1969 and 1970, the F.B.I.  conducted wiretaps
and other surveillance on a number of individuals, primarily Government
officials and newsmen. President Nixon instituted this program in the spring of
1969 because of his concern about leaks of national security information,
including disclosure of minutes of National Security Council meetings and of
U.S. bargaining option in upcoming SALT negotiations.

Decisions by President

The facts about my role are straightforward:

- The decision to use wiretaps and surveillance to detect the source of the
leaks was made by the President, in consultation with the Attorney General of
the United States, and the Director of the F.B.I. I was not involved.

- I was assured that the program was legal.

- I never decided which individuals were to be tapped. On several occasions, I
was asked by Dr. Kissinger to identify individuals who had access to specific
information, and I identified those who, to my knowledge, had such access. My
responsibility was to convey to the F.B.I. names of individuals that were
provided to me either by the President or by Dr. Kissinger. On many occasions,
the summaries of the results of the tapes were delivered to me for Dr.
Kissinger.

This committee has considered the issues raised by this program twice, once in
1973 and once in 1974. The first time, this committee voted, 16-1 , to confirm
Dr. Kissinger as Secretary of State, noting: ''Dr. Kissinger's role in the
wiretapping of 17 government officials and newsmen did not constitute grounds to
bar his confirmation as Secretary of State.''

Decision of Committee

Later, this committee held a special hearing solely to review the events
surrounding these wiretaps. Based on this investigation, the committee voted
again that the wiretaps provided no basis to question the propriety of Dr.
Kissinger's serving as Secretary of State:

''The committee reaffirms its position of last year that his (Dr.  Kissinger's)
role in the wiretapping 'did not constitute grounds to bar his confirmation as
Secretary of State.' If the committee knew then what it knows now it would have
nonetheless reported the nomination favorably to the Senate.''

In Halperin v. Kissinger, a lawsuit for damages by one of the individuals who
had been wiretapped, the Federal District Court dismissed me as a defendant in
the case because of my ''inactive role and ...  lack of oversight authority.''

Change in Wiretap Rules

I am aware that the legal rules governing wiretaps today differ dramatically
from the rules in effect in 1970. The Supreme Court has now established stronger
constitutional restrictions on wiretapping for national security reasons. The
Congress has enacted the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, and the
President has issued Executive Order 12036. As Secretary of State, I will, of
course, follow the law, just as I sought to do when I served in the White House
10 years ago.

Now, with respect to covert activities in Chile. As I indicated, I testified on
this subject to the Senate Intelligence Committee in August of 1975 and that
testimony is available to members of this committee. In essence, that testimony
describes my limited involvement and confirms that Chile was not a special
rsponsibility of mine and that I was not deeply involved in either overt or
covert policies toward that country. In general, throughout my service on the
National Security Council staff, I had no responsibility to review or approve
any C.I.A. covert activities in Chile.

I am aware that the Congress has established procedures for informing the Senate
Intelligence Committee ''of all intelligence activities ...  including any
significant anticipated intelligence activity ...  .'' The Reagan Administration
intends to follow those procedures.

U.S. POLICY IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
1. Bombing of North Vietnamese Sanctuaries on the Cambodian Border.  President
Nixon's decision to bomb the sanctuaries of North Vietnamese troops along the
Cambodian border and to keep that bombing secret was made in March, 1969. I
supported the Presi- dent's decision to order those raids, and I was involved in
planning them.  The bombing was focused on North Vietnamese troop encampments
within five miles of the Vietnamese-Cambo- dian border where there was virtually
no civilian population. This operation was carried out as a secret military
mission. I was aware that Congres- sional leaders were notified about it at the
time although I had no personal re- sponsibility for that process. I was not
aware of any subsequent inaccurate statements that may have been pro- vided to
the Congress.
2. Increased Bombing of North Vietnam in December 1972. During my four years at
the National Security Council, the negotiations to end the Vietnam War gradually
occu- pied more and more of my time - particularly after I became Dr. Kissin-
ger's deputy in June, 1971. I worked closely with Dr. Kissinger as negotia-
tions intensified in late 1972 seeking to end the war and obtain the return of
U.S. prisoners of war.

During this period, the North Vietnamese began to renounce earlier agreements
and stall the negotiations for peace. As a result, Dr.  Kissinger and I
advocated the bombing of military targets in North Vietnam which occurred in
late December 1972. I believed then that it was the only way to convince the
North Vietnamese to resume serious negotiations. (I continue to believe today
that judgment was correct.) Subsequent observers - as well as aerial
reconnaissance photos -have confirmed that the bombing was focused on selective
military targets and did not result in indiscriminate ''carpet bombing'' of
civilian areas.

In my judgment, that course of action was in the best interest of the United
States and it produced the intended result. The North Vietnamese quickly
signaled their willingness to return to the negotiations. Those negotiations did
resume in January, 1973, and led to the agreement that President Nixon announced
on Jan. 23, 1973, and led to the return of U.S. prisoners of war in the spring
of 1973.

White House Chief of Staff (1973-74)

Here is how I viewed Watergate while I was White House chief of staff.

- I believe that President Nixon, the duly elected and duly constituted head of
the Executive Branch, was entitled to the presumption of innocence, until proven
otherwise, accorded as a constitutional right to every American citizen. In that
context, I worked hard within the boundaries of the law and the advice of the
lawyers to support him.

- I also believe passionately in the Office of the Presidency and the awesome
ability of that office to inspire its occupant to consider constantly the
judgment of history and to work for the broad public interest. The influence of
that office on its occupant provides a critically important institutional
safeguard for our democracy. I viewed my overriding duty as one to preserve that
office in the national interest.

- The basic legal advice concerning Watergate was consistently developed by the
lawyers in the White House. The President made the final decisions how to
proceed. My role lay in assuring that the legal staff developed options and
presented these to him for decision. Occasionally I was asked to see that his
decisions were carried out. To the best of my knowledge, the President never
made any decision that the lawyers did not support as legally appropriate.

Business Besides Watergate

Finally, although Watergate was obviously important during my tenure as chief of
staff, I spent 90 percent of my time trying to assure that the other business of
the Presidency was properly conducted. This was the time of the Yom Kippur War
in the Middle East, the 1973 summit meeting between President Nixon and Soviet
Premier Brezhnev, the Congressional cutoff of funds for U.S. bombing in
Cambodia, the resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew and the appointment of
Gerald Ford to replace him, the OPEC oil embargo, President Nixon's Middle East
trip and the second Moscow summit in the early summer of 1974.

Let me also provide some background. During the course of 1972, I had become
increasingly anxious to return to my career in the army.  The announcement of my
appointment as army vice chief of staff was made in the summer of 1972. My
involvement in the Vietnam peace negotiations delayed until Jan. 4, 1973, the
date on which I actually assumed the position. I spent three and a half months
working as vice chief of staff. Despite my own preference to remain with the
army, I agreed to President Nixon's request in early May 1973 to undertake a
30-to-60-day assignment to reorganize the White House staff.

I accepted with two understandings. First, it would be only for a brief period
after which I would return to my army position. Second, I would have no
involvement with Watergate matters.

When I arrived at the White House in May 1973, there were almost a hundred major
positions empty - Cabinet positions, heads of agencies, sub-Cabinet positions,
White House staff positions. My initial task was to reorganize the White House
staff and to move promptly to fill vacant positions. In addition, I was
responsible for managing the President's appointments, schedules and meetings
and for reviewing papers before they went to the President.

In what follows, I will try to reconstruct my actions in several separate areas.
Some involve incidents that occurred very shortly after I arrived at the White
House. I was untutored in the details of Watergate. Other pressures and duties
demanded my attention with far greater urgency. By the time other events
occurred, my involvement in post-Watergate related matters had grown
substantially.

HUGHES'S $100,000 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION

I have testified on this matter before the Senate Select committee on
Presidential campaign activities on May 15, 1974. As I testified, this issue
also came to my attention shortly after I arrived at the White House. I took
only one action of any significance: At the request of the President, I obtained
the name of an attorney from White House counsel Leonard Garment, and
transmitted the name of that attorney to Mr. Rebozo as a lawyer that he might
retain in connection with an I.R.S. investigation. This incident may have
occupied a small portion of my time on several scattered days during the first
six months that I was at the White House.

THE NIXON TAPES
1. Transcription of Tapes The responsibility for supervising the preparation of
all transcripts that were to be released either to the courts, Congressional
committees or to the public rested completely in the hands of the White House
legal staff, working with President Nixon. I never personally listened to a tape
(other than a brief portion of one that President Nixon played at a Cabinet
meeting to demonstrate the poor qual- ity of the recordings). I never partici-
pated in reviewing any transcript for accuracy or in deciding the relevancy to
Watergate of portions of conversa- tions. Those decisions were left to the
lawyers and other members of the White House staff subject to review by
President Nixon. My knowledge and views about the contents of tapes came from
either the White House legal staff or President Nixon himself. I learned that a
White House lawyer, Fred Buzhardt, believed there was a ''smoking gun'' tape
some- time in the last few days of July, 1974, and I read the transcript of that
tape on Wednesday, July 31, 1974.
2. The 18 1/2-Minute Gap I never physically had any tape in my possession, and I
explained in two days of testimony before Judge Sirica my limited and
arms-length actions in arranging on several occasions for President Nixon or his
secretary to lis- ten to tapes. I still have no knowledge of the origin of the
18 1/2-minute gap.
3. Transcript of June 4, 1973, Meeting with President Nixon The transcript of a
meeting between President Nixon and me on June 4, 1973 has been the repeated
subject of specu- lation and innuendo. This meeting occurred in the context of
the President's decision to listen to his tapes at my urging based on the ad-
vice of the White House lawyers. I had been at the White House for less than a
month and I knew little about the de- tails of Watergate. At this date I cannot
reconstruct the precise June 4 conversation even with the transcript in front of
me. But I do recall that I wanted President Nixon to finish listening to the
tapes - to com- plete a task that he did not find pleas- ant. To turn
specifically to the transcript: it shows the President saying to me that he will
continue to review the tapes to ''see what else is in'' them. I agreed with him
that he should continue to re- view the tapes, saying, ''That's the thing for
you to do, for your own, really your own peace of mind right now.'' And I
continue: ''You can't recall. It was a meeting ...  (unintelligible).'' In
context I believe that I was em- phasizing to him that he should - for his own
sake - continue to listen to the tapes since he could not recall inde- pendently
what had been said. But, since the transcript shows so many parts of the
conversation as unin- telligible, it is impossible to say with certainty exaxtly
what we were dis- cussing in those two sentences. I do not have an independent
recollection now of those sentences. But one thing I know with complete
certainty is that I never suggested then or on any other occasion, that he
should dissemble or pretend not to recall something. In October, 1974, President
Ford tes- tified before the House Judiciary Com- mittee about the circumstances
sur- rounding his decision to pardon Presi- dent Nixon. That testimony accords
with my recollection of my conversa- tions with Mr. Ford. But let me remove any
lingering doubt: At no time did I
ever suggest in any way an agreement or ''deal'' that Mr. Nixon would resign in
exchange for a pardon from Mr.  Ford. When I met alone with Vice Presi- dent
Ford on August 1, 1974 I went to that meeting to tell him of President Nixon's
inclination to resign and to em- phasize to him that he had to be pre- pared to
assume the Presidency within a very short time. We discussed the views of
members of the White House staff, various courses of action that had been
developed by the White House lawyers, and a number of transition matters. As
President Ford indicated in his testimony, the courses of action under
discussion by the White House lawyers included: letting impeach- ment take its
course through the House and a Senate trial, prompt resignation, temporary
withdrawal from office under the 25th Amendment, a censure vote in lieu of
impeachment, President Nixon pardoning hmself, and a pardon from President Ford.
As President Ford also testified, I did not advocate any course of action. My
duty was to urge Ford to be prepared for a rapid transition, perhaps within a
day, not to discuss any possible agreement.

PERCY: I noticed this morning, Senator Pell or Senator Lugar asked a question,
on television, about the War Powers Act. My question to you is, have you looked
at this carefully? It does restrict - it takes into account the problem that we
have faced. The Constitution gives the Congress of the United States - and only
the Congress - the right to declare war. The problem is we have not declared war
since World War II - never in Korea, never in Vietnam. In fact, there's never
been a declared war in the Middle East. Wars are raging today and never a
declaration. So what the Founding Fathers had in mind, has now been circumvented
by events. Therefore, the War Powers Act has been extraordinarily important as a
protection, and to reassert our Constitutional authority. Do you fully concur
with that act? And do you intend to abide by the spirit and the letter of the
War Powers Act?

A. There is no question in my mind about the essentiality of doing precisely
that, Mr. Chairman. And I know there are some apects of the act itself which
have yet to be tested in practice. But I think - and there are some honest
differences on certain aspects of the application of that - some that this
committee itself has wrestled with and that Senator Javits himself took a very
strong position on.

But I want to assure this committee that I intend to live by the letter and the
law and the spirit of the War Powers Act. And I see no difficulty in doing so.

Position on Afghanistan

Q. Just briefly, General Haig, then do you - are you generally supportive of the
responses the United States Government, and the Carter Administration - of the
responses to their invasion, their brutal invasion, of Afghanistan?

A. Well I would be very inconsistent, Mr. Chairman, if I suggested to this
committee, at this late date, that I have not been disturbed by not only the
United States, but overall Western handling of the Afghan situation. It was my
view at the time, and it remains that view today, that had we in the West -and
perhaps primarily at the instance of American leadership - been more vigorously
opposed to the earlier intervention of the Soviet Union into Afghanistan, where
they established a puppet regime some two years ago, and where some of our
newspapers at the time urged us to stay cool in Kabul, that had we been more
forceful in bringing to the Soviet leadership our disagreement with that action,
we would not have been confronted by the blatant interventionism that took place
a year ago.

Use of Nuclear Weapons

Q. PELL: General Haig, looking at the various military situations that have
arisen since World War II, do you see any situation where tactical nuclear
weapons, in your view, would have been recommended by you?

A. Let me suggest to you that the deterrent developed by the United States over
the years, and indeed that applied to our NATO alliance in Europe, is built on
an interrelated, three-tiered triad, if you will, three elements. Those elements
involve conventional land, sea and air power; theater nuclear weapons, or
tactical nuclear weapons, as you referred to them, and the central strategic
nuclear power controlled largely by the United States, but also controlled by
France and Great Britain.

And our deterrence has been built on a degree of uncertainty, which we have
intentionally generated, on the part of a potential aggressor so that they would
not know, at any given time, what the nature of the Western response would be,
and therefore could not calculate with certainty, the advantage of launching
attacks of any kind in the first instance.

And it is this deterrence, which includes inherently in its composition the
willingness of an American President, in conjunction with our allies, to take
whatever steps are necessary - including the use of nuclear weapons - to
preserve our vital interests should, heaven forbid, be necessary.

Possible Use in Past

Q. Let me repeat my question and hope for a more specific reply.  Is it
conceivable that tactical nuclear weapons would have been - should have been
employed - in any military situation in which we were in since World War II up
to now - I'm not talking about the future, I'm talking about the past?

A. Well I believe Senator, that the -any employment of nuclear weapons
represents a profound change in the character of a conflict.  Profound change.

Now I don't think anyone can predict with absolute certainty just how profound
that would be - whether it meant immediate escalation to higher levels or not.
My inclination is to be very fearful that that would be the case.

But I know of no conflict in our recent past history that would have justified
the employment of nuclear weaponry.  Q. At any time during the war in Vietnam,
were there circumstances presented which made the use of tactical nuclear
weapons a viable military option?

A. I know of no responsible recommendation, suggestion or deliberation that
encompassed that course of action.

Nuclear Weapons in Vietnam

Q. Did you ever recommend to any superior in the military chain of command. as
the Office of the President, the use of any kind of nuclear weapon in the
Vietnam war?

A. No, but I certainly hope, Senator, that your question doesn't suggest that
you have evidence - or are intending to suggest that you have evidence -that I
have.

Q. It does not. Have you believed, at any time since the inception of the
hostage crisis in Iran, that the use of tactical nuclear weapons might be a
viable option?

A. Well I think the very act of definitizing an answer to this question
undercuts the fundamental deterrent upon which our peace and security rest
today. And I'm not going to indulge in it.

Q. Do you believe there's such a thing as limited nuclear war? That there can be
such a thing?  A. I think, Senator, I addressed that question earlier to suggest
that any employment of nuclear weapons represents the most profound change in
the character of a conflict. And that my basic inclination is that it would be
very difficult to control that. But I don't think anyone, short of the Almighty
Himself, could answer your question definitively with assurance.

Avoidance of Nuclear War

BAKER: I want to ask you two questions. The one has to do with whether or not
you feel that the avoidance of nuclear war between the United States and the
Soviet Union - or the United States and any other country - is the paramount
item of foreign policy and the cornerstone on which we must built that policy
for the future?

A. If we make just the maintenance of peace alone - as vitally important as that
is - the raison d'etre on the core of our policy deliberations, I am afraid
we're going to bring about circumstances that are going to have the practical
consequences of bringing about the destruction of the very objective we've
established for ourselves: peace.

There are things that we Americans must be willing to fight for. I know this
republic was spawned by armed conflict for the freedoms and liberties that we
enjoy today - were a consequence of armed conflict. Insurrection if you will. It
was Patrick Henry who stated ''give me liberty or give me death.'' And in this
century alone we Americans have fought and died to prevent dictatorship and
genocide, in the Second World War, to become the rule of the land.

Clearly, in the nuclear age the responsibilities in this area become all the
more awesome. But the point I wanted to make is there are things worth fighting
for. We must understand that. We must structure our policy under that credible
and justified premise.

Efforts to Reduce Risk

Q. The question I'm leading to is this: whether or not you, as Secretary of
State, will recommend to the President of the United States that we should
resume our efforts to find ways to reduce the risk of nuclear war through
negotiations?

A. Absolutely. As you know, Senator Baker, I was a participant in the
preparatory work that led to SALT I and some of the earlier Vladivostok
deliberations. I believe this is an urgent and important task for American
diplomacy.

HELMS: Chile has been mentioned several times here, let's examine that just a
little bit. Even though you were not in a policy-making position you were aware
of some of the developments, I'm sure, from the inside. Is it fair to say that
Salvador Allende was a selfproclaimed Marxist? A. That's a very fair statement,
Senator.

Q. Is it fair to say that he was attempting to impose a Marxist Government on a
country that never had given him more than one-third of the vote? A. That is
correct, Senator.

Arms, Money and Women

Q. Is it true that Allende was given arms and money by the Cubans and other
Communist nations? A. I recall we had some evidence of that at the time.

Q. Is it true that the women of Chile demanded the overthrow of Allende? Not the
military? A. Yes it is and I have spoken to several of them who were key
instrumentalities in the uprising against Allende.

SARBANES: Leon Jaworski, the special prosecutor, in his book ''The Right and the
Power,'' said, and I'm now quoting: ''When I commented on Nixon's seeming
culpability in a maproom meeting, Haig countered by saying, 'I'm not trying to
save the President, Leon, I'm trying to save the Presidency.' I shook my head.
You may be destroying the Presidency. He just shrugged his shoulders.'' What
would your comment be on that?

A. Let me comment on the specific question you've raised by referring to my
statement. And also the exchange cited. You know, I have witnessed two, perhaps
three or maybe even four, Presidents at reasonably close range. And the point
I'm trying to make here, Senator, is that that office itself, that institution
of the Presidency, is an extremely important safeguard for our people. And the
reverence of our people for the institution, and the vision that they hold for
it, represents a safeguard that has led less-thanperhaps-perfect men occupying
that office to constantly feel the weight of the office itself. And to
inevitably, in my living memory, reduce their decision-making process to their
vision of how they are going to be judged by history in the context of their
performance. And I make no exceptions - in my observation of various Presidents
in that area.

And I think we, as Americans, degrade the office, seek to perhaps lessen the
American peoples' vision of the importance of that office at the greatest risk
to the Constitution, and to the safeguards our Founding Fathers established. And
that's the point I was trying to make and I would hope that that's the context
in which we would discuss it.

Obligation to President

Q. Well, I recognize that the Office of the Presidency is part of the
Constitution, but it's not the sole or only part of the Constitution. Let me put
this question to you: What is the obligation of a member of the executive branch
to follow or obey a directive or an order from the President?

A. Well, I think this is a very personal thing, Senator, and I think that an
order that an individual receives that he morally and consciously feels is
wrong: He must not only refuse to obey but he must separate himself from the
conveyor of that order.

Now there are relative levels of severity and gravity. You know, many
bureaucrats today - right in this city today, in and out of uniform - face this
hourly. Many say, I'll ride along with the hopes that I can change or moderate
for the good of the people, for the good of his vision of what the objectives
should be. Others regurgitate and gag and walk away.

Q. Would you say that a Government official should not obey an order from the
President? Under what circumstances should he not obey an order from the
President?

A. I suppose we could discuss this at some length, philosophically and
epistomology-like-wise. But I think any order that would generate illegality
-incidentally, Senator, what worries me is that your line of questioning would
suggest that perhaps you have a feeling that I have done this. I want you to
know - as I put in my sworn attached, my attached statement to my opening
statement - that I was constantly receiving advice from counsel. And in almost
any Watergate-related issue you care to mention, my actions represented a
response to advice from counsel or the conveyance of information from counsel to
and from the President. I didn't set myself up as the President's lawyer.

Nuclear Weapons Superiority

Q. HART: General Haig, do you believe it's desirable and if so is it possible,
for the United States to achieve or seek to achieve strategic nuclear weapons
superiority?

A. I think the issue is another very complex and difficult question, Senator,
that doesn't lend itself to too many glib answers because of the visceral
reactions that superiority versus adequacy versus equivalence or essential
equivalence generates.

I would hope that the policy we pursue in this area would be one which would
contribute to the lessening of an arms race. But in that context, it's very,
very important that we not pursue policies which we think are contributing to
that, but which are really providing an incentive for a lack of breakthrough in
arms control negotiations.

Now, I suppose I'm conditioned by past American history and attitudes. And
there's no simple answer to this question - I'm sorry to belabor it. But I lived
with the post-Cuban missile crisis situation, when we first spoke of parity,
equality. Then we spoke of equivalence. Then we spoke of rough equivalence. Or
an essential equivalence. And with each iteration of that generic term, it
represented a weakening of the American posture and, if you will, a
justification for our failure to maintain the strategic levels of capability we
should have as a nation.

And I would like not to, in this hearing, get into whether or not we are seeking
superiority in the narrow sense of that term, or adequacy. Right now, the key
issue facing the American people is that we are less than we should be in this
area. And very early on into this decade, we're going to be seriously less
capable than we should be. And that's a product of past discussions of the kind
we've had here and I hope I don't sound like I am attempting to avoid your
question.

Overthrowing a Government

Q. General, are there any circumstances under which you would advocate or
support covert operations to destabilize or overthrow a Constitutionally elected
Government, including an avowedly Marxist Government?

A. Well first, Senator, let me say this is not a forum for a discussion of the
kind your questions suggest - in my view.  Q. Why is that? A. Simply because
it's an open forum and it should be conducted in a closed session, I believe.
But let me just answer your question. The law now requires that the reporting -
a priority reporting - of all intelligence activities be made to the Select
Intelligence Committee, to the Intelligence Committee. I think they have an
interrelationship with this committee that provides that where that's a
significant action it will be reported to this committee.

The very act passed by this legislature, this Congress, or the preceding one,
was one that addresses the sensitive issue of clandestine, covert activity. And
I think if you will analyze it, it endorses it under the most unusual of
circumstances which - the judgements on which, you gentlemen will share with the
executive branch. Now, I intend to live by that regulation and that rule.

Action in Persian Gulf

Q. As Secretary of State, what factors would you consider, or weigh, in
advocating or participating in a decision to commit American land forces to the
re-establishment of oil supplies in the Persian Gulf, if substantial amounts of
those supplies were cut off?

A. Well, I suppose there'd be a number of them - not the least of which would be
whether or not such an operation would succeed.  Q. That's one. What else? A.
Whether or not there was another course of action which would more effectively
accomplish what we were seeking in the light of the imponderables of the
question. What the consequences of failure to act would be.

You know, any - and I think I said this in my prepared statement - any
application of American commitment or power, must be taken with the greatest
reservation. And once you do it, you should be aware that you have done
something that has a prospect of succeeding - not always an iron-clad guarantee.
No one can assure that, but it's certainly a key factor.

Now if all of this is to suggest that I'm recommending an intervention to
protect our oil, why, it's clearly circumstances where such a recommendation
might be made.

I am very concerned today about the inadequacy of our capability to do the kinds
of things that your question suggests. And I think this Administration outgoing
has been equally concerned. I think we have a great deal to do to correct that
capability. That's some of the military aspects of it, and I'm talking about
airlift, sealift. I'm talking about staging areas, or basing areas. And I'm
talking about ready forces capable to intervene at the level of capability
necessary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of members of the Foreign Relations Committee
(Page 10) Photo of Alexander Haig testifying before Senate Foreign Relations

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Not To Worry, Jimmy

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


A group of learned men quoted in the paper the other day gave it as their
opinion that Jimmy Carter would not go down in the history books as much of a
President. Possibly so. A George Washington doesn't come along very often and
even if one did, under our present system for choosing Presidents he would
probably be wiped out in the polls for showing badly fitted false teeth in his
television smile.

Trying to guess what history will say is tricky business, however.  A hundred
years from now schoolchildren compelled to study American history from John
Kennedy to Ronald Reagan are more likely than not to lump all five Presidents of
the era under the label of ''general confusion'' and let them go at that.

This is what most Americans do nowadays with the Presidents between Andrew
Jackson and Abraham Lincoln and those between Andrew Johnson and William
McKinley. Even people who have read some history have trouble telling you
whether Franklin Pierce preceded Millard Fillmore, where Zachary Taylor fitted
in, how he differed from John Tyler, which Harrison was Benjamin and which
William Henry, and what Chester A. Arthur did that was different from what
Rutherford B.  Hayes did.

People a hundred years hence are probably going to be equally baffled about the
five Presidents we have had since 1961. When Presidents come and go as rapidly
as they have come and gone in the past twenty years they are apt to leave
nothing but a blur in the history books.

Among these five Carter has as good a chance as any of being remembered
honorably, if at all. Imagine for a moment you are living in the year 2081 and
cramming for a test on 20th-century Presidents.

You can handle Theodore Roosevelt easily enough: the last hero of American
optimism. William Howard Taft, O.K., he was the fat man, fattest President in
history.

Woodrow Wilson? A snap. World War I. League of Nations.  Intellectual.  Warren
Harding, Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover. Lump them all together under ''Roaring
Twenties.'' Harding was sexy and produced Teapot Dome; Coolidge did not choose
to run; Hoover got caught in the stock market crash. Franklin Roosevelt: the big
fellow; you know enough to write a 25-word essay on him. Harry Truman: gave 'em
hell, big cold-war leader. Dwight Eisenhower: war hero, presided over eight
years of unprecedented American prosperity and power.

With John Kennedy, however, you run into a confusion of rapidly changing
Presidents and incomprehensible political snarls, such as in 2081 only a Ph.D.
in history can hope to grasp. You probably know that Kennedy was assassinated,
and possibly, if you prefer scandal to history, that he liked to play around.

But did Kennedy come before or after Richard Nixon? Well, Nixon was the one who
had to quit because of Watergate, whatever Watergate was, and then he was
succeeded by the Vice President who had been appointed instead of elected. Was
that Carter or Johnson?

It couldn't have been Johnson because the fellow who succeeded Nixon was a nice
guy, and Johnson was not a nice guy but the one who had to quit because he made
a mess of the Vietnam War.

It will probably take you a while to remember that it was Gerald Ford who
followed Nixon, and even if you do remember you are probably going to forget
altogether to include Carter, as people nowadays forget to include James K. Polk
when trying to remember who came between John Tyler and Zachary Taylor.

Students who are cunning may be able to keep things properly sorted out by using
the phrase ''a very wet November breeze'' as a memory device in which ''a''
stands for ''assassinated'' (Kennedy), the ''v'' in ''very'' for Vietnam
(Johnson), the ''w'' in ''wet'' for Watergate (Nixon), the ''n'' in ''November''
for nice guy (Ford), and the ''b'' in ''breeze'' for breezy (Carter). Why does
''breezy'' instantly bring Carter to mind? Because he was the first President
who insisted on being formally addressed in the breezy style, by his nickname
Jimmy rather than James.

This, admittedly, is not a great distinction for a President, but on the other
hand it is not discreditable either. It is certainly not as bad as being
remembered by ''Vietnam'' or ''Watergate,'' and in the long run far preferable
to being remembered by ''assassinated.''

It is not so pleasant, to be sure, as being remembered by ''nice guy,'' but it
is better than not being remembered at all, for if Carter can get himself
remembered way up there in the future some student may be moved to ask the
teacher what Carter did.

I fancy the teacher will have to reflect a minute before saying something like,
''Well, he really didn't do anything terribly dreadful at all.'' For the era
1961-1981, that is not a bad notice from the history critics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JAKARTA FIGHTS OVERCROWDING IN BALI AND JAVA

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: SUKARAMI, Indonesia


This village of 4,000 in the swampy region southwest of the provincial capital
of Palembang in Sumatra's Lampung Province is what is known as a transmigration
village, an agricultural settlement established as a new home for Indonesians
who were willing to leave the overcrowded islands of Java or Bali.

Dozens of these villages exist on the outer islands, particularly Sumatra,
Kalimantan and the Celebes, and this year the Government ambitiously plans to
move 100,000 Indonesians.

''We will reach this target if we judge from our experience in 1980,'' said
President Suharto in his budget message the other day.  As many as 500,000 are
being moved in the five-year plan that ends next year.

Indonesia has the oldest and perhaps the most successful transmigration program
in the world. Malaysia, Vietnam, Burma and Sri Lanka have had large relocation
programs, but Indonesia's is the only continuing effort by a Government to
redistribute its own people within the country. Indonesia's purpose is not only
to reduce population pressures but also to promote regional development and
redistribute manpower.

Effort Began in 1802

The Dutch started relocating people about 1802 because of overcrowding, and a
century later the colonial government moved people to work on plantations in
Sumatra. Only 200,000 were moved from 1905 to 1940 and the program stopped with
World War II.

The late President Sukarno, who opposed birth control, championed transmigration
to ease Indonesia's population problems. ''My solution is to exploit more
land,'' he said. ''If you exploit all the land in Indonesia, you can feed 250
million.''

The 1980 census put the population at nearly 148 million, which President
Suharto said indicated an average annual increase of 2.34 percent since 1971. He
said, the figures ''should stimulate us to continue and intensify our
programs.''

In parts of western Java, where there are about 1,650 people per square mile,
transmigration is attractive and the Government has made it more so by promising
willing Indonesians a better life, food and their own land and communities. In
addition, because transmigrants are often considered to be the homeless, the
unemployed and the less resourceful, the Government has started a screening
program to make applicants feel that they are being chosen for their skills and
adaptability. ''We want to develop in our young people the frontier spirit,''
Harun Zain, Minister of Manpower and Transmigration, said.

Each family is given nearly five acres of land, housing or building materials
and living expenses for the first nine months until they can support themselves
from farming. In areas where there is no irrigation, families are often given
more land. ''We want to convince the transmigrant that there will be no hitches
or broken promises,'' Mr. Zain said.

Transmigrants have not found it easy. Land on the outer islands is not so
fertile as the volcanic soil on Java and Bali, and Government promises of water,
roads, schools and tools have often been broken.  Thousands of transmigrants
have returned to their former villages.

The successful villages tend to be homogeneous, having people from the same
region or village, according to Colin MacAndrews, director of the Provincial
Planning Program.

In Sukarami, more than 80 percent of the people are from a village near Solo in
central Java and most of the others are relatives or friends of those who
started coming here more than 20 years ago.

A Piece of Java Is Recreated

''We came so that we could own land,'' said Tjih Olah, an 18-yearold who arrived
in Sukarami with his family when he was 4.  ''My mother tells me that I am
healthy and strong because we came here,'' he said. After his two older brothers
died as small children, the family moved to Sukarami, where the next four
children were born.

Like other transmigration camps in Lampung Province, Sukarami is on a waterway.
The houses are built on stilts over a marsh and some can be reached only by
boat. It is a much different life than many of the families had on Java, where
most of them lived in one-story wooden homes on dry land.

The Government points to the development of Lampung Province, where more than 60
percent of the three million people are transmigrants, as a successful example
of regional development, but this is a onesided view.

The transmigrants tend to bring their music, shadow puppetry, religious
festivals and language with them, fostering the Government's goal of uniting
Indonesia. But the program ignores the cultural differences that once made each
Indonesian island unique.

In Sumatra, the tribes of five-foot-tall, dark-skinned aborigines called Kubu
have either retreated to the jungles or have gone naked to the cities to beg.
The transmigrants who run Lampung Province refuse to educate or accept the Kubu
into their communities. ''This part of Sumatra is now like Java,'' said
Sumarangi, who was born in Sukarami in 1962. ''We were sent here to civilize
Sumatra and make things grow,'' she said. ''The Kubu have no understanding.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Sumatra

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR POINTS IN THE SENATE FOREIGN REALTIONS COMMITTEE'S QUESTIONING OF

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4427 words


HAIG

Following are excerpts from a transcript of questions by members of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and answers by Alexander M. Haig Jr. in testimony in
Washington yesterday on his nomination as Secretary of State, as recorded by The
New York Times:

Senator S.@I. Hayakawa

What do you see as China's role in Asia where Peking is concerned?  That is,
Peking is improving relations with Japan and the Asian countries which are in
conflict with Vietnam and Cambodia and potentially at odds with us over Korea.

Now how should we balance our interest in a stronger China with our absence of
interest in creating a Chinese threat to Taiwan and the rest of Southeast Asia?
That is, the stronger we make China, the more threat it becomes to Taiwan. And I
think we want to remain neutral on this, don't we?

A. Well, Senator, as you probably know, I was a participant in the early efforts
to normalize relationships with the Peoples Republic.  And as a matter of fact,
I made the trip that was the stalking horse, if you will, for President Nixon's
historic trip some years ago.

I think it's awfully important that we recognize that the situation is
fundamentally one of strategy. It's a strategic relationship that is the
underlying motivation for normalization of relationships with the People's
Republic of China. It doesn't mean in any respect that we have a convergence of
interests and values.

I have said that the challenge of this decade facing us is the necessity, on the
one hand, to conduct our policies in such a way that the People's Republic of
China recognize that there is some value in a normalization of relationships
with the United States; that we are reliable. And on the other hand, not permit
this normalization process to result in a situation that my European friends
describe as poking sticks in the polar bear's cage.

And clearly this is a balancing act of some importance. Our realtionships with
China, on the one hand, should be based on our strategic motivations for that
relationship. And we must not get ourselves into a triangle relationship which
constantly serves as an irritant to improving East-West relationships.

Motivation for China

Now with respect to China's role, the People's Republic of China, in the
regional area, I think that strategic relationship has increasingly begun to
suggest that their concern about what they refer to as the search for hegemony
by the Soviet Union on their border, and south of them, and to the north of
them, has given them a motivation for certain stabilizing influence in the area.
Evidence, with a value judgment, their punitive action against Hanoi when Hanoi
continued its activities in Cambodia.

So I see a compatibilty and a convergence in the strategic sense between
ourselves and the People's Republic of China. And I think it's in our interest
to continue the normalization process begun during the Nixon years, furthered
during the Ford years and furthered further during the Carter Administration.

I do not see a particular threat at this juncture of maturization to the other
nations of the area as we look at the overall demographic assets of the People's
Republic of China. They have a long, long way to go before, for example, they
could be considered a military threat, in my view, to the people of Taiwan, to
Japan.

And I would hope that there would be a structuring of improved relationships
between Japan and the People's Republic, and there's a great deal under way
today that could lead to that, despite historic differences of the past.

Q. Do you see an improved relationship between P.R.C. and Taiwan, too?  A. Well,
I think this is a question that only time can answer. And I think it's a matter
of considerable delicacy. It came up in the campaign, and I would prefer not,
today, to add any fuel to the controversy. Suffice it to say, I think we have a
strategic interst in improving and normalizing our relationships to the People's
Republic of China on its own merits.

We also have a fundamental responsibility to demonstrate American reliability to
previous commitments in a historic sense; and we do and continue to have an
obligation to the people of Taiwan.

Senator Paul S. Sarbanes

Q. Do you support the Camp David accords? A. Yes, I do. Q. Do you support the
Zimbabwe settlement that was negotiated by Lord Carrington and the British? A.
Yes, I do. And I've discussed this with Lord Carrington on several occasions at
great length.

Q. Now I know you've addressed this question before this committee, but I'm
still not altogether clear on your position. Do you support the Panama Canal
treaties? A. Well, I hope I made it clear yesterday that I do, and will continue
to.

Q. Do you favor establishing official relations with Taiwan?  A. I think that
question is one that was just touched upon in a more indirect way, but certainly
was clearly connoted in the discussion with Senator Hayakawa. And I think it's
very important that I have an opportunity to discuss this issue with the
Presidentelect at some length before I would want to go on the public record
with respect to that question. I would prefer that you ask it in the context of
official relationships with the people of Taiwan, for example.

Taiwan Relations Act

Q. Well, let me ask you whether you support the Taiwan Relations Act.  A. In
general yes, but there again I think we have to look at this whole picture. It's
a matter high on my agenda, because of its longterm importance not only to our
relationships with the People's Republic of China, but of equal importance in an
East-West context along the lines of my discussions with Hayakawa.

Q. What is your view of the international financial institutions and the
question of U.S. contribution to them? First, with respect to amounts of our
contributions and, secondly, with respect to attaching conditions to our
contributions.

A. Well, this as well is an extremely delicate question. And it's one on which
there has been some rhetoric in the most recent campaign. As a matter of fact,
there's some language with respect to it in the Republican platform.

As a general rule, there's no definitive generalization that I'd want to make on
this. I think it's awfully important, as we enter into multilateral
arrangements, that we know specifically to what use our contribution is going to
be made. That we know clearly what influence we are going to have within that
mechanism to insure that the American people's objectives are being met, because
they are, after all, paying for these contributions.

And as a general rule, of course, it's always much easier to insure those things
if we make our contributions in a bilateral framework.  Now that's not to say
that I'm opposed to multilateral contributions and participation. Not at all.
But there is a whole panoply of assessments that have to be made associated with
such contributions.  And that includes everything from the issues I've talked
upon. It also include, perhaps, the character of the recipient of this
assistance; what our objectives are and what we're seeking to achieve by these
contributions. It has to have folded into it our assessment of whether we're
doing this to influence other contributors in a constructive way. And I can see
many instances where that would be the case.

So it's not something that lends itself to a glib, short answer, Senator. I'm
sorry.

Support for World Funds

Q. What degree of support can the institutions, such as the World Bank or the
International Monetary Fund, the Inter-American Bank and the Asian and African
banks, expect from you if you are the Secretary of State?

A. Well, I think you can expect in a normal context of your question that I will
remain an advocate of support to these institutions. I would like to reserve on
the level to which that support - the level that I would recommend for that
support before I've had an opportunity to consider the matter at great length
with advisers in the State Department, with the members of this committee and,
above all, with the President-elect. Because clearly the question came up
because there's some controversy in it.

Q. Now when the question was broached, you made reference to the fact that the
issue was touched upon in the platform of the Republican Party. To what extent,
therefore, can one assume that your views on foreign policy issues will be
governed or guided or do you feel a obligation to conform to the provisions of
the Republican Party platform?

A. Well, since I didn't participate in any way in the structuring or drafting of
that platform, I would say only to be aware that it exists, and to take it into
consideration as the judgments are made on issue to issue. In no way would I
anticipate an approach which visualized strict adherence to something that I had
no role in drafting

Aid for Nicaragua

Q. Should the Congress have made available to the President, to be used by him
if determined to be in our interest, aid for Nicaragua?  A. Well, I like to see
the President afforded by the Congress as much flexibility as he can on the case
of Nicaragua, or any other trouble spot.

I suppose I have some reservations as I look back at the evolution of the
Nicaraguan situation. I don't put it in the same category as perhaps I would my
concerns about the evolution of the situation in Iran, but nonetheless it had
many of the same overtones.

But I was not a participant, and I didn't follow it minute by minute, and I'm
not really sufficiently attuned to the pressures and the considerations of the
moment that shaped our policy. And I don't think it would be appropriate for me
to cast myself this morning as an expert critic on the thing.

I would like to look very, very carefully at the current situation in Nicaragua,
the policies of that government, the activities they are supporting throughout
the central American area, and to assess very carefully whether or not we are
indeed contributing to additional troubles for the American people.

Q. Well, my question really didn't go to that response. The question was neither
an evaluation by you of our past policy in Nicaragua, or as to what the
executive should do now. The question was whether the Congress should have acted
favorably to the request that aid be made available to the executive branch for
its use in Nicaragua.

A. I apologize, because I certainly read more into your question than perhaps
you meant. And I think this is a question that only the Congress can answer. I
think it's the obligation of the Congress to make the value judgments with
respect the actions they take in a context of whether it is the right or the
wrong thing to do. Clearly they felt it was the right thing to do.

Senator Richard G. Lugar

Q. Is not the fundamental point that you're trying to make - and if it's not,
why please tell me - that if we are to have management of affairs, we have to
recognize the need for defense policies in this country that are more credible,
as you said, to ourselves, to our friends, to the Soviets.

A. Well,clearly that is not at all inconsistent with my formal opening
statement; it's not inconsistent with the general thrust of my articles and
public speeches over a period of five, six years.

I would like to point out one aspect of that world view that I think we
Americans must keep a very clear eye on as we assess the sacrifices that are
facing us in this period ahead, to remedy the problems you've outlined. And the
one is that we are not facing the inevitable, inexorable supremacy of
Marxist-Leninism as a system.  Quite the contrary: it is a profound historic
failure.

If one measures the success of the Soviet brand of Communism, we find economic
shortfalls that are increasing in severity over the last three to four years; we
find it an agricultural basket case in a historic sense. Despite the fact the
Soviet leadership has driven larger and larger segments of their population into
agriculture, the consequences have not been remunerative.

'Period of Utmost Promise'

We find growing demographic problems within the Soviet system as non-Soviet
populations begin to thrust for greater autonomy and a greater voice in the
conduct of Soviet policy. We find that transmitted into the Eastern European
zone of influence.

PICKUP FIRST AD HAIG TEXT

Now, what I suggest by that is that if we Americans and we Western nations,
those who share common values, have the vision and the dicipline to get our act
together and to move in concert and to manage this very dangerous period, at the
far end of a decade or more, I think we're facing a period of utmost opportunity
and promise.

Now, why is it so dangerous? This decade facing us. Well, there are two
converging realities. On the one hand we have this growth in sheer Soviet
military power. And simultaneously these pressures, these manifestations of
failure - and I've pointed out, and I think history would confirm, that
totalitarian states when plagued with internal failure and armed beyond the
limits of prudence and reasonableness, frequently indulge in the external
diversions to insure their incumbency and continuation in power.

And one need only look at Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia to suggest at
least there are some flirtations with that kind of diversion under way in Moscow
today.

Senator Edward Zorinsky

Q. Do you intend to recommend that the current United States Ambassadors to El
Salvador and Nicaragua be replaced? Or have you made that judgment?

A. Well, I haven't gotten into the process of assessing our diplomatic posts and
that's one of my concerns about the process under way here today, Senator. I've
got to launch into the - first - the manning of the Department of State. I feel
that's the most important early-on task that I have. And then, in conjunction
with the President, I'll have to assess our worldwide diplomatic posts.

Q. Are you aware of any hit list, so-called hit list, with those names -those
ambassadors?  A. No, and I sometimes shudder at the connotation of using the
word.

Senator Paul E. Tsongas

I would assume that when the United States signs a treaty that it pledges its
honor and integrity in that process, would you - I'm sure you would agree with
that? A. Yes I do.

Q. And those articles of nonintervention are codified in the O.A.S. charter. Do
you think that the United States has the responsibility to live up to those
sections?

A. Yes, I think in general we have put our signature on a treaty which incurs
obligations for the signatories. And I think yes, that is correct.

Q. And so, when we sign a treaty that a government can expect that we will live
up to those provisions?  A. Yes, I think so, unless we were to withdraw or
modify and, of course, the O.A.S. treaty was spawned and signed at a time when
the basic issues - and I put, I mentioned this in my formal statement yesterday
- when the circumstances have changed, then these things have to be either
adjusted or reassessed.

Q. On March 25, 1970, the so-called 40 Committee met and allocated $135,000 for
a so-called spoiling operation in Chile. In your opinion, did that violate
Article 18 of the charter?

A. It really depends a great deal on precedent. You know, for example, I could
cite for you, when you talk about violation of that charter, recent pressures
applied to the Government of Nicaragua, Salvador, withholding armament shipments
and - all constitute, in the spirit of the O.A.S. charter, some divergencies, I
think, from that spirit. And I would suppose the same applied to your question
on Chile.

Increase in the Ante

Q. On June 27, 1970, the 40 Committee met again and upped the ante to $300,000
for spoiling operations in Chile - that would also be in violation of Article
18?

A. Yeah, just as failure to supply armaments obligated to and paid for by other
nations in treaties under the guise of human rights or some other violation. It
constitutes a violation of a spirit of a treaty of that kind. Yes.

Q. On Sept. 4, 1970, Allende won the election with 36.3 percent, and under
Chilean law, the matter was then going to go the Congress for resolution -very
similar to our own situation. Sept. 8, 1970, the 40 Committee met again, and
asked then Ambassadory Korry to prepare a ''cold-blooded assessment'' as to
whether a coup could be organized prior to Oct. 24. On Sept. 14, the 40
Committee met again and - on the so-called Track One operation, allocated
$250,000 to bribe members of the Chilean Congress because they did not feel that
the coup prospects were favorable. Do you think that allocating $250,000 to
bribe members of another government's Congress violates Article 18?

A. I think it's in contrast to the spirit of it, yes. But, you know, there are a
host of questions that had to be asked then and, frankly, I didn't participate
in those deliberations in the 40 Committee. I was aware of them. But there are a
host of questions that have to be answered in conjunction with them. And that is
the degree of democratic freedom involved.

Just as we've been applying with an almost ruthless pen, in recent months,
insistence among our friends to adherence to human rights, where we have changed
fundamental policies which they had a reason to expect we would not change. Now,
and this is not to say that's not justified but I think that there are many
aspects of these obligations that you've got to deal with in the broader sense
of what is in the best interests of the American people as well.

Decision at White House

Q. On Sept. 15, 1970, there was a meeting at the White House; there were four
principals: President Nixon, Secretary of State Kissinger, C.I.A. Director Helms
and Attorney General Mitchell. At that meeting, $10 million was allocated, and
let me read the testimony, or the report, of the Senate Committee on
Assassinations: (Reads from report) Let me read the C.I.A. directive that went
out after that session to cable: (Reads.)

Would you say that the decision arrived at the White House on Sept. 15, to
engage in a military attempt to prevent Allende from taking power, violates
Article 18 of the O.A.S. charter?

A. I'd say the same with respect to your earlier questions: that it is clearly
not - it is in contrast to the spirit of that charter. But again, it's got to be
viewed in the context of a host of other countervailing pressures, and other
countervailing imperatives.

And I don't think you, Senator, or anyone in this room would want a rigid,
legalistic preoccupation which does not assess exigencies of the moment, or
particular events which represent American interests.

Now, that is not to say that's an endorsement of that activity. In many respects
it's a rather, somewhat moot, question because I think new regulations have been
passed in the interim, which now will place a lot of these anguishing questions
on your plate as well as on the executive branch's plate.

Q. Well I, for one, have no appetite for that morsel on the plate.  A. That's
frequently true of executive branch people as well. Q. Is it true of yourself?
A. Yes, of course, on many occasions.

Cable From White House

Q. Oct. 15, 1970, a meeting at the White House, three participants: Secretary of
State Kissinger, General Haig and Tom Karamessines, who's a CIA official. As a
result of that meeting, the following cable, again contained in the public
report of the Assassinations Committee: (Reads cable.) A. What was the date of
that meeting, Senator? I'm sorry.

Q. Oct. 15, 1970. Do you think that that cable violated the charter?  A. It's
clear it was an extension of the earlier activity you described. But I think
it's important to point out to the committee that that's a selective accounting
of the committee report, with respect to that meeting on the 15th. Because on
that meeting of the 15th, my recollection was that covert activity, with respect
to Chile, was turned off. Unless my memory is - and I think there's some
reference to that in that report. And I think that's the sworn testimony of Dr.
Kissinger to that effect.

Q. Mr. Chairman, in pursuit of that issue, I would ask that the entire section
involving the covert activities in Chile of the Assassinations Committee, pages
225 to 254, be inserted in the record at this point so that readers of the
record can make up their own minds.

Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum

Q. I'm sure you're very aware that there is concern abroad in the land that you
might turn to military options more quickly than diplomatic alternatives. I
frankly think you've shown a great deal of diplomatic expertise here before this
committee. But I would like for you to address your own views of the rule of
diplomacy in these situations, and perhaps speaking specifically to some of the
areas with which you had to deal as commander of NATO - some extremely important
negotiations involving Greece and Turkey that would help allay some of the fears
that there might be?

A. Well first, Senator, I'm glad you gave me an opportunity to comment on the
subject because I think I've been in the public record repeatedly with respect
to my personal assessment of the role of force and the role of military power in
the conduct of American foreign policy and national security policy.

And what I have said is that it is diplomacy that is the core of successful
American operations abroad - that military power merely provides the credibility
and the bonafide for an effective diplomacy.

We can't ask our ambassadors and our negotiators either to sit down at the
negotiating table or to deal with foreign powers - some of whom may not be
friendly - unless they have a credible military base behind them.

But the core of it is, of course, the political - and I use that in the broad
sense, not in the domestic sense. And it is in that sense that every asset that
America has must be integrated and assessed: economic, political, moral,
military, technological. All of these things have to be brought into the core of
the political assessment and that's the role of the Department of State, as I
see it. And it's the role of successful diplomacy: to bring those assets to bear
effectively to achieve our ends.

In the political area, it involved a number of things: developing consensus for
tactics, strategy in the multinational forum; developing a multinational
consensus for force contribution; for modifications in strategies - some of
which were highly sensitive, political issues. The Greek-Turkish situation -and
I'm very pleased that the formula that I left for Gen. Bernie Rogers, which
would've permitted the reintegration of Greece back into the unified command
structure of the alliance, was ultimately successful, thanks to General Rogers'
persistence and brilliant work with both parties.

I suppose I could go on and on to tactical nuclear issue, which I worked for the
consensus that was raised -discussed - here yesterday with great vigor. And
these are essentially political questions. And I think, frankly, we lose sight
of the fact that military responsibilities frequently, by their very nature,
involve political action and at least familiarity with political nuance.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd

Q. In 1974, India detonated what it called a peaceful nuclear device. India has,
of course, also refused to sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty of 1968 and
has indicated it would not accept any international inspections and so forth. I
wonder if you might comment on whether or not you think the present
Administration was correct in its decision to export nuclear components,
materials, to India despite the fact that they have refused to sign or agree to
the nuclear nonproliferation treaty?

A. I basically wasn't comfortable with the decision. But I was not in on the
give-and-take of the motivations for the action taken, and I think it's highly
ill advised to indict a particular course of action without having all those
facts. The last linkage that you created at the end of your question is one that
I'm more sensitive to and would not want to endorse.

Q. That is the failure to sign that treaty should not necessarily preclude the
decision to sell -A. I would not necessarily endorse that. That certainly must
be a major factor in decisions related to the subject. But it must not be a
rigid - there may be other courses of action. Or the very act of doing that may
further contribute to nonproliferation objectives. And you can't a priori
establish that.

That's the point I made about the Clark amendment. I think we have to be very,
very careful. We have a great tendency to do that; perhaps it's our legal
mentality.

Q. Do you believe that it would be in our interest to try and improve our
relationship with Cuba? And what conditions would have to be present, in your
mind anyway, before such an undertaking could begin?

A. It would be very, very difficult to me to support efforts towards the
normalization of relationships with Cuba just so long as they are spawning,
instigating, manning and conducting terrorist activities in this hemisphere
designed to change by force legitimate governments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Tsongas

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS IN SUMMARY;
Tides of Terror Rise in Salvador

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


Striving to present the Reagan Administration with competing faits accomplis, El
Salvador's extreme right and left last week redoubled attacks on supporters of
the centrist junta, which has the backing of the outgoing Carter Administration.

The right was believed responsible for assassinating the head of the country's
agrarian reform program, Jose Rodolfo Viera, and two Americans advising the
program, Michael P. Hammer and Mark David Pearlman. The left, meanwhile, moved
what it called its ''final offensive'' closer to San Salvador, battling
Government forces on the slopes of a 4,500-foot dormant volcano overlooking the
capital.  Government sources said a small guerrilla force tried to seize control
of a poor,outlying district of San Salvador on Friday but was defeated by troops
who killed at least 20 rebels.

Mr. Viera and the two Americans were gunned down as they sat finishing dinner in
San Salvador's usually well-guarded Sheraton Hotel. A witness said the killers
then calmly strolled out through the lobby. Their nonchalance - and the fact
that hotel security guards were seen minutes earlier - strongly implicated
rightist death squads drawn from Salvadoran security forces. United States
Embassy officials also feared for the life of a free-lance journalist from New
Jersey, John J. Sullivan, who has not been seen since he left the Sheraton Hotel
on Dec. 29.

The land reform program has been the centerpiece of the Carter Administration's
strategy to pre-empt a victory by Marxist-led guerrillas. But implementation has
been hampered by the junta's inability to control rightist terror; the left has
criticized the program as ineffective. (Pros and cons of land reform, page 4.)

The American Institute for Free Labor Development, a Governmentfunded arm of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O., helped design the program and has supplied many advisers,
including Mr. Hammer and Mr.  Pearlman. Roy L. Prosterman, another institute
adviser who has supervised land redistribution in such other embattled countries
as South Vietnam during the Vietnam war, asserted last week that the process
could not be stopped in El Salvador ''by assassin's bullets.''

Dr. Prosterman seemed to acknowledge that political salvos from the United
States right could be more decisive. He urged President Carter and Ronald Reagan
to announce joint support for land reform in El Salvador ''before this situation
toboggans downhill into full-scale civil war.'' But the President-elect declined
an opportunity to discuss the larger question. In Mexico for a brief meeting
with President Jose Lopez Portillo, he refused comment beyond expressing ''anger
and grief'' at the Americans' death. Spokesmen said the two leaders did not talk
about Central America even though Mexico sympathizes with the Salvadoran
guerrillas and has urged Washington not to intervene.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STRUGGLE OF WOMEN DIRECTORS

BYLINE: By Sally Ogle; Sally Ogle Davis is a Los Angeles-based writer.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6120 words


The past couple of days had been tough ones for the young film director. The
filming the day before had involved difficult set-ups in the middle of Lake
Ontario in a pitching boat. The weather was foul, the schedule tight and a few
of the actors were seasick. The next morning, there was a fire on a set in an
old Tudor mansion in Toronto that wiped out four hours of shooting.

''I keep waiting for the panic,'' said Candace O'Connor, the young Canadian
actress who is one of the stars of the film. ''By now, this place should be in
an absolute uproar. I guess a woman's just different. Annette's being simply
marvelous.''

What Annette Cohen and her cast and crew were engaged in is a unique film
project: an anthology of nine short vignettes on the subject of love, all of
them written by women (Antonia Fraser, Liv Ullmann, Gael Greene, Germaine Greer,
Mai Zetterling, Penelope Gilliatt, Nancy Dowd, Edna O'Brien and Joni Mitchell),
directed by women (Annette Cohen, Liv Ullmann, Mai Zetterling and Nancy Dowd),
and produced by a woman (Renee Perlmutter, a Canadian making her first movie
with her own company, Coup Films Ltd.) ''Love,'' a moderately budgeted,
internationally financed film, is the biggest thing to come along for women in
the movie industry since 1933, when Dorothy Arzner directed Katharine Hepburn in
''Christopher Strong.''

Unfortunately, however, women directors as a class are not faring well today. At
the time the four female directors were at work in Toronto, there was not a
single woman directing cameras on a movie set anywhere in the United States.

True, Claudia Weill's ''It's My Turn'' has been playing to good audiences
throughout the country since it opened in October and Lee Grant's ''Tell Me a
Riddle'' opened last month to generally favorable reviews. But, for the most
part, women directors feel the film industry in the United States discriminates
against them on an almost unprecedented scale.

Of course, film directing is one of the most exclusive professions in the world,
with only a handful of men or women ever getting the opportunity to direct a
major motion picture. If it's difficult for men, women feel that for them it
sometimes seems nearly impossible.  Men in the film industry, from studio bosses
to directors, are defensive on the subject. They acknowledge that sexist
attitudes persist, but they claim that opportunities for women to direct have
never been better. The trouble, they say, is that, with one or two exceptions,
first-rate ''mainstream'' women directors have not emerged who combine the
creative and leadership qualities needed to handle multimillion dollar projects.
Many women, these men say, want to make women's pictures.

This notion is angrily rejected by aspiring women directors, and they are making
the industry aware of the depth of their frustration and bitterness. The
motion-picture industry, and television, is male-oriented and always has been,
these women say. Movies are still financed by banks, and banks, they contend,
are unwilling to bet large sums of money on women directors. The women point out
that when a male director is temperamental, this is often considered part of his
artistic genius; when a woman is temperamental, she is ''acting like a woman''
and is not to be trusted. When a man produces an expensive flop, he is judged as
an individual and generally given another chance. When one woman fails, all
women are tainted. Whatever the reason, the statistics suggest that women are
being short shrifted.

Last June, a committee of women members of the Directors Guild of America
invited executives of all the major studios and television networks, as well as
some large independent production companies, to a meeting in the guild's Los
Angeles headquarters. The producers were presented with a package of statistics
that pointed out that of the 7,332 feature films (not including documentaries or
films made by small independent production companies) released by major
distributors during the last 30 years, only 14, or two-tenths of 1 percent, were
directed by women. And that out of 65,500 hours of national network, prime-time
dramatic television for the same period, only 115 hours (mostly productions
concerned with female themes), or two-tenths of 1 percent, were directed by
women.

The statistics may be a little misleading in that they include only feature
films released by major distributors and do not include small, independent
productions - films that did not receive major distribution and promotion - or
documentaries, industrial and educational films. Nor do the television
statistics include publictelevision productions, which have a better record of
employing women directors.

Nevertheless, it is films released by the big distributors that are seen by the
larger public; these are the films that have the opportunity to make money -the
rest, too often, really do not count commercially.

It may seem, also, at first glance, that in the last few years, things have
changed for the better. Joan Darling directed ''First Love.'' Joan Tewkesbury
directed ''Old Boyfriends.'' But one look at the production statistics for some
representative major studios for 1978-1979, the last year for which complete
statistics are available, illustrate graphically what women directors find
themselves up against: Columbia Studios. Feature films. Female directors: 0.
Male 11.  Television episodes. Female directors: 1. Male directors: 138.
Universal Studios. Category, feature films. Female directors: 0.  Male
directors: 17. Television episodes: Female directors: 2. Male directors: 381.
Paramount Studios. Feature films. Female directors: 0. Male directors: 8.
Television episodes: Female directors: 1. Male directors: 211.

''We know how hard it is for men to become directors in this industry -very
hard,'' Nell Cox, a committee member, told the executives at the meeting, ''but
the odds against women are apparently 99.8 percent harder.'' Many of the male
executives at the meeting expressed shock and dismay at the statistics and said
they had no idea that things were so bad. o aid in righting the balance, the
women's committee proposed an affirmative-action program and the formation of a
resource group of prominent men and women - including such industry heavyweights
as Claire Townsend, vice president of the production of features at 20th Century
Fox, and Verna Fields, her counterpart at Universal Studios -who would meet with
selected women directors, assess their work and report back to the guild.

After the meeting, a lot of letters went out to production staffs from studio
heads who wanted to put themselves on record for supporting the women's aims and
who declared their intentions to do better. Fundamentally, however, little has
changed as yet.  During their discussions with executives, the committee members
emphasized the absence of women from episodic television, which is the real
center of the film industry today. It's where young male directors get their
training. It's where directors can make a living while learning and polishing
their craft - an opportunity that, with the exception of ''soft'' shows like
''The Waltons'' and ''Family,'' is largely denied to women, who are caught in a
seemingly inescapable ''Catch-22'' situation. Women are told they can't direct
episodic television or movies because they don't have enough hours of directing
under their belt. And they can't acquire those hours because no one hires them
to direct. While men entering the industry encounter similar problems, the women
claim that their experiences are infinitely worse because of sexism.

Occasionally, the established female star of a television show will direct an
episode or two. Nancy Walker, for example, did some 'Rhodas'' and ''Mary Tyler
Moores,'' and Penny Marshall did a couple of ''Laverne & Shirleys.'' But most of
the top shows have regular directors who lock themselves into a series, and very
few of those regulars are women.

The exclusion operates on every level. When she was still a film editor, Verna
Fields (who is widely acknowledged to have saved more directors' hides in the
cutting room than most of them would care to admit) was suggested as the
director for ''Jaws II'' (she won an Academy Award for editing ''Jaws'') after
another director fell by the wayside. But, she says, ''I was told I couldn't do
it, because, according to guild rules, in order to replace another director, I
had to have directed one feature (film) or 90 minutes of television, and,
(technically), on paper, I hadn't.''

Barbara Peters, a veteran low-budget action-and-exploitation film director
reports that when ''I was teaching a directing course at an experimental film
college in Los Angeles, I helped one student shoot and put together a 10-minute
videotape to use as his calling card.  With it, he immediately got an episode of
'The Incredible Hulk' to direct. I couldn't even get an interview on that
show.''

Although production companies are willing to look at test videotapes in the hope
of unearthing a new young directing talent, few of them seem to consider the
possibility that that talent could be female.

Jan Haag, a woman film director who administers the American Film Institute's
(West Coast branch) programs to aid film makers, explains: ''Young men come out
of our Center for Advanced Film Studies and go straight into jobs in TV and
film. The women in our workshops produce tapes ... many of which are as good or
better than the men's, yet they can't get a look in.'' Increasing numbers of
women are also coming out of other film schools, but their chances have not
appreciably changed as yet.

Adell Aldrich, daughter of veteran director Robert Aldrich, began her career as
a script supervisor at the age of 16. ''My father,'' she says, ''started off his
career as a craft serviceman, going for coffee, and moved from third assistant,
slowly but steadily, through the ranks to director. ... My family told ... me
the men in the industry simply didn't see women in that light. They were right.
It took me 18 years to be given the opportunity to direct (small-budget films
for independent studios).'' Other women seem stuck permanently in
assistant-director or second-assistant director ruts while their male
counterparts move up more steadily to directors' chairs.  Why has an industry
which may have had a woman as its first storyfilm director (it is hotly debated
whether Alice Guy-Blache, who directed ''La Fee Aux Choux,'' made in Paris in
1896, was the first person to direct a story film), an industry which allowed
the late Dorothy Arzner to become one of the top 10 Hollywood directors in the
30's, been so resistant to giving opportunity to women directors since World War
II?

There was one notable exception in this worst of times for women directors in
America. Ida Lupino, tired as an actress of waiting for the right films to come
along, formed her own production company with her then husband, the late Collier
Young, and between 1949 and 1954 directed, produced and wrote eight feature
films, characterized by their tough subject matter and their provocative picture
of American life beneath the surface, and went on to do shows for television.

Ida Lupino's films were low-budget, fast-shoot independent. Her first feature
''Not Wanted'' (1949), the tale of an unwed mother who gives up her baby and
then kidnaps another, cost $110,000 to make and grossed $1 million. It might
have been characterized as a women's picture, but one could certainly not say
the same of the ''The Hitch-Hiker,'' an all-male suspense drama shot in 1953, of
which a contemporary reviewer wrote: ''It is breathtakingly keyed to an
agonizing pitch of terror for its full running time.''

In the three decades since, no other woman has managed to amass a similar body
of work. One possible explanation of the phenomenon is that the history of women
as film directors has simply not been fully documented. As the writer-director
Nancy Dowd pointed out in Action magazine in 1973, the history of the great
directors began to be written in the 50's, spurred on by the French creators of
the auteur theory, wherein directors, not stories, became preeminent. When the
interest spread to America, it did so in a climate that was scarcely sensitive
to women's efforts.

''It was the era of the feminine mystique,'' wrote Nancy Dowd, ''of Jayne
Mansfield, Betty Crocker cake mixes, Dior waists, crinolines and Mamie
Eisenhower. ...

''The cultural blinders of the era,'' she continued, ''blunted (the historians')
scholarship. They simply did not see, or could not believe, or preferred to
forget, that women had been among the first film makers, that women had made
distinguished films, that women directors had amassed significant
filmographies.''

Women also tended to have been allowed to direct when directing wasn't
considered all that important. Under the old studio system, the ranks of
journeymen directors could well include an Ida Lupino.  Once the director became
the star, from the mid-50's on, women were, to all intents and purposes, passed
over.

It became easier to ignore women as directors. The one woman who could not be
ignored, because she was so obviously a cinematic genius, Leni Riefenstahl, was
easily discredited because of her Nazi connections.

Some male industry leaders today rush to explain the dearth of women directors.
Women don't have the technical skill to direct.  Women can't ''control the
floor.'' Male crews don't respect them.  Women are stubborn, inflexible and
won't compensate. Women make heavy-handed ''messagey'' films that no one wants
to see. Women don't have the physical stamina.

''Directing for television is a very, very tough job,'' says Douglas S. Cramer,
a co-executive producer with Aaron Spelling Productions (the company that makes
''The Love Boat'' and ''Vega$''). ''It's a merciless, constant pounding. It's
gruelling. I don't want to sound like a chauvinist, but I don't know if a woman
could stand up to it.''

''It's easy to blame male chauvinism,'' says Harry Ufland, one of Los Angeles's
most successful agents (with a reputation for launching many first-time
directors, none of them women), ''but it's quite simply that no woman except
Elaine May has ever made a good movie, and her last one, 'Mikey and Nicky,'
never got finished. Everyone knows how brilliant she is, but no one will trust
her with a film.  The rest of the women's stuff I've seen is just awful.''

It is difficult for a neophyte male director today to get a production company
to take a chance on him. It is virtually impossible for a woman. She simply adds
an extra layer of risk in an already risky formula.

At the present uncertain time in the movie industry, what with the advent of
home video cassettes, cable and other new software, no one is quite sure who the
audience is anymore. No one, therefore, is inclined to take risks, and women
directors are perceived as the greatest risk of all.

Film producers claim that budgets today are too big for them to entrust a movie
to a woman. And television producers say their budgets are too small to risk the
mistakes an untested woman director might make.

Money and power move the film industry. Women have traditionally had neither.
Banks, which lend money for films, are notoriously conservative, but, say women
directors, they become positively Scrooge-like when a woman is at the helm of a
picture. And there is little indication that the introduction of women's banks
has made any difference.

But first, and fundamentally, the word ''director,'' like ''general,'' continues
to have a primarily male connotation.  Fay Kanin, who is currently president of
the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, head of her own production
company, and writer and/or co-producer of such television hits as ''Friendly
Fire,'' ''Hustling'' and ''Tell Me Where It Hurts,'' explains it this way: ''The
director is a papa figure. We were always told women couldn't exercise authority
over a bunch of men. It's nonsense, of course. Some women are lousy at
authority. But then, so are some men.''

But old conditionings die hard.  Verna Fields sits in her large, prestigious
vice president's office at Universal Studios, surrounded by posters of some of
the successful films she's edited, and admits, ''To be honest, my early
education has never really left me. It's like how you feel passing a nun, even
though you've given up Catholicism a long time ago. It will take several
generations in this industry to get over our subservience to the male gender.''

It may be this early conditioning that produces a profound lack of confidence in
the women themselves when they decide to try their hand at directing. As Barbra
Streisand, who is widely believed to have virtually ''directed'' many of the
films she has starred in over the years, prepares to make her official movie
directing debut with the musical ''Yentl'' for her own production company, she
is, accord-ing to a woman who has worked closely with her, ''so scared, she's
making herself ill.''

The fear, of course, comes from the visibility of failure. A man makes a bad
movie and it's John Doe who's made a bomb. When a woman fails, it's ''women''
who can't direct. A ''Moment by Moment'' or a ''Can't Stop the Music'' sets
every woman who has ever directed, or wanted to direct, back a decade. A
''Heaven's Gate'' or a ''1941'' would finish them forever. But such monumental
failures by men are regarded as momentary aberrations by otherwise gifted
directors. A Robert Altman can direct a string of failures and still get
''Popeye.'' Ken Russell can produce embarrassment after embarrassment and go on
to ''Altered States.''

The injustice galls. ''We want the same opportunity to make fools of ourselves
as the men,'' says Nancy Walker, who directed ''Can't Stop the Music.'' If
nervous studio heads these days watch young male directors closely - and they do
-the scrutiny is multiplied tenfold for women.  ''It was like being in a
fishbowl,'' says Claudia Weill of her experience with Columbia Pictures on
''It's My Turn.' (The New York Times film critic Janet Maslin said the movie was
''full of brief, telling details that Miss Weill somehow makes unexpectedly
interesting.'')

''I heard (the production people),'' she reports, ''talking to the crew - 'You
mean she took five takes (not an inordinate amount) on that?' 'What the hell is
she doing?' -that kind of thing.''

The new breed of women production executives at studios can go only so far to
help.  ''They'll bring up a woman director's name a couple of times,'' says
Barbara Peters, ''then they simply have to let it drop.  Otherwise, they might
be asked, 'What's the matter with you, can't you work with a man?'''

There are, however, small signs of hope. The presence of women executives at
several major studios may represent the best chance for a change. New studios in
town, like Francis Ford Coppola's Zoetrope, are apparently receptive to women
directors and are actively seeking projects from them. Lucy Fisher, who started
in the industry as a studio reader 12 years ago and is now vice president for
worldwide productions at Zoetrope, says, ''We've been interested in women making
films since before it became fashionable.'' And she points out that it makes
good sense to hire new people, both male and female, to direct. ''The public
certainly hasn't been too happy with the caliber of movies they have been
getting lately from the same old people,'' she adds, ''so why go back to them
just because you know them?''

At 20th Century Fox, Sherry Lansing says she is discussing a development deal
with Karen Arthur, director of ''Legacy,'' and one with Gilliam Armstrong,
director of ''My Brilliant Career,'' and there are several others cooking which
she does not want to discuss until they become settled. She, however, emphasizes
that she has trouble answering when she is asked how many projects with women
directors her studio has. ''I simply don't break them down into male and
female,'' she says. ''We have some projects we're talking about with terrific
directors, and, yes, some of them happen to be women.''

''I've seen some wonderful films by women,'' Sherry Lansing adds.  ''Elaine May
did two of the best films I've ever seen. I loved 'It's My Turn.' I've seen
brilliant work from Joan Silver, Beth Brickell, a director called Evelyn Demme
and Amy Heckerling, and there're lots more. ... Six months from now, I'm sure
we'll have several projects under way with women at the helm.''

Most woman directors agree that big-name actresses -those with enough clout to
have director approval -could help by insisting that a woman be at least
considered in the running to make their pictures. But it rarely happens.

When Jane Fonda was asked at the 1975 San Francisco Film Festival why she had
never worked with a woman director, she said there weren't any. ''Later,'' says
Karen Arthur, who was honored at the festival as one of three outstanding new
directors of the year, ''I asked her if she'd view some of my films. She
refused. She had told the woman who had directed her in a documentary ... on
Vietnam ...  that women shouldn't direct.'' A spokesman for Jane Fonda quotes
the actress as saying, ''It's totally false. I don't recall ever meeting Miss
Arthur, but if I refused to see her films it was because I didn't have the
time.'' The one thing on which even their critics agree is that women directors
are especially sensitive in their handling of actors.  On the set of ''Love'' in
Canada, Candace O'Connor explained that from an actor's point of view in a story
involving rather explicit sex, a woman director is a plus all around. ''I keep
waiting for Annette Cohen to say, 'Oh, for God's sake, Candace, relax -so it's a
nude scene, so what?' I've heard it so often from men. But I know she won't.
There are just some things I don't have to explain to a woman.'' Candace
O'Connor's male co-star, Robin Ward, was equally enthusiastic: ''I've worked for
women directors often in the theater. This is my first experience with one in
films, and I can tell you that, given my druthers, I prefer a woman director.
They're so much more willing to discuss things with you. There is none of that
mysteriousness that some of the male directors seem to enjoy wrapping things up
with.''

Ideally, a significant influx of women on the directorial scene would add a
whole new perspective to the human experience: the filmic equivalents of Joyce
Carol Oates, Margaret Drabble or Joan Didion. It was evident in ''The Heartbreak
Kid,'' a satire on the ethnic male's fantasy of the WASP princess that could
surely only have been done justice to by an ethnic female like Elaine May. It
was evident in ''Hester Street,'' Joan Micklin Silver's film of an immigrant
woman growing up to the realization of her own strength. It was evident in Lee
Grant's short film ''The Stronger,'' wherein Strindberg's old tale of two women
battling over a man became an altogether different story in which the man was a
virtual irrelevancy. And it is there in her new film, ''Tell Me a Riddle,'' in
which flashbacks are used not simply to detail a dying old woman's past but to
let the audience into her imagery, to show not only what the woman is thinking,
but how she thinks it.

But some women directors have felt impotent and deprived of selfexpression for
so long that, in their frustration, what sometimes comes out when they finally
do get the chance to direct is hostile feminist excess: films in which too much
time is spent dealing with menstruation, rape and abortion - the kind of wallow
that few women, and even fewer men, want to sit through.

These are probably the kind of excesses that first efforts inevitably bring, and
will pass, but many women think that the time has come for female directors to
put aside the overall subject of ''women'' for a while.''I find them so icky,''
says Mai Zetterling (once billed as the ''Swedish Sex Bomb,'' now a
well-regarded director in Europe), ''all this adoration of the tummy - women
standing in front of mirrors oiling pregnant bellies.''

Most women directors are not interested in pouring their anger onto the screen,
nor are they interested in being pigeonholed.  Nancy Dowd, who wrote the
original story of ''Coming Home'' and the raunchy, brutal script for the movie
''Slap Shot,'' about the very male sport of ice hockey and is making her
directorial debut in ''Love,'' asks, ''How come no one is interested in what a
woman thinks about freedom?''

Small subjects, films about interpersonal relationships -the kind of pictures
European film makers, both male and female, make - these are the pictures that
the majority of women directors say they want to make. But, too often in
America, these are contemptuously tagged ''women's pictures'' by studio heads,
who consider them the kiss of death at the box office. Despite the success of
films like ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ''Ordinary People'' (voted 1980's best film
by the New York Film Critics Circle), the suggestion is that people aren't ready
for real life on the screen.

In Europe, the picture has traditionally been somewhat brighter for women.
Directors like Lina Wertmuller, Mai Zetterling, Agnes Varda and, in Britain,
Betty Box have found a market for their incisive, satirical looks at their
societies' foibles. But the European movie is a vastly different animal from the
American breed. There, movies are still regarded as individual artistic efforts.

And in North America, the Canadians have traditionally had more room for women,
because, explains the producer Renee Perlmutter, ''Our country is too young to
have an old-boy network that disdains women. We have a whole different
sensibility to our sex.''

But even in Canada, it is significant that the French-speaking section of the
country has many more women film directors than the English section. In the
United States, however, any woman who wants to direct finds herself struggling
with one key question: Can her sensibilities ever fit into a financial reality
that says the average cinema goer is a 14-to 24-year-old male?

Karen Arthur, who will begin shooting her third major motion picture, ''Lady
Beware,'' in April, and had to raise her $4 million budget from independent
investors after Universal, which had optioned the project, dropped out, says,
''I battled endlessly with (a studio head) over the picture. There was one scene
where the girl goes to do her laundry and finds the crotch cut out of her
panties and the nipples out of her bras. Any woman would be completely terrified
by that. (He) thought it was funny.''

''I can relate to 'The Deer Hunter' and 'Apocalypse Now,''' she adds, ''but it
appears a man can't relate to my world. It's the essence of the problem.''
Thwarted in their attempt to make major feature films, some women directors have
tried a different route. Barbara Peters, who doesn't mind being called ''the
Queen of B Pictures,'' has been making exploitation films - like ''Humanoids
from the Deep,'' ''Moving Violation'' and ''Candy Striped Nurses'' -heavy on sex
and violence and packed with car crashes, stunts and chases. She believes that
more women would make action pictures if they weren't so intimidated.

''Look, it's like a bunch of little girls trying to get into the boy's baseball
game,'' she says, ''and being told, 'Go away, you're not good enough.' So they
say, 'O.K., we'll go over to Mary Jane's yard and play our own game.' They stick
to what the men aren't doing.''

One area which has become a safe haven for women is the documentary field, and
many and varied have been the contributions of women directors to it. But in the
United States, documentaries are considered nonprestigious and uncommercial,
i.e., they don't make money. The field is one in which a woman can get stuck and
from which there is relatively little movement into feature films.

''We shouldn't try to be protected from the battle,'' declares Karen Arthur,
''just because we haven't been to war before. I adored those meetings with (a
studio head). They gave me a chance to sharpen my negotiating talents. They
taught me how to work him better, how to manipulate. Men are battle-scarred from
these meetings. They know the players. We don't even begin to understand the
rules.''

So far, the biggest commercial success for a woman director since Elaine May's
''Heartbreak Kid'' belongs to Claudia Weill, who had to put together three
grants to make her first success, ''Girlfriends,'' a modest little picture which
convinced Columbia Pictures to ante up $7 million for ''It's My Turn.'' Before
these two films, Miss Weill, who has been working in film production ever since
her student days at Radcliffe, produced and directed the documentary, ''Joyce at
34'' and did some 20 segments of ''Sesame Street'' for public television before
directing ''The Other Half of the Sky,'' the chronicle of Shirley Maclaine's
trip to China which won an Academy Award nomination.

Before ''It's My Turn'' was released, it was reportedly mucked about with
considerably. Hollywood sources say that the producer Ray Stark had so little
confidence in Miss Weill that he took the film away from her for editing. But
Ray Stark has a reputation for being crass and insensitive with directors, male
or female, and many women expressed little sympathy for Miss Weill's plight.

''What exactly did she expect,'' snorts Nancy Dowd. ''Anybody who makes a film
for Ray Stark must expect the worst.'' Nevertheless, the film survived and
audiences are seeing it, and the next woman to come along may find it easier
because of Miss Weill's success. Box office returns on the film are excellent,
an indication that if given the big studio treatment - major distribution,
widespread advertising and marketing - a woman's film can be just as succcessful
as any other good, well-promoted film.  Meanwhile, the fate of women directors
is unenviable. They make ends meet by teaching, stage directing or consulting on
films directed by men. They live frugally, and they keep moving.

Joan Tewkesbury, whose first film, ''Old Boyfriends,'' brought her a flurry of
attention, and who has just finished shooting ''The Acorn People,'' a Movie of
the Week for NBC-TV, says, ''You've got to keep the momentum going. I'm moving
to New York to do more theater. You can get awfully stale in this town sitting
around listening to all the deals the boys are making.''

Nancy Dowd is writing a play for England's National Theater. Some women are even
making movies. Joan Micklin Silver, who has a production company with her
husband, will begin shooting ''Medallion,'' a contemporary thriller in the
political arena, sometime in 1981, and Lee Grant is planning a comedy ''chase''
film for shooting next spring.

Others are still trying to get projects off the ground. Adell Aldrich's
''Twinkle, Twinkle, Martha Hinkle,'' starring Valerie Perrine, is currently
being considered by several studios. Amy Heckerling's ''My Kind of Guy'' went
the rounds from Universal to M-G-M before being dropped - a common enough
experience, but evidently more so when women directors are involved.

Meanwhile, many women search for a mentor - usually a male producer -who will in
some way further their career. Or they write, hoping to tie themselves to a
commercial project that the studios want enough to let them direct. And always
there's the struggle to raise money.

''You have endless dinners with men whom you convince yourself are interested in
investing in your movie,'' says Karen Arthur, ''when all the time they're
looking at your breasts. They evaporate when you suggest getting together with
your lawyer.''

Sometimes the temptation to give up is overwhelming. Joelle Dobrow, a news and
specials director, says, ''It's crisis time for me. If it doesn't happen in the
next six years, it's all over. I'm not 22 anymore. I'm a director, it's all I
know. What am I supposed to do, open a restaurant?''

Elaine May, the woman director with perhaps the most talent, has apparently
given up directing films, because Polly Platt says, ''She did it for her
personal life. This can be a very defeating town and at some point you have to
say, what am I giving up for this?  The resource committee appointed by the
Directors Guild to look into the plight of women in films had been scheduled to
make its final report by last Oct. 8.

The guild's national executive secretary, Michael H. Franklin, waited at the
appointed time. Not one member of the committee showed up, nor were any
apologies sent.

A top executive at a major studio said that on the advice of a labor-relations
lawyer it was decided that by taking part in this program the studio would be
locking itself into voluntary mandates and putting itself in jeopardy.

Lawyers for the Association of Motion Picture and Television Producers say that
the resource committee was in trouble on several counts. The National Labor
Relations Act prohibits the making of employment decisions on the basis of guild
membership and the group met only with guild members. Also, by restricting their
interview candidates women, says the A.M.P.T.P. lawyer, the resource committee
was discriminating against other minorities in the guild. But it was clearly
stated at the women's meeting with the producers that other minorities would be
next, that this was simply the first in a series of such affirmative-action
efforts.

Unofficially, members of the producers' association complain that the guild is
simply playing politics. ''They were facing the threat of suits from their own
women members,'' says one lawyer. ''They're simply trying to protect their own
rear ends by passing the buck to the producers.'' Nevertheless, an angry
national board of the Directors Guild voted to file a complaint for
discrimination against the production companies with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission, which will hear the case on Jan. 19.

It may do them little good, and it could produce a backlash. ''If a man has a
woman forced on him,'' says 20th Century Fox vice president Claire Townsend,
''he'll hate her. He'll want her to fail. And it will do more damage to women
further down the line.'' The prospects for women directors are perhaps most
promising for actresses who are interested in directing: people like Barbra
Streisand, Lee Grant, Anne Bancroft (who made her directorial debut with
''Fatso''), Dyan Cannon, whose short film ''Number One'' was well received and
was nominated for an Academy Award, and Lee Remick, who plans to direct her next
film. These women could make it to a secure stephold because they have the
visibility and clout that the others lack. They are accustomed to dealing with
the power brokers, and they have the added advantage of being able to finance
their efforts by their acting.

''I edited 'Tell Me a Rid-dle' while acting in 'Charlie Chan,''' says Lee Grant,
''and finished the mixing (while) doing 'The Fright' in Montreal. It's
exhausting, but it works.''

Most reasonable people in the industry agree, however, that there simply hasn't
been a sufficient body of work from any woman director to really tell who, if
any, is likely to have staying power.

Watching from the sidelines, Polly Platt, a production designer/producer who
with her former husband, Peter Bogdanovitch, launched such successful films as
''The Last Picture Show'' and ''What's Up, Doc?'' says that, regrettably, she
has not yet seen anyone she considers a really exciting talent among the ranks
of women directors.

''But just to keep things in perspective,'' she says, ''don't forget that John
Ford made (over 130) films, the first 45 of them were absolutely lousy. And
Peter and I plowed through many of Hitchcock's efforts made in England. Most of
(the very early ones) were quite dreadful.''

Fay Kanin is optimistic: ''If anyone had told me 10 years ago that there'd be so
many women producers today, I wouldn't have believed it. It's just snowballed. I
know it'll be harder for directors, but it will come.

How much harder, is the question.  For every film that actually gets to the
screen, there are 50 to 100 in development that never make it. That means it
takes over 100 production executives to make about five films. Becoming a
director, therefore, is approximately 20 times more competitive than being a
producer. No wonder then, as Fay Kanin admits, ''It's going to be two steps
forward and three back for a while, but it will come. Sherry says we'll get to
the day when none of us will have 'woman' as (an automatic) prefix stuck in
front of our title.''

For women directors that day can't come soon enough.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of directors

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Contents

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


January 11,1981
NONFICTION
ANCIENT SLAVERY AND MODERN IDEOLOGY. By M.I. Finley.  8 BERTOLT BRECHT IN
AMERICA. By James K. Lyon.  3 COMIC FAITH: The Great Tradition From Austen to
Joyce. By Robert M. Polhemus.  13 DOES GOD EXIST? An Answer for Today. By Hans
Kung.  7 HANDS. By John Napier.  13 LESSONS OF THE ROAD: An Overland Journey to
the East.  By Michael Schiffer.  12 QUEST: The Life of Elisabeth Kubler-Ross. By
Derek Gill.  14 THE RAILWAY JOURNEY: Trains and Travel in the 19th Century.  By
Wolfgang Schivelbusch.  14 ROADS TO EXTINCTION: Essays on the Holocaust.  By
Philip Friedman.  8 WHY VIET NAM? Prelude to America's Albatross.  By Archimedes
L.A. Patti.  9 WINTER BROTHERS: A Season at the Edge of America.  By Ivan Doig.
12
FICTION AND POETRY
THE COLLECTED POEMS OF STERLING A. BROWN.  Selected by Michael S. Harper.  11
THE HIDDEN TARGET. By Helen MacInnes.  22 HOW JAREM CAME HOME. By Paul Kaser.
10 THE IDOL HUNTER. By Barry Unsworth.  10 LOVE. By Susan Fromberg Schaeffer.
10 NO ONE KNOWS MY NAME. By Joyce Harrington.  22 THE OLD DIE YOUNG. By Richard
Lockridge.  22 THE PLAYERS' BOY IS DEAD. By Leonard Tourney.  22 THE SHORT LIFE.
By Aharon Megged.  10 THE SIRIAN EXPERIMENTS. By Doris Lessing.  1 WIVES OF THE
WIND. By Marjorie Jarrett.  10
FEATURES
HOLLYWOOD ON THE POTOMAC: Literary Letter From Washington. By James Conaway.  11

DEPARTMENTS
BEHIND THE BEST SELLERS. By Edwin McDowell.  34 BEST SELLERS.  32 BOOK ENDS. By
Herbert Mitgang.  39 CHILDREN'S BOOKS.  28 CRIME. By Newgate Callendar.  22
EDITORS' CHOICE.  32 LETTERS.  31 NONFICTION IN BRIEF. By Jennifer Dunning.  13
PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS.  36 PAPERBACK TALK. By Ray Walters.  35 PAPERBACKS: NEW
AND NOTEWORTHY.  35

Picture Credits:00. .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COULD WE HAVE AVOIDED VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


WHYVIETNAM?  Prelude to America's Albatross.  By Archimedes L.A. Patti.  612 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $19.50.

By GADDIS SMITH

WAS there a moment long ago when the Vietnam War and its hideous consequences
for Southeast Asia and the United States could have been avoided? Archimedes
Patti, an American witness to lost opportunity, says yes. The time was the late
summer of 1945, after the Japanese had been defeated but before the French
reinstalled themselves in Vietnam. At that moment the United States Government
had the option of recognizing the independent Vietnamese regime proclaimed by Ho
Chi Minh, keeping back French imperialism and assuring that the region lived
happily ever after.

This is a romantic but compelling piece of might-have-been, and no one is in a
better position to put the case than Mr. Patti. In 1944 he was assigned by Gen.
William (''Wild Bill'') Donovan to head a mission of the Office of Strategic
Services (the World War II predecessor of the C.I.A.) to China, with
responsibility for gathering intelligence from and conducting clandestine
operations in Japanese-occupied Indochina. Since 1940 the Japanese had enjoyed a
free hand in Indochina, although a French collaborationist government remained
nominally in control. In March 1945, after the liberation of France, the French
military in Indochina staged a bungled uprising against the Japanese, who
thereupon imprisoned the French forces and ruled the country directly.

While Mr. Patti and his colleagues were planning how to harass the Japanese,
Japan - rocked by the atomic bombs of August 1945 - suddenly surrendered.
Indochina was now a vacuum into which rushed several groups claiming to speak
for the Vietnamese: some French officers bent on re-establishing France's glory,
British who were sympathetic to the French, an army of Chinese Nationalists and
Mr.  Patti's O.S.S. mission. The bulk of this book is Mr. Patti's almost
hour-by-hour account, from memory amply reinforced by research into O.S.S. and
other archives, of what happened.

Mr. Patti was and is an idealistic foe of colonialism and a staunch admirer of
President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Mr. Patti believed with almost religious fervor
that the United States must act on its commitment, as proclaimed in the Atlantic
Charter, to support the political independence of all peoples who had been
forcibly deprived of that independence. He believed that this commitment applied
to all peoples and not merely to the victims of Axis aggression. He shared
Roosevelt's distrust of the French and believed with the President that the
French should not be allowed to return as rulers to their former colonies.

Even before Roosevelt's death in April 1945, American policy toward Indochina
had been clouded by an
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Gaddis Smith, chairman of the History Department at Yale, teaches American
diplomatic history.
inconsistency between the President's personal views and some official
assurances that the United States did not intend to dismantle the French Empire.
After Roosevelt's death, policy became absolutely opaque. The immediate task was
to arrange for the surrender of Japanese troops in Indochina, a task assigned to
the Chinese Nationalists north of the 16th parallel and the British south of
that line. Thus, Mr. Patti's mission to

Hanoi, in the Chinese zone, had little authority in the formal sense, although
enormous prestige as representing the United States.  For Ho Chi Minh, whose
Viet Minh regime proclaimed independence on Sept. 2, 1945, the United States in
general and Mr. Patti in particular offered a chance of survival. Mr. Patti was
captivated by Ho Chi Minh, seeing him as a selfless, dedicated, shrewd leader.
His account of long conversations with Ho and of the broad support Ho was
winning among the people is reminiscent of an earlier American's firsthand
observations of another revolution: John Reed's ''Ten Days That Shook the
World,'' about the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.

Mr. Patti was convinced that Ho's undoubted Communism was subordinate to his
Vietnamese patriotism and that an independent Vietnam under Ho would be
compatible with American ideals and selfinterest. But there was little Mr. Patti
could offer Ho other than a sympathetic ear, some personal advice and facilities
for transmitting direct appeals to Washington. With each passing day Mr.  Patti
felt more isolated. Few Americans outside his own entourage shared his vision.
The French saw him as an enemy, and they were right. Meanwhile, the British sent
a pro-French force to the southern part of the country and soon helped the
French regain control of Saigon. In October 1945, the O.S.S. was terminated with
unseemly haste, and Mr. Patti returned to Washington to observe what now seemed
inevitable: war between the French and the Viet Minh, and then the American war.
His vision of Ho as nationalist patriot was rejected by American leaders in
favor of the vision of Ho as agent of the world Communist conspiracy.

Mr. Patti's personal narrative, containing a richness of detail never reported
before, makes this an indispensable source for the historian. A pity the account
did not appear 30 years ago. His words might have had some useful impact on
those who in the 1950's and after were so ready to make the French war against
Vietnamese independence an American cause - although they described it, of
course, as a war in support of freedom against Communism. Mr. Patti did prepare
an earlier version and was ready to publish it in 1954 after the French defeat
at Dien Bien Phu. But as he now writes: ''Our nation was embroiled in the era of
McCarthyism. Sensitive to adverse criticism of American foreign policy by
members of the military establishment, the Department of the Army decreed that
any public disclosure of information or opinion by me on the question of
American involvement in Viet Nam would be regarded with official displeasure and
I would be subject to disciplinary action. Under protest I acceded to the
Department's injunction.''

There is no way of proving a might-have-been. Independence for Vietnam in 1945
might still have led to local conflict within Southeast Asia, but it would have
prevented the wounds that the United States inflicted on itself by going to war
in Vietnam. And 1945 was indeed the moment. After that it was too late. After
that the stereotypes of the cold war became too powerful to allow for American
acceptance of Vietnamese independence except at terrible cost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW TEAM TACKLES WORSENING INFLATION

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 12; Page 12, Column 1; National
Economic Survey Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words


WASHINGTON THE most immediate challenge facing the new administration is how to
arrest and reverse a deeply entrenched peacetime inflation that has exceeded 10
percent annually for two years in a row.

Not since World War I, more than 60 years ago, has the Government's Consumer
Price Index increased at a double-digit pace for two consecutive years. The
index did just that in 1979 and 1980, years marked by international tensions but
no inflationary wartime activity.

Some of Ronald Reagan's advisers have told him that inflation can wreck his
Presidency before it is well along unless he takes early, bold, far-reaching
actions that impress the public and the financial markets.

Accelerating inflation was the scourge of Jimmy Carter's Presidency, forcing him
to steadily tighten fiscal and monetary policy. This course climaxed in March
1980 with the imposition of broad economic constraints, including restrictions
on consumer credit, at a time when the nation had already begun plunging into a
steep recession.

Mr. Carter's domestic policy chief, Stuart E. Eizenstat, suggested in a
post-election appraisal that inflation was the single most important rason why
the voters denied Mr. Carter a second term and gave the Republicans control of
the Senate.

''The election of 1980 sent an unmistakable message,'' Mr.  Eizenstat said in a
speech. ''The taxpayers of America - the great American middle class - are
frustrated at persistent high inflation and its corrosive impact on their
incomes and savings, their inability to buy a home, to plan for tomorrow, to
retire when they hoped and once retired maintain a reasonable standard of
living...Many believe the Democratic party has lost touch with their concerns.''

Inflation in 1980 as measured by the Consumer Price Index may have receded by a
whisker from the 13.4 percent rate of 1979, but 1980 was a recession year and
recessions are supposed to provide significant relief from inflation. Indeed,
many analysts said the 1980 slump was ''policy induced.''

But the medicine did not appear to have much effect. As the year ended, Mr.
Carter's Council on Wage and Price Stability reported that the ''underlying''
rate of inflation had moved up a full point in 1980 to 9 percent, and a
double-digit rate appeared to be ''almost inevitable in the near future.'' By
''underlying'' rate, the council was referring to the C.P.I. less its three most
volatile elements - food, energy and mortgage interest rates.

Most worrisome, officials said, was that the general rate of pay increases was
also moving up, as working people sought to ''keep up'' with inflation. That
seemed to mean that consumer price inflation was becoming imbedded in the labor
costs of business. Since labor productivity has declined in five of the eight
latest calendar quarters, unit labor costs have gone up even more sharply.

What caused the acceleration of the past four years, from an underlying rate of
roughly 6 percent to 9 percent during the Carter years? Mr. Carter blamed a
number of factors. He said the trend had been unfolding since the late 1960's,
when President Johnson hesitated to ask for the higher taxes needed to pay for
the war in Vietnam. Mr. Carter cited the shocks to food prices imposed by bad
harvests here and abroad, and he noted that in the 1970's there were two bursts
of world oil-price inflation, chiefly in 1974 and 1979.

Mr. Carter's chief economist, Charles L. Schultze, also laid heavy blame on the
tendency of wages and prices to chase each other. To curb that interaction, Mr.
Schultze sponsored the voluntary wage and price restraints adopted in October
1978, 21 months into the Carter Presidency - too late, many said.

Mr. Carter himself subscribed to the center-right view that a Federal budget
deficit is inflationary, a theory that the Democratic party's Kennedy-Mondale
wing finds offensive. Accordingly, Mr. Carter imposed more spending restraint
than the liberals wanted, and still the economy and inflation showed more
strength than the White House expected.

Inflation and a series of Federal Reserve shifts toward higher interest rates
also combined to drive mortgage and business borrowing costs to the high teens
and low 20's, levels unprecedented in modern times. The high cost of financing a
house pushed the C.P.I. still higher, fueling inflation psychology.

Business and conservative economists have contended that inflation is high and
productivity weak because proliferating Federal regulations discourage business
investment.

Mr. Reagan and his advisers have emphasized Federal spending and Federal
regulation as the chief villains. They have ambitious hopes of curbing both.
Some also argue that enactment of a three-year package of across-the-board tax
cuts is a third essential ingredient of a strategy to break the back of
inflation.

Other advisers to the President-elect, in and out of his Cabinet, would make the
second- and third-year tax cuts contingent on demonstrated restraint in
spending. Some Congressional Republicans and many Democrats take that view, and
a heated debate seems certain.

So far, the Reagan camp has disavowed any type of ''incomes policy'' - that is,
a general practice of exhortation and consultation with business and labor or
the more specific form, the numerical guidelines tried by Mr. Carter. The case
for such measures is that they reinforce fiscal and credit restraints and so
help to chip away at inflation.

It is an intriguing question as to whether the Reagan administration will at
some point, perhaps in a mood of desperation, swallow its ideological distaste
and try some form of incomes policy. Observers remember that it was Richard
Nixon who last imposed outright controls.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph on Consumer Price Index and its major components,
1970-79

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. NOMINEE ENVISIONS FIRM STANCE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the Reagan administration's delegate-designate to the
United Nations, takes exception to those who find her overall views on American
foreign policy ''hawkish.''

''It is other people who call me a conservative,'' Mrs.  Kirkpatrick said in a
recent interview in her office here at the American Enterprise Institute, a
conservative research organization.  ''I never have been. I originally regarded
myself as a liberal. I do today.''

She cites as one of her intellectual mentors the late Charles Frankel, the
liberal Columbia University philosopher who resigned from the State Department
over the war in Vietnam.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who is expected to assume the United Nations post soon after
President-elect Ronald Reagan is inaugurated Jan. 20, must be confirmed by the
Senate. No date has yet been set for confirmation hearings,

Does Not Expect to Make Policy

Mrs. Kirkpatrick says her cabinet rank will not make her a molder of foreign
policy, a role that some of her predecessors like Henry Cabot Lodge had held and
Adlai E. Stevenson had sought.

''I have a very strict constructionist view of an ambassador,'' she said. ''The
job of U.N. ambassador is to represent the policy of his/her government without
qualifications or ambiguity, to do it as persuasively as possible. I do not
expect to be making policy in New York. The Reagan administration and the Haig
State Department make policy.''

But she intends to make her voice heard in the administration's inner councils.
''I hope to have some input through the cabinet,'' she said, toying with her
black, horn-rimmed glasses as she spoke.  She added: ''I am not a professional
diplomat. I haven't signed over my conscience and intellect. If I didn't feel in
good conscience I could represent the policies of the Reagan administration and
the State Department, then the appropriate course would be to resign.''

At the United Nations, will she model herself after Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
master of the aggressive manner, Andrew Young and his warm embrace for
third-world nations, or the self-effacing Donald F.  McHenry? ''I'm very
nonconfrontational,'' she replied. ''I never seek confrontation with anybody.
But if I must, I do. It is useful from time to time to affirm that we are not a
racist, genocidal, imperialist power.''

Article Attracts Reagan

Mrs. Kirkpatrick first came to Mr. Reagan's attention with a Commentary magazine
article that appeared in 1979.  In the article, ''Dictatorships and Double
Standards,'' Mrs.  Kirkpatrick, a professor of political science at Georgetown
University, wrote sympathetically of ''moderate autocrats friendly to American
interests'' and warned against United States administrations that ''forswear
unilaterally the use of military force to counter military force.''

This view was reinforced by a recent television appearance in which she said:
''I would like to see us increase assistance to El Salvador. We have never given
El Salvador very effective military assistance.''

But now Mrs. Kirkpatrick insists that this was not a call for military aid to El
Salvador's junta, struggling against a revolutionary front.

Use of Marines Opposed

''I wouldn't push for military aid to the junta,'' she said. ''I hope that El
Salvador isn't overrun by a military solution'' that the guerrillas are trying
to impose, she added.

Indeed, Mrs. Kirkpatrick asserted that she would not ''under any circumstances''
send the Marines to calm a turbulent Central American nation.

Her words about countering military force with military force, she said, must be
taken literally and not read for implied meanings.  ''In a general sort of way,
I don't believe it is the business of the United States to determine the
composition of other governments,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick said. ''I am not an ardent
advocate of intervention. This doesn't mean we regard all governments as equal,
but we have a realistic assessment of our limits.''

Wouldn't Favor Intervention

''I would not under any circumstances recommend support for U.S.  military
intervention in Central America,'' she said.  Asked whether President Lyndon B.
Johnson erred in sending troops to the Dominican Republic in 1965, she replied,
''Let the dead bury the dead.'' She added, ''That is part of what we may have
learned from Lyndon.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who is 54 years old, said she allies herself with ''a liberal
spirit that refers to individual freedom, reason and negotiations.''

''The founding fathers were profoundly liberal,'' she said and pointed to Louis
Hartz's ''The Liberal Tradition'' as text for her gloss.

But she was equally insistent that her liberalism has a conservative root and
''takes a lot of account of tradition, has lots of room for tradition.'' The
talk turned to Edmund Burke and his strictures on the French Revolution.

How She Approaches Post

How does a professor of political science at Georgetown apply all this to a
cabinet-level post in the glass and marble palace of the United Nations? ''How
do I approach the job?'' A warm smile lit up her oval face and she answered,
''Carefully.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick is understandably distracted by the move from academe and the
suburban rearing of three sons to New York, public life and demands for pictures
from Time magazine, Japanese television and others. She fretted over 30 unread
blue books, final examinations for her graduate course, ''Pluralism, Competition
and Democracy.''

''This is tuition time,'' she reminded a caller who had been slow to pay the
expenses for a conference abroad. Mrs. Kirkpatrick has two sons at Georgetown
Law School and a third at Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio.

Her husband, Evron, retires this summer as executive director of the American
Political Science Association. That will make easier the couple's move from
their home in Bethesda, Md.

She is worried, however, about what she has heard of the Waldorf Towers
apartment reserved for the United Nations representative. ''I have feelings
about color and styles,'' she said, hinting that the Waldorf's overstuffed
furnishings are not to her taste.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRZEZINSKI TO PROPOSE THAT ECONOMIC TALKS BE 'STRATEGIC' SESSIONS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser, will propose
tomorrow that the leaders of the United States, Canada, Japan and key Western
European nations expand their yearly economic meetings into ''strategic summit''
sessions to meet the challenges posed by the Soviet Union.

In what amounts to a farewell speech to be given to the French Institute of
International Affairs in Paris, Mr. Brzezinski underscored his concern that the
allies have not responded with sufficient coordination to Soviet moves around
the world. Mr.  Brzezinski's office made the text of the speech public here
tonight.

He said that after World War II, American and allied efforts ''to check Soviet
power'' experienced two successful phases. The first, in the late 1940's and the
50's, saw the consolidation of Europe through alliances like the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, ''which brought an unprecedented surge in institutionalized
contacts across the Atlantic.''

Alliances Enhanced Security

The second phase, he said, occurred in the Far East as the result of the Korean
and Vietnam Wars, in which security was enhanced by American alliances with
South Korea and Japan and by ''the growing strategic cooperation with China.''

''In both the Far East and Europe, we recognized a challenge to our vital
strategic interests and we responded collectively to those challenges,'' he
said.

Now, he said, there is ''a third phase and a third collective strategic zone,''
which he described as Western Asia, the Persian Gulf and the Middle East. He
said this zone was intimately linked to Europe and the Far East.

But he said that it is vital that the United States and its allies regard the
three areas the same way, that there should not be detente with the Russians in
Europe ''and a different face a few thousand miles away,'' an apparent reference
to what Mr. Brzezinski regarded as the lack of enthusiasm shown by the allies
toward punishing the Soviet Union for its intervention in Afghanistan.

''A possible remedy lies,'' he said, ''in a consciously expanded program of
sustained strategic consultations between the United States and its principal
allies, including Japan.''

'Consequences of Soviet Power'

''Accordingly,'' he went on, ''we should give serious thought to the expansion
of our yearly economic summit meetings into a strategic summit which would also
address, at the highest political levels, the consequences of Soviet power
projection and the mutual security requirements to meet that challenge.''

Mr. Brzezinski said the leaders could assess not only the dangers of East-West
confrontation ''which flow from the pattern of Soviet military expansion but
could help supply the political impetus required for a firm and effective
response.''

He said ''the basic issue is whether we and our allies share the same historic
and strategic vision which enabled us to mount such successful responses to the
dangers we jointly confronted earlier in Europe and the Far East.''

''Do we now have the political will to take decisive, albeit difficult, measures
on behalf of our own vital interests?'' he asked, adding that he thought the
answer was yes.

The economic summit meetings, which have been held in different nations in the
alliance for the last several years, have touched on noneconomic matters in an
informal way, but not on strategic concerns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Protest Reconsidered

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG.Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


There's no law against changing your mind, Sam Brown will tell you.

In 1969, when he was 26 years old, Mr. Brown, as principal organizer of the
massive Vietnam Moratorium to protest the United States' involvement in
Indochina, was known as a militant foe of the draft.

As an antiwar activist, Mr. Brown campaigned daily, for years, against the
Selective Service, but now he says that was a mistake.  Mr. Brown, now 37, is
concluding a four-year tour as director of Action, the Government's volunteer
agency, and now he says he's had a change of heart and mind about the Vietnam
era.

''As one who spent a number of years, I think incorrectly, opposing the draft,''
he said, ''it seems to me all of us owe some obligation to society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KALLUR IS ACHIEVING HIS N.H.L. GOALS

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1886 words


HE was the best hockey player in Sweden and he also was a physical education
instructor - at the same time. Under Sweden's amateur structure, Anders Kallur
taught classes by day and played top-level hockey at night.

''It is not such a big deal to be an athlete in Sweden as it is here,'' says
Kallur, the second-leading goal scorer on the New York Islanders. ''They don't
want too much competition in the class because they don't want four or five guys
always to be last and feel bad. In the U.S., it's like winner-take-all.''

Two years ago, Kallur finished his seventh season of hockey and his first year
of teaching and was voted the outstanding player in his homeland. Like the most
gifted youngsters in his gym classes, ''I knew what I could do,'' he says. ''I
wanted to try something new.''

At the somewhat advanced age of 26, he signed with the Islanders to play in the
most rugged - if not the best -hockey circuit in the world. Of course there was
the bigger salary, but he also wanted to test himself, to compete.

The first season was inconclusive because of injuries, but this season Anders
Kallur is finding out. He had scored 26 goals in the first 44 games, second only
to Mike Bossy's 40, and he is living with the North American hockey notion that
all foreigners can be pushed around.

''I won't fight,'' he says. ''I've never had a fight.'' In the deepest
competitive sense, however, Kallur is proving he was right to leave the security
of Sweden to come to the wilds of the New World, where savages flail away at
fancy foreign skaters, and where a pulled groin muscle could (and did) lead to
temporary banishment to the minors in Indianapolis.

''I thought about it,'' Kallur says of the possibility of failure, ''but coming
here was a challenge to me.'' He discusses the challenge in the nearly flawless
English that many Swedes possess. His facial features are as quick as his hands
and his skates: sudden smiles and flashes of insight. A luncheon interview
becomes a two-way conversation among adults, with the subjects ranging from
Appalachia to religion to economics to sports. Perhaps because Swedish athletes
are not separated - physically and psychologically - from their peers, they are
still able to relate to strangers.

In the small talk before the appetizers, Kallur recalls the emphasis on
coordination rather than competition in his gym classes.  ''It's good one way,
bad in another,'' he says. ''In Sweden, people complain we have bad sports teams
but this comes from the schools.  We don't compete enough. People are satisfied
faster in Sweden.  Americans are used to fighting more for what they have. They
are used to competing more in this society. In Sweden, they try to get everybody
equal.''

For some, Sweden is respected as a shelter for young American resisters during
the Vietnam era. Yet Sweden has produced its own tiny band of expatriots. Every
Swede with the prospect of making money is faced with the twin examples of men
who left their homeland: Ingmar Bergman taking a night flight to Paris in 1976,
arriving ashen-faced at the Hotel Georges V the next morning, looking pursued by
demons worse than the tax-collector; and Bjorn Borg establishing his ''home'' in
a Monte Carlo condominium, with a view of the blue Mediterranean not quite
obscuring the stigma of the exile. Both left to escape the tax levies of their
homeland that cost a person as much as 90 percent of his money.

''In Sweden, you can work hard but you cannot make a lot of money,'' says
Kallur, who now pays taxes to the United States but returns to Sweden every
summer. ''Here, if you work hard, you make money. The Swedish people don't have
anything to fight for. They know they will have a good life, without fear.
Perhaps my country can learn a little from America in this regard. Perhaps you
can do more if you have the chance to make money.''

Kallur was not a stranger to North American scouts, having come here twice with
the Swedish national team. The Islanders kept up on his progress through an
arrangement with a Canadian now living in Europe. (''We have never disclosed his
identity and I'm not about to do it now,'' says Bill Torrey, the general manager
of the Islanders.  ''The man wants it that way.'')

As the club prepared to replace Captain Ed Westfall, a forward, it had
reservations about Kallur - ''his size, his strength, sure'' - Torrey says of
the 5-foot-10-inch Swede. In a turtleneck shirt, Kallur seems broad in the chest
and shoulders, but the club once had its doubts.

''It's not the old 'Chicken Swede' factor,'' says Torrey, acknowledging the
bully-boy tactics that have been used against other Swedes in the National
Hockey League. ''It's more a matter of adjusting to the smaller rinks. In Sweden
he was playing on rinks 100-by-220 feet, while in Boston and Buffalo he'd be
playing on 85 by 185. That's a helluva difference.''

Kallur visited North America after his 1979 season, accompanied by a lawyer, and
listened to several teams. He sought the advice of Stefan Persson, his
countryman, who had already played two years with the Islanders.

''Stefan told me the Islanders were a good organization, they didn't make a lot
of trades, they treated you good,'' Kallur says.  ''Also, they were winners.
I've been with a lot of losing teams.''

In his first fall camp, Kallur impressed the Islanders' coach, Al Arbour, with
his athletic ability.  ''We play soccer in training camp,'' Arbour says ''and
Andy is a terrific soccer player. Great instincts and competitiveness. He's also
an excellent tennis player. Just a superb athlete.''

(Kallur enjoys tennis so much that he plays two or three times a week during the
hockey season to provide ''a different kind of exercise for my legs.'')

Before the 1979 season began, Kallur suffered a groin injury playing hockey, and
the Islanders sent him to their top farm club, Indianapolis.

''I was afraid he'd get behind the eight-ball if he didn't play,'' Torrey
recalls. ''A North American player understands that sometimes the big club sends
you to the minors, but in Sweden they don't farm you out. A European player's
pride is such that it can be a terrible mental blow to be farmed out. Andy was
concerned, but he's such a classy person, he accepted it.''

Kallur says: ''I was only there five days. Two games. Fortunately for me, other
people were hurt and I was called back. No, I didn't worry. If I hadn't been
called back, then I would have worried.''

Used to kill penalties and fill in on different lines, Kallur admits, ''I didn't
have my confidence last year.'' Yet Bryan Trottier, the Islanders' captain, says
Kallur ''was just as good last year as this year.'' ''He just didn't get enough
ice time,'' said Trottier. ''Why? You'll have to ask the coach.'' Arbour
explains: ''I told Andy I wasn't going to rush him. He had injuries early and we
could take time. He adjusted pretty fast and worked himself into condition. By
March he was one of our best forwards.''

Kallur insists he was not intimidated by the bullies of the league.  ''I also
want to say, we body check in Sweden. The hockey is tough over there. But we
don't fight. We're not used to it. The Swedish people were shocked in the early
60's the first time they saw the Canadian teams. They'd never seen anything like
that.''

Mike Bossy, who leads the league in goals while avoiding fights, thinks the
thugs of the league seek out Swedish players even more than North Americans.

''Andy has taken more shots than I did when I came into the league,'' Bossy
says. ''He has responded to this treatment by scoring goals. In our league,
people respect that. I think sometimes Swedish players do change their styles.
It seems to me that (Anders) Hedberg (of the Rangers) felt if he was going to
stay, he'd have to change his style a little, be more aggressive. It might have
taken a little from his offense.''

Kallur admits: ''I think I changed my game around. I was looking for contact,
and I wasn't playing my game.'' Nevertheless, Kallur finished with 22 goals and
30 assists last season, the fifth highest total on the Islanders. He injured his
shoulder in the last game of the season when a defenseman fell on him.

''It wasn't intentional,'' says Kallur, acknowledging the level of normal
contact in his new league. ''I tried to go around him and he checked me into the
boards, and we both fell,''

Although he agitated to be put in uniform for the final round, Kallur was told
to rest and missed the entire Stanley Cup championships.

This season has been different. Arbour shifts most of his forwards around to
keep them alert to each other, and Kallur played with Bossy and Trottier for a
while. But when Duane Sutter went down for the season, Kallur was teamed with
the speedy Bob Bourne and the crafty Butch Goring. He enjoys plotting game
strategy with Goring just about as much as he enjoys Goring's clubhouse pranks.
(The raincoat covered with adhesive tape? Check the empty spools in Goring's
locker.)

Used on power plays, Kallur is also excellent as a penalty-killer because he is
always thinking offensively. He scored four shorthanded goals last season.

Against Hartford last week, playing a man short, Kallur snatched the puck not
far from the Islander goal. Spotting Trottier on the other side of the rink, he
slapped a cross-court pass that gave Trottier a few inches on his man. With a
few long strides, Trottier scored a breakaway goal.

''That is not a normal play,'' Trottier said later. ''The only way I'm down
there is if Andy reacts with the puck. He made that play with is great
anticipation.''

The Swedish import is feeling at home on the ice as well as on Long Island. He
owns a home in East Northport, which is big enough to accommodate the twins that
his wife, Elisabeth, expects in March.  The house usually contains their
relatives from Sweden, whom Kallur takes sightseeing in the city.

The Islanders are just beginning to expand their vision of Kallur's gifts, and
more than just his scoring, though he could become the first player born outside
Canada to score 50 goals in an N.H.L.  season.

Says Torrey: ''My interest in Anders is not only in his goals, not merely
statistics, but how he plays defense intelligently, how he helps kill penalties.

''But it's like any other sport, there is a fascination with statistics. The guy
who hits .300 gets more attention than the guy who hits .275. Andy is versatile,
intelligent. I never thought whether he'd be a 20-goal scorer, a 30-goal scorer
or a 40-goal scorer. But right now it looks as if maybe he'll score more than we
thought.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Anders Kallur

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnamese Said to Exploit Release to Control Garwood

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 12


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood's North Vietnamese captors promised to send him home in
1967 as a gesture to an antiwar delegation headed by Dr. Benjamin M. Spock and
Joan Baez, but only if the marine became ''progressive and re-educated,'' a
senior Air Force psychiatrist testified today.

Private Garwood was subsequently separated from other American and South
Vietnamese prisoners and billeted near the camp commander, which ''was viewed
suspiciously by the other prisoners, fueling a reasonable amount of paranoia,''
said Col. James F.T. Corcoran.

The colonel, chief psychiatrist at the Air Force School of Medicine at Brooks
Air Force Base in San Antonio, was called by the defense as a witness in Private
Garwood's court-martial by the Marine Corps on charges of desertion and
collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG AND DEMOCRATS IN REPEATED CLASHES ON WATERGATE VIEW

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Alexander M. Haig Jr., President-elect Ronald Reagan's choice for Secretary of
State, repeatedly clashed with Democratic senators today over the Watergate
scandals, accusing them of demanding that he admit to a guilt he did not feel.

Today's frequently tense confirmation hearing, following a closed session last

Main points of hearing are on page A14.
night in which Mr. Haig and some senators traded accusations, seemed to split
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on partisan lines.

In testimony by other Reagan nominees, Samuel R. Pierce Jr. said today that the
new administration might reduce by as much as 10 percent the budget for the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, which he is to direct, but he
promised that he would not turn his back on the poor. And William J. Casey, who
has been chosen to be Director of Central Intelligence, said he was opposed to
any sweeping reorganization of the agency but wanted to reverse its
''self-doubt.'' (Page A16.)

Plans for Senate Vote

Senior Republican sources said that the solidity of Democratic ranks had raised
the threat of at least a brief filibuster on Mr.  Haig's confirmation next week.
This was denied by Democrats. The committee scheduled a vote for Thursday
morning, but the Republican leadership abandoned plans for a full Senate vote on
confirmation for Inauguration Day. The nomination will still be called up before
the Senate next Tuesday, with Republicans hoping for a vote later in the week.

The sharpest questioning came from Senators Paul S. Sarbanes of Maryland and
Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who argued that they were not asking Mr. Haig
to admit involvement in Nixon Administration crimes but who insisted that his
refusal to label them as ''wrong'' or ''immoral'' had made them worry about how
he would function in the future.

Mr. Haig said that while serving as chief of staff for President Nixon he had
found ''tremendous abuses on both sides,'' meaning by the Nixon Administration
and by the press.

Testy Remark to Sarbanes

''Do you think I'm going to endorse what was done?'' he asked Mr.  Sarbanes, who
was a member of the House Judiciary Committee when it recommended Mr. Nixon's
impeachment. ''In no way, on either side.  Nobody has a monopoly on virtue, not
even you, Senator.''

To Mr. Tsongas, the prospective nominee insisted, ''The kinds of mea culpas that
I sense in your question you want, I just can't give, because I don't feel
them.''

Senator John Glenn of Ohio asked the retired Army general whether he had ever
advised Mr. Nixon or Henry A. Kissinger, his chief at the National Security
Council, that a proposed course of action was ''illegal'' or immoral.''

''Well, of course,'' Mr. Haig replied. But he added that it was not that ''Mr.
Kissinger or the President were concocting some illegal course of action. It's
in the conduct and flow of things that appropriate suggestions and proposals are
made - and inappropriate,'' he said. ''They are in your office, I'm sure.''

Asked if the break-in at Democratic headquarters in the Watergate complex in
Washington in 1972 was ''wrong,'' Mr. Haig said, ''it was both illegal and
stupid.''

The level of confrontation was lower after lunch, and after a onehour session in
which Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Republican of Connecticut, assailed Mr.
Haig as unprincipled. Mr. Haig returned with a statement in which he denounced
the Watergate break-in and coverup as ''improper, illegal and immoral.''

He defended other controversial moves of that period, the bombing of North
Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia and the bombing of North Vietnam in December
l972. ''These actions were not abuses of power,'' he said.

Stand on Nixon and Kissinger

But he said that while he could offer these value judgments, he added that could
not judge Mr. Nixon or Mr. Kissinger. He stated: ''I worked intimately with both
of them. It's not for me - it's not in me - to render moral judgments on them. I
must leave that to others, to history, and to God.''

The Democrats did not comment, but two Republicans, Senators Rudy Boschwitz of
Minnesota and Charles H. Percy of Illinois, the committee chairman, praised Mr.
Haig for his responses to Mr.  Sarbanes.

Even so, it was clear that Mr. Haig's statement had not taken the sting out of
what Democrats regarded as his earlier unwillingness to answer directly.

''He sure is making it hard to vote for him,'' confided one Democratic senator
in a recess.  Mr. Weicker appeared as a witness with Senator Barry Goldwater of
Arizona and former Senator John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky, Republicans who
praised the choice of Mr. Haig. Mr. Goldwater said the nation owed Mr. Haig ''a
sincere debt of gratitude'' for persuading Mr. Nixon to ''quit before he ruined
the country.''

Criticism on Watergate

But Mr. Weicker, who was President Nixon's chief Republican critic on the Senate
Watergate Committee, said that Mr. Haig had helped conceal the existence of the
White House taping system from that committee and had misled Republican senators
late in 1973 about the widening scandals.

''In the absence of their superior's adherence to the law, honorable men either
speak up or get out,'' Senator Weicker said, terming Mr. Haig's allegiance to
the Constitution ''a sometime thing.''

Current policy issues were raised in the testimony today, but they took a
distinct back seat to the examination of Mr. Haig's judgments on Watergate, 1970
efforts to oust the Chilean Government of President Salvador Allende Gossens,
government wiretapping and the bombing of Camobia.

The real drama of the day, the first in four days of hearings that are scheduled
to conclude tomorrow, came when Mr. Sarbanes asked Mr.  Haig to judge those
Nixon era controveries. It was the first time any questioning had focused on the
Watergate period.

Early on, the mood was friendly. When Mr. Sarbanes asked Mr. Haig how he felt
about the exclusion of Secretary of State William P.  Rogers from the
anti-Allende operations, he replied jauntily, ''It better not happen on my
watch.''

A Hostile Exchange

But the exchange grew hostile, as Mr. Sarbanes would ask, ''What is your value
judgment?'' or complain, ''I'm trying to find out whether you think it's right
or wrong.''

Mr. Haig would reply that he had not made the decision involved, on wiretapping
of government officials and journalists, and so had found it difficult or
inappropriate to offer a moral judgment.

He demanded to know what Mr. Sarbanes, and then Mr. Tsongas, wanted him to say,
and told the Massachusetts Democrat: ''It would be far more comfortable for me
to stay where I was in Connecticut, making 10 times more money and enjoying life
than to come down here and subject myself to the kinds of discussions I've gone
through for the last three days.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alexander Haig Photo of John Glenn and Paul
Sarbanes

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-RADICAL LEADER GETS PROBATION AND FINE IN 1969 CHICAGO PROTESTS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS E. KNEELAND, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 13


Bernardine Dohrn, the reputed former leader of the radical Weather Underground,
pleaded guilty today to two counts of aggravated battery and two counts of
jumping bail, charges stemming from violent protests here against the Vietnam
War in 1969.

Appearing in Cook County Criminal Court on the day after her 39th birthday, Miss
Dohrn, who voluntarily surrendered here on Dec. 3 after more than 10 years of
eluding the law, was fined $1,500 by Judge Fred G. Suria Jr. and placed on
probation for three years.

Denying a request by Mary O'Connor, an assistant state's attorney, that Miss
Dohrn be sentenced to serve 30 days in the county jail, Judge Suria said that he
believed she had suffered enough through her years in hiding, separated from her
family and friends.

In a brief lecture from the bench, the judge told Miss Dohrn that ''we have a
system for change that does not involve violence and jeopardizing the lives of
others: the election process.''

'Different Views of America'

''Are you ready to join us?'' he asked the defendant. Smiling slightly, Miss
Dohrn replied: ''You and I have different views of America.''

After her court appearance here last month, when she pleaded not guilty to the
charges and was released on bond, Miss Dohrn said at a news conference that she
did not believe the system had changed and added that she remained ''committed
to the struggle ahead.''

Miss Dohrn was accused of having used a stick to strike a police officer in the
''Days of Rage'' protests, but her attorney, Michael J. Kennedy of New York
City, said that she had pleaded guilty ''with the caveat that she was not in
possession of a weapon.''

Judge Suria granted Mr. Kennedy's request that Miss Dohrn be permitted to file
written probation reports so that she might continue to live in New York.

Miss Dohrn has been reported to have lived for at least two years on Manhattan's
Upper West Side with William C. Ayers, another Weather Underground leader, by
whom she had two children.

Mr. Ayers, against whom no charges have been pending since Federal charges
against both of them were dropped in 1979, was in court with her today, as he
was in her earlier appearance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Bernardine Dohrn

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MAJOR POINTS IN TESTIMONY BEFORE SENATE PANEL IN HAIG CONFIRMATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3736 words


HEARINGS Following are excerpts from a transcript of the hearing in Washington
yesterday by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the confirmation of
Alexander M. Haig Jr. as Secretary of State, as recorded by The New York Times:

SENATOR PAUL S. SARBANES, Democrat of Maryland: How important is it that
Government decisions be made through regularly established channels?

A. I think very important. And I think we cannot permit ourselves to be
frustrated by the realities of the current environment in Washington of the kind
Mr. Biden, Senator Biden, talked about: the leakage problem. Sometimes that
takes a great deal of persistence and requires a number of failures and
disappointments.

Q. Well, in view of that answer, what would your thinking be on the way the
Cambodian bombing and the Chile Track Two operation were handled? A. Well, with
respect to the Cambodian bombing, I think it was very much in line with past
practices in American history.

Q. Did those practices trouble you at the time?  A. Not so long as I was assured
- and I was - that the appropriate leaders of the Congress were informed. I
think in the context of past practices, normally - no one's perfect. No
administration is impeccable in these areas, and I don't suppose the Nixon
Administration was. But I think there's not a great deal of reason to question
that aspect of the problem.

Now you can question whether or not the program itself should've been launched.
In that context, you know, I'm on the side of being very much in favor of it. I
know what those sanctuaries provided the enemy, and I thought it was a
self-defeating position for us to take, to permit them to enjoy those
sanctuaries on that narrow strip of land adjacent to South Vietnam.

Q. Now what about the Chilean Track Two, the way that was handled?  A. Well
again, and you know everybody's perception is conditioned by their level of
involvement, and I know a great deal more about Track Two after the event, and,
as I prepared for a required testimony in 1975, than I think I knew at the time.
And I think, in hindsight, that that's something that is not ever going to
happen again.

In other words, if there were established mechanisms, a 40 Committee designed to
deal with covert activity, and there was a separate track established. But, you
know, there were tracks in other administrations.

So, again, I want to be sure that we don't single out one particular phase in
our history that suggests that it was unique and, as a consequence, something
very different. There were tracks in Kennedy's Administration, on the Cuban
problem, outside of the old 303 Committee. That's clear and history has
confirmed that.

Operation in Chile

Q. Now, it's my understanding that the Secretary of State at the time was not
aware of the Chilean Track Two operation. Is that your understanding? A. Yeah, I
think that's probably true, yes.

Q. What do you think of a decision-making process that excludes from it the
Secretary of State, with respect to a decision of that - an action of that sort?
A. It better not happen on my watch.

Q. Did you make a value judgment about it then?  A. I wasn't really sensitive to
whether I should or didn't - or shouldn't have because I was not a functionary,
in the formal sense of Track Two. My recollections of the situation were I was
asked to take some reports from the Central Intelligence Agency. And I served as
a conduit for a number of reports that were received, which I learned later were
under the format of Track Two.

I didn't sit in on the 40 Committee meetings, I doubt - you know, frankly, it
wasn't an issue that I focused on, Senator. Now it's very important that that be
understood here.

Q. In terms of your own value judgment, do you think that the wiretaps should
have been put on for, first, your fellow staff members at the National Security
Council?

A. I think my first answer to that question is to refer you to my statement in
the annex dealing with the subject of wiretaps. And I'd like to read it to you,
Senator:

''This committee has considered the issues raised by this program twice: once in
1973 and once in 1974. The first time this committee voted 16-1 to confirm Dr.
Kissinger as Secretary of State, noting Dr. Kissinger's role in the wiretapping
of 17 Government officials and newsmen did not constitute grounds to bar his
confirmation as Secretary of State.''

Later, this committee held special hearings solely to review the events
surrounding those wiretaps. Based on this investigation, this committee voted
again that the wiretaps provided no basis to question the propriety of Dr.
Kissinger's serving as Secretary of State and said, I quote:

''The committee reaffirms its position of the last year that his, Dr.
Kissinger's, role in the wiretapping did not constitute grounds to bar his
confirmation as Secretary of State. If the committee knew then what it knows
now, it would have nevertheless, nonetheless reported the nomination favorably
to the Senate.''

Now, I think you know, Senator, that I have testified extensively before this
committee on all the subjects and all of the issues related to it. I think you
know that in a recent civil suit the judge concluded that my role was an
inactive one and that I had a lack of oversight authority, and therefore I was
eliminated from the - from the list.

Judgment on Wiretapping

Q. General, let's proceed on the premise that you weren't there and had
absolutely nothing to do with it. What is your value judgment about that
practice?

A. I think in today's environment, largely as the result of all of the
controversy associated with that incident, it no longer would make good sense,
unless you had some very, very firm evidence that a member of the staff was
engaged in either intentionally, or accidentally, putting the vital interests of
this nation at risk. In which case, you would then follow the procedures
established which, I believe, include going to a court of law to obtain, from a
judge, a warrant to execute the tap.

Q. I'm trying to find out whether you think it's right or wrong.  And under what
circumstances you think it's right or wrong? A. I think under unusual
circumstances it is a course of action that must be considered.

Q. But in this instance, since we know those circumstances, was it right or
wrong?  A. It's hard for me to answer that question, since I did not make the
decision. I do know this: that the very issue that Senator Biden talked of this
morning, the hemorrhaging of vital national security information, clearly by
people - and there were only a select few who had access to that information -
would be a contributor to that kind of decision made by the President, the
Attorney General and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Now, I didn't contribute to that decision. I had no role in it other than to
know that it was in conformance with procedures. And I was assured that had been
followed up to that time by every American administration and every American
President since World War II.

Q. Well, what I'm still trying to get at is whether you think it was right or
wrong? ..  A. You see, you've given me a question I can't answer for you,
Senator, because I just wasn't in the vortex of the pressures under which a
constituted political authority had to make a decision. I think you know where I
feel on the practicalities of it.

Issue of Political Authority

Q. Well, that raises the next question and that is whether your notion of the
limits upon the use of power and authority relate to whether they will produce
successful results, or whether there's another standard that applies, which
leads you to make the judgment as to whether it should, or should not, be done?

A. Well, I think I've commented at length on my views on that. I just did a few
moments ago when I spoke about the dangers and pitfalls of modern politics,
where politicians play only to headlines instead of the dictates of their
conscience. I think one's conscience is the deciding factor, and, if a
particular course of action affronts that conscience, he's got to either oppose
it or to separate himself from the decision.

Q. Well now, you indicated that on the opening day. I'm concerned about - the
reports at least - about your reactions to people to whom orders were given to
do certain things, during this period, who refused to do so. Now, were they not
acting on the basis of their conscience?

A. You'd have to be somewhat more specific, Senator.  Q. Well, Attorney General
Richardson and Deputy Attorney General Ruckelshaus - to name two - who then
resigned from office. Was that not an honorable course of conduct?

A. It was the ultimate of an honorable course of action, and I don't think
you've ever found me say otherwise -unless you have some information that I am
not privy to.

Q. Well, weren't you upset that they did not adhere to your order, or your
instruction to them?  A. Not at all, Senator, and I'm glad you raised this
because I think this committee should be aware of precisely what happened.
There's been so much distortion, so much dishonesty, so much libelous reporting
on this situation in our press - so much.

On the day Elliot Richardson decided, for his own reasons as a matter of
conscience, that he could not execute the President's order - and that was a
Saturday morning - he called me on the phone and told me. And since he had
participated in the formulation of the plan itself, the plan which the lawyers
developed and the lawyers dealt with on both sides of the issue, I said,
'Elliott, it's important that you come down here and speak to the President,
himself, and inform him of your decision.'

He did so. And in the context of informing the President of that decision, he
said, now, that is also the view of Mr. Ruckelshaus, And if Mr. Haig will go to
his office and call Mr. Ruckelshaus and tell him of this decision, and ask him
if he's ready to serve, he will answer no. He should then call the Solicitor
General, Mr. Robert Bork and Mr. Bork will answer yes.

That is precisely how that situation occurred.

Disagreeing With a Superior

Q. Would you have done what they did, if you were in their position?  A. If my
conscience told me I couldn't, in good conscience, carry out that decision, of
course. I just did it, incidentally.  SENATOR CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Democrat of
Massachusetts: In response to Senator Sarbanes's last inquiry regarding Mr.
Richardson, you just said, ''I did it,'' the question being, would you have done
the same thing?

A. No, I found my condition couldn't permit me to continue on in my post in
Europe recently because I was in such profound personal disagreement with the
policies of our Government, so I discontinued that tenure.

SARBANES: How do you distinguish that decision, which you assert as one of
conscience, with continuing on in the White House at the time of these very
serious abuses of power? A. Very simply. If everyone were to indulge in the
option of refusing to serve in a unique period when our Republic, I think, was
in danger, heaven help us all. I felt an obligation to do the best I could. And
I did that.

Q. What was your value judgment about the things that were happening?  A. I
found tremendous abuses on both sides.  Q. Meaning?  A. I think that was a
period comparable in history to the worst of the so-called McCarthy era, in many
respects. Unfortunately, there were many abuses that justified it, as well. And
the real problem was to sort out and to continue an even keel, as best we could
within the dictates of one's conscience and the rules of law - which I never
made a move without checking with the White House counsel.

Matter of Moral Judgment

PICK UP FIRST ADD

Q. Well, I understand your assertion that was in the statement that in each
instance you acted pursuant to counsel's advise that the course was, at least as
they saw it, legal. But the more underlying question is, again, your judgment as
to whether what was happening was right or wrong?

A. Is that a statement or a question?  Q. It's a question.  A. I think the
problem, the overriding problem, during that Watergate period, was to, as I said
in my statement, to give the duly elected President of the United States an
opportunity, under established procedures, to establish his guilt or innocence -
just as we would provide for any other American citizen; to be sure, above all,
that this country continued to function effectively in a very dangerous
international climate and in a growing economic crisis here at home; to attempt
to work with this Congress to keep them responsible and never flirting with
solutions which would've been extra-constitutional - they did, thank God. Thanks
to the leadership of some very fine senators; to be sure that in every step
along the way, the American people had a right to know and to make their
judgments.

I think they did. I think, above all, to be sure that our system had an
opportunity to work. And that populist or extraordinary measures, driven by
emotion or hate or bias, for whatever reason, did not become the standard of the
land. It didn't. And I thank God for that, Senator.

Q. Why wouldn't the overriding objectives have been to insure that the
Constitution and laws of the country were maintained and adhered to?  A. There
is nothing that I said thatisn't totally consistent and indeed reinforcing with
that fundamental premise.

Q. I understand when you say, well, it wouldn't have happened; this is the way
it happened; the lawyers said to do it. I'm really asking you what did you think
about what was happening? And the only real response I think I've gotten to that
is that you thought there were tremendous abuses on both sides, and that you
likened it to the McCarthy period.

A. Well, I hope that's not what you derive from the extensive comments I made,
Senator. If you did, then we -it's not going to be very easy for me to answer
your questions, ever, to your satisfaction. I hope that's not what you derive
from what I said.

Evaluation of an Era

Q. Well, is that your view? That it was an era - what is your value judgment of
that era and those events? A. I think in a public forum I would have to be
somewhat constrained to answer in totally frank terms the full nature of that
question. And I'm inclined to think that's the right position to take.

On the other hand, I can go far enough to suggest to you that mistakes were
made. Clearly they were made. No one has discounted the fact that they were
made.

I didn't make them. I wasn't there when they were made. I had to inherit the
situation and the consequences of those mistakes and to do my best to keep the
country on an even keel, to the degree that my authorities and responsibilities
provided; to count heavily on counsel and advise from those that were trained in
the law. I did that.

I never - and this must answer your question or you've got another problem that
I'm not aware of - I never willingly, consciously or unconsciously, participated
in an act that I considered to be immoral, and above all, illegal. I didn't do
it then and I haven't done it in 37 years of military service to our country -
including fighting in combat in two wars.

And I'm somewhat surprised at your persistence on this subject, in the light of
the questions I have answered repeatedly for three days before this committee,
including last night.

Q. Well, I don't think you should be surprised. And I understand your assertion
that you didn't. And I indicated earlier when I asked you one of the questions,
that you could totally remove yourself from the situation - in terms of the
assumption of the question - be completely outside of the scene and then I was
asking for your value judgment of what occurred. Now the difficulty is every
time that question is asked, you interpret it to mean that you then had some
involvement in what occurred. I want to know what you thought about what
occurred. Let's assume, for the moment, that you weren't there at all.

A. Well, I think it's probably one of the greatest tragedies that's ever
befallen our country. I thought that about it. And I think it would be an equal
tragedy to have it reborn. If I thought that were the issue, I wouldn't be
sitting here today, Senator.

Now, what do you expect me to say? What is it you're after - something that you
want me to say that you've been unable to get from somebody else, with respect
to that tragic period in our history?

Q. What I'm asking you is for some indication of your value judgment of what
took place?  A. Well, I think I've answered the question completely. I have not
ever indulged in something that was wrong, illegal. I did not during that
period. Others did. That's clear. The record's clear. We saw the volumes of it.
What is my observation going to contribute to this? Do you think I'm going to
endorse what was done? In no way - on either side. And I want to be sure that
balance is kept. Because there were tremendous abuses on both sides - honest
differences between honest men - that's what Government is all about, even when
there are seamy aspects of Government.

And nobody has a monopoly on virtue. Not even you, Senator.

'How Far Do You Go?'

SENATOR PAUL E. TSONGAS, Democrat of Massachusetts: The question is really one
of paramaters, of how far do you go; how far don't you go. And a number of us
have been pressing you on that - impressing you, impressing. And the more we
press you, the more often we get into these glaring back-and-forth across the
table as you've done with me, and today with Senator Sarbanes. But every time
there's an obvious way of you saying it was wrong, it will not happen again, we
don't get that - at least I don't get that. And it troubles me; because you're a
very strong individual. You're going to dominate this administration, if I may
say so. You are by far the strongest personality that's going to be in there.

And I think that's the major question. In a judgment of crisis, in a point of
tension, does the conscience of General Haig come forth and dictate policy for
220 million Americans in a way that perhaps was not the case before; and can we
assume that what happened before was because of instructions, because there was
no policymaking responsibility. But from this point on, the judgmental value,
judgmental core of what America is all about is something that you're
comfortable with; and we're not going to see the U.S. going into Angola with
covert activity, just because, you know, we want to go back and redo that. We're
not going to have wiretaps, because it is illegal. We're not going to have these
kinds of things that have really stained America happen again.

We are almost beseeching you constantly for that reassurance. And somehow a very
unrequited love, we're not getting it. It's disturbing. Because this is our one
shot. I mean, if we don't get it now, I don't know where we're going to get it.

A. I'm very sorry that in our exchanges I haven't sufficiently indulged in the
kinds of mea culpas that you were seeking and hoped to to have to reassure you
that I could do my job responsibly.  That's a matter of some regret to me.

But I don't think it's easier in the context of the experiences that I've had,
the sacrifices I made during the period in question, the motivations that drove
me at that time, as they drive me today, to indulge in the kind of mea culpas
that you and, perhaps, Mr.  Sarbanes are seeking.

And I don't think it would serve any useful purpose, either to the overall
objective of justice and fairness or the best interests of this country, to have
me do it at the onset of what may or may not be an incumbency as Secretary of
State.

It would be far more comfortable for me to stay where I was in Connecticut -
making 10 times more money and enjoying life - than to come down here and
subject myself to the kinds of discussions I've gone through for the last three
days.

I give you gentlemen the greatest credit for sincerity, for knowing what you're
about, and for sticking by your guns to persist in the kinds of questions that I
think you have a right to have answers for. But the kinds of mea culpas that I
sense in your question you want I just can't give, because I don't feel them.
And I'd be deluding you and deceiving you were I to do so...

Abuses of Power

I would like to use this time to stress one point.  There's been a great deal of
discussion about abuses of power and my views on this subject.  Were there
abuses of power during Watergate? Of course there were.  The break-in at the
Democratic Committee headquarters and the obstruction of justice involved in the
cover-up, for example.

These actions were improper, illegal and immoral. They were an affront to the
fundamental values I cherish and we all share.  But there were other actions
that I do not consider immoral or abuses of power. The Cambodian bombing to
destroy sancutaries that were used by North Vietnamese troops who were killing
American soldiers was not an abuse of power.

The 1972 bombing of North Vietnam was essential to concluding the peace
negotiations and achieving the return of American prisoners of war.

In my judgment, these actions were not abuses of power.  I'm happy to express my
values, values which I have worked for during most of my life. They are the
values of freedom, liberty, privacy, justice, the rule of law, the right to live
with dignity.  They are values and rights worth fighting for.

But I cannot bring myself to render judgment on Richard Nixon or, for that
matter, Henry Kissinger. I worked intimately for both men.  It's not for me
-it's not in me - to render moral judgments on them.  I must leave that to
others, to history, and to God.

As for our country: I believe that it's the greatest nation on earth. A nation
in which these values and rights we cherish have flourished. I believe the
United States has a special responsibility to conduct itself with honor and with
generosity.

The strength I seek in our economy, in our political structure, and in our
military posture, is essential if we are to fulfill our responsibilities in the
world.

As Secretary of State, it would be my firm intention to devote myself to
fulfilling these responsibilities in accordance with the law and the
Constitution. And to working to preserve and enhance the values which we as a
nation share together.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

In a transcript of the hearings on the confirmation of Alexander M. Haig Jr.
that appeared in The Times yesterday, the home state of Senator Christopher J.
Dodd was given incorrectly. He is a Connecticut Democrat.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alexander Haig

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD'S PROSECUTORS ASSAIL PSYCHIATRIC DEFENSE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 386 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 13


As attorneys for Pfc. Robert R.  Garwood prepared to rest their case,
prosecutors moved today to discredit attempts by defense attorneys to portray
the 34-year-old marine as a victim of Vietcong torture who was brainwashed into
collaborating with the Communists.

Col. James F.T. Corcoran, chief psychiatrist at the Air Force School of Medicine
in San Antonio, was questioned at length by Government attorneys. Colonel
Corcoran contends that Private Garwood was susceptible to brainwashing as a
prisoner of war because of his troubled childhood and mental condition.

''Did not all the P.O.W.'s you have evaluated have similar backgrounds in age
and experience?'' the psychiatrist was asked.  ''Yes, but this was a special
case because of the years he spent in captivity,'' Colonel Corcoran replied. He
is the fourth witness to testify that Private Garwood was the victim of coercive
persuasion, or brainwashing, which substantially impaired his judgment.

Says He Was Held 14 Years

Private Garwood, a native of Indianapolis, was a 19-year-old jeep driver when he
disappeared near Danang, South Vietnam, in September 1965. He reappeared in
Hanoi in early 1979, telling a European businessman that he had been held
captive by the North Vietnamese for almost 14 years and wanted to return to the
United States. He is charged with desertion and collaborating with the enemy,
and, if convicted, faces a possible sentence of life imprisonment.

Defense attorneys have not disputed accusations by some former prisoners of war
that Private Garwood lived relatively freely in the prison camps and at times
carried a weapon and acted as a guard.  Instead, they have used psychiatric
evidence to try to show that he was not responsible for his actions.

Government attorneys quoted from a 1965 psychiatric report in Private Garwood's
file stating that, on being informed of his assignment to Vietnam, he became
intoxicated and banged his head against his locker door, saying, ''Not Vietnam,
not Vietnam.''

Asked what he thought of that incident, Colonel Corcoran replied, ''You can draw
any number of inferences from it, including the fact that he didn't want to go
to Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOUP-EASY, VERSATILE AND ROBUST

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Living Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


Jacques Pepin is a teacher, chef and the author of ''La Technique'' and ''La
Methode.''

By JACQUES PEPIN

THERE are few things as cordial and comforting on a chilly winter evening as a
bowl of steaming hot soup. A thick, heavy country soup has the distinctive
characteristic of warming you inside as well as outside - an important asset in
this time of energy shortage.

Soups are extremely versatile. Robust types, such as pot au feu, black bean
soup, Hanoi soup or garbure can be enjoyed as a main course, while cold soups
like vichyssoise, gazpacho, peach or cherry soups can be served as a first
course or even, in the case of the peach or cherry, as a dessert spooned on
slices of sponge cake.  Consomme, one of the most classic and sophisticated of
all soups, provides the ideal start for an elegant dinner, while onion soup is
the perfect after-theater or late-night supper.

Soups are generally inexpensive; they can accommodate many types of leftovers as
well as vegetable and meat odds and ends left in the refrigerator. For instance,
an inexpensive, flavorful soup can be made with only fish bones. Most soups can
be frozen or will at least keep a few days refrigerated. Sometimes they even
improve on reheating. Garnishes such as fresh herbs, croutons, grated cheese,
sour and heavy cream can enhance a concoction that is too weak.

Although certain soups are made with stock and simmered for long hours, most
soups can be made in one hour or less, using water instead of stock with
excellent results. In fact, in vegetable soup, as well as fish soup, the true
taste of the ingredients will come through better when water is used rather than
stock.

A soup can be made in only a few minutes using one or several vegetables,
depending on the richness of your larder. It can be made quickly because the
vegetables are grated and therefore do not require much cooking, and the
thickening is achieved with a starch that cooks almost instantly. Such a soup
has a freshness of taste often lost in soups that simmer for long hours.

Oatmeal soup is unusual but excellent, and particularly suited for brunch or
lunch. It takes less than 30 minutes to make, but if made ahead it will probably
thicken too much and should be thinned down with milk at serving time.

Garlic soup is ideal on a cold night. Although it is made with potatoes and a
lot of garlic, the pungency of the garlic disappears during cooking and the
addition of cream makes it smooth and velvety.

Oyster and corn chowder is a truly elegant soup that makes a splendid first
course for a formal dinner. The whole soup can be made ahead with the exception
of the oysters and corn, which should be added at the last minute to avoid
overcooking.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Jury May Disregard Story Garwood Told Psychiatrists

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 14


A military judge said today that jurors may disregard the story Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood told psychiatrists about his 14 years in Vietnam unless the marine
testifies in his court-martial.

Attorneys for Private Garwood said the Indiana native had not decided whether to
take the stand to rebut accusations that he deserted to the North Vietnamese
Communists and took up arms against fellow prisoners of war.

But the presiding judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, said in an interview that if Private
Garwood did not testify the jury could ''totally disregard'' his story as told
to psychiatrists and accept the testimony of several fellow prisoners of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Hail And Beware

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


The way we install our Presidents says something about the mythic nature of the
office. In Britain the winning party leader moves matter-of-factly into 10
Downing Street the day after the election.  We wait 75 days and then have a
republican coronation. The President is invested with the nation's dreams.

Inaugurations are also a time of political joy, and few more justifiably so than
this year's. When Ronald Reagan takes the oath on Tuesday next, a political
movement that has not been at the center of power in this country for fifty
years will have its chance again.  Even the wariest liberal should not begrudge
conservatives their exultation - or exclude the possibility that this
conservative experiment will have its value.

But if Reagan is a sensible man, he will be wary of both the ceremonial and the
political visions of glory. For they may produce hubris, the sense of
overweening power that leads to a fall. And what has happened to the Presidency
in recent times makes hubris a particular danger.

To an extent unimaginable a generation ago, Americans look to Washington - to
the Federal Government -for solution of their problems. Washington is expected
to rescue failing automobile companies, make a college education possible for
middle-class children, save New York City from bankruptcy, stop crime in the
streets: formidable tasks and none of them, until recently, thought to be
Washington's responsibility.

And the public tends to personalize the responsibility in the President. He is
our one visible national political figure, so expectations run to him.
Television has accentuated the tendency.  When Americans see the President in
their living rooms, they naturally identify him even more as the one politician
who can help them.

But Presidents do not have power to match the expectations piled upon them.
There is a telling anecdote in Prof. Richard Neustadt's book, ''Presidential
Power,'' on the Presidency. Harry Truman, just before leaving office in 1953,
muses on how Dwight Eisenhower will find the job: ''He'll sit here, and he'll
say, 'Do this! Do that!' And nothing will happen.'' If anything, the frustration
has grown worse since then. Because of Vietnam, Congress has hemmed in the one
area where Presidents used to have discretion: foreign policy.

With all that in mind, a new President should above all avoid suggesting, much
less believing, that he can meet all the great challenges facing Americans. He
should beware hubris.

Recent Presidencies have left fateful examples. John Kennedy moved us in his
inaugural address. But it came to be remembered, perhaps unfairly, for that one
overreaching passage in its rhetoric: ''We shall pay any price, bear any burden,
meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe ....'' The fall came a few
months later at the Bay of Pigs. Kennedy learned that inspiration and power were
complicated matters.

Lyndon Johnson succumbed to hubris. Succeeding to the Presidency in tragic
circumstances, he did wonders with Congress. Then he won a huge election victory
- and thought he had the power to shape events not only in America but in
Vietnam. Oedipus provided no more searing an example of self-destruction.

What caused Richard Nixon to destroy himself is still too dark and tormented to
understand. But we do know that his one-sided victory in 1972 had perverse
effects. Instead of moving him to generosity, it seemed to turn him even more
defensively inward. He called for the resignation of all his Cabinet and staff,
and he sank into the gutter soliloquies of the Watergate tapes.

Gerald Ford is not a man we associate with hubris. Yet just a month after taking
office with the reassuring words, ''Our great Republic is a Government of laws
and not of men,'' he spurned the claims of law and pardoned Nixon. In the bare
sense the act was within his power. But the sudden, unexplained way he used the
power did him fatal political damage.

There was a lesson, too, if not so stark or personal, in Jimmy Carter's
beginning. His first big legislative venture was his 1977 energy program. He put
it together in haste and secrecy, and presented it as a package solution to the
country's most pressing set of problems: one that he asked Congress to swallow
whole. Life does not work that way in Washington, and it does Presidents no good
to pretend to such omniscience.

Ronald Reagan does not seem a man likely to take himself too seriously. Despite
some fierce rhetoric, he was an easygoing Governor of California, in operating
practice as well as personal style. He is kidded for working an eight-hour day,
but doing that as President might be good for him and us in limiting pretensions
that he can do it all.

But the pressures of expectation are high in the White House, and Reagan will
feel them as others have. If he feels a lofty promise coming on, an illusion of
power, he ought to remember the parting advice of President Carter's counsel,
Lloyd Cutler:

''I would warn him against shoring up the natural tendency of all of us,
including the media, to believe that the President can solve all of our
problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Worth Fighting For

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


The confirmation hearings on the nomination of General Alexander Haig to be
Secretary of State were good for Haig, good for the Senate and good for the
country.

The issue has never been whether Al Haig would be confirmed, but how he would
conduct himself under fire. The hearings were a test of nerve rather than depth.
To use a media measurement, the four-star general rated three stars.

His worst moment was one he probably thinks was among his best: the
oh-what-a-sacrifice-I'm-making pitch of a man who is trading the opportunity to
make money for the opportunity to wield power.

General Haig and his supporters on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee made
much of the estimate that the nominee was giving up some nine million dollars in
salary and options (assuming his company would not be raided, he would not be
fired, and the value of his stock would go up).

I don't know what gets into Republicans when they take Government jobs; all too
often, they think the public owes them gratitude and gentle confirmation
treatment because they have temporarily placed power above money. General Haig
was not drafted for this job, he campaigned hard for it. Henry Kissinger would
gladly give up his book royalties for the real royalty of cabinet office, where
the Secretary of State travels and entertains more lavishly than any mere
millionaire.

On substantive matters, Haig handled himself well: at this stage, the fuzziness
of a platitude attitude is to be hailed, because it is not for one man -or one
department - to set or articulate the specifics of U.S. foreign policy. Haig's
refusal to make premature policy pronouncements in the guise of personal beliefs
is welcome: let the President speak first on the big issues. Later, his
Secretary of State can fill in the details.

On Watergate, he emulated the attitude of the Confederate General Thomas J.
Jackson (''There stands Jackson like a stone wall - rally to the Virginians!'').
On one level, the questions from liberal Democrats were politically vindictive:
Senator Paul

Sarbanes, the leading whitewasher of the Carter Justice Department, tried to get
the former Nixon chief of staff to assert that he had been the willing occupant
of a moral sewer.

Haig resisted, and rightly so; we have learned since 1973 that many of the
abuses of power discovered then had been quietly perpetrated in two previous
Administrations. No longer does service in the Nixon White House require a plain
Republican sackcloth coat: Haig's ''Nobody has a monopoly on virtue, not even
you, Senator'' was a useful reminder of the ambiguities of double-standardized
investigations.

But ''nobody's perfect'' was not enough. On a deeper level, Haig could not
avoid, as he tried mightily to avoid, the obligation to declare that he realized
that lying and spying within anybody's White House was and is wrong.

His longtime friend and counsel, Joe Califano, prevailed on his client to issue
a much-needed written statement after the confrontation with the Mayors of
Culpa. Only then did Haig label the break-in and coverup ''improper, illegal and
immoral'' and publicly embrace ''the values of freedom, liberty, privacy,
justice, the rule of law....'' (Thanks for the insertion of ''privacy,'' Joe.)

Unnoticed in Haig's necessary nod to constitutionality was a defense of what
doves have derogated as ''the Christmas bombing'' of North Vietnam in 1972, a
military action that Haig stated ''was essential to concluding the peace
negotiations and achieving the return of American prisoners of war.'' Those last
nine words, which I suspect were personally drafted by Haig, were intended to
contrast that policy with the policy of appeasement in Iran.

In his defiant apology for Watergate, and in his balancing nonapology for
Vietnam, Haig provided a cathartic for an era - that time in the mid-70's when
the nation was debilitated from too many cathartics.

Will Mr. Nixon permit unheard portions of the horror-show tapes to be played in
the future? Don't count on it; as one old Nixon hand said, only
half-facetiously, ''He learned his lesson from not burning the tapes; he'll burn
the subpoena.''

Will Al Haig, a good soldier in more ways than one, make a good diplomat? We'll
see. His most important response in the hearings was a line that would have
created a political firestorm only a few years ago: ''There are more important
things than peace - there are things which we Americans must be willing to fight
for.''

If that truth can be conveyed to superpower and terrorist alike, much bloodshed
will be avoided. The unsayable has been said, and not in a jingo-istic way. Both
the new Haig and the new Senate Foreign Relations Committee bear watching, but
this week both were off to a good start.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Jerry Rubin to Direct Development at Muir

BYLINE: By Leonard Sloane

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


Jerry Rubin, the former Yippie and Chicago Seven defendant who surprised many
who knew him by taking a job on Wall Street six months ago with John Muir &
Company, has been promoted to director of business development of the brokerage
firm. Sounding like a born and bred capitalist, he spoke yesterday about his
plans in his new post.

''I hope to actively communicate the opportunities that John Muir presents to
the economy, to the entrepreneur and to the investor,'' Mr. Rubin asserted.
''Using my knowledge of the media and my communications abilities, I hope to
effectively communicate.''

Mr. Rubin, 42,, was an early protester against the Vietnam War and was a member
of a group that threw dollar bills from the visitors' gallery to the trading
floor of the New York Stock Exchange about 13 years ago. Last week he passed the
joint Big Board-Nationl Association of Securities Dealers examination to qualify
as a registered securities salesman.

''From July until a month ago, I did nothing but study,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''I
went to the New York Institute of Finance. I felt I learned a tremendous amount
and I'm still learning.''

Does Mr. Rubin believe that his experience - which includes a stint as a
reporter for The Cincinnati Post and Times Star, the authorship of four books
and lecturing on college campuses - qualifies him for his new position as head
of Muir's advertising, public relations and marketing? ''I think the process of
being active in current events and basically trying to improve the country
reveals a commitment I still have,'' he replied. ''I think the talents I had
then I still have.''

When Mr. Rubin joined Muir, he wrote, ''Welcome, Wall Street, here I come!''
Yesterday he added: ''I've really been an entrepreneur all my life. Many people
say I've been an excellent promoter. I think a promoter is essentially a
communicator.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jerry Rubin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DOWN-HOME FARE AND POLICE SHOWS

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


SHUCKS. Television is going folksy this weekend, with a down-home new comedy
series, ''Harper Valley P.T.A.,'' tonight at 8 on Channel 4 and a two-hour
country music extravaganza (''Country Countdown,'' tomorrow night at 8:30 on
Channel 11). Does this constitute a trend?  It does not. But it may indicate,
correctly, that the country shows were available for preview, whereas a new
detective series (''Nero Wolfe,'' tonight at 9 on NBC), a new cop show
(''Walking Tall,'' tomorrow at 9 P.M. on NBC), and another new cop show (''Hill
Street Blues,'' tomorrow at 10 P.M. on NBC) were not. Had these programs been on
hand at press time, they might well have constituted a trend of their own.

In the meantime, ''Harper Valley P.T.A.'' is no trend-setter, or at least so one
might hope. Barbara Eden stars in this half-hour sit-com (with the ''com'' used
very liberally) that manages to be even staler than the song that inspired it.
Miss Eden plays Stella Johnson, who in this first episode scandalizes the staid
Harper Valley by running around in her scanties. ''Once again, Stella Johnson is
lowering standards and raising temperatures,'' says a Harper Valley wag, with
typical wit.

The episode begins early one morning as Stella locks herself out of her house,
wearing baby doll pajamas and fluffy little slippers.  Well! Along comes the
mayor, played by George Gobel, walking down the street with only canned laughter
to accompany him. ''Where you goin' at 7 o'clock?'' Stella asks. ''I'm goin'
home for dinner,'' the mayor replies. ''But it's 7 in the morning!'' says
Stella. ''That's why the sun is out!,'' the mayor replies, drawing an even
bigger laugh than he got for just walking.

When the mayor tries to help Stella climb in a window, a compromising picture is
taken and Harper Valley is duly shocked.  Stella's reputation is ruined, as it
undoubtedly will be ruined every week that the show lasts. So she gets even by
selling the women of the town a makeup that glows in the dark. When they arrive
at her house to protest, gleaming and fuming, Stella says ''You know, it's a lot
easier to clean up a face than a reputation.''

After this, perhaps so that ''Harper Valley P.T.A.'' will not be mistaken for a
program of moral fiber, Stella @good-naturedly works in a carnival booth, being
dunked into a pool of water by anyone interested in seeing her in a wet T-shirt.
That turns out to be the entire male population of the town.

''Country Countdown'' features the top 35 country songs of 1980 and the
performers who recorded them. Are all of these songs, beginning with No. 35 and
ending with No. 1, to be sung in their entirety? It's a two-hour show, and that
would make about an hour and 40 minutes of music, not counting commercials, so
perhaps it would have been possible to feature all the songs. But George Jones,
heard singing ''He Stopped Loving Her Today'' (No. 6), gets as far as the fifth
word before he is cut off to make room for No. 5, and that's the way some parts
of the program go. Others merely repeat footage from other shows, with Kenny
Rogers's appearance, for example, taken from his recent special.

So where does ''Country Countdown'' spend its time? Visiting with the stars, in
part. The host, Dennis Weaver, turns up in Merle Haggard's California home for
an interview, informing us that the den is called ''Hag's Place.'' Then Hag
comes along and introduces Tuffy, his Chihuahua. He - Hag, not Tuffy - also
makes a few comments, like ''all of a sudden, the things that cowboys like are
the fad now - such as patriotism.'' And he suggests that Mr. Weaver ''come back
sometime when you're not so busy. We'll go fishin'.''

Mr. Weaver, not to be outdone in the down-home department, fills the show with
friendly, upbeat chatter. ''It's been a great year for me, Dennis, and I'm
really looking forward to 1981,'' says Tanya Tucker in response to one of Mr.
Weaver's hard-hitting queries.  Ronnie Milsap, who appears a couple of times, is
introduced as ''another fella who's quite a guy,'' and just about everyone who
shows up is said to have had ''an outstandin' year.'' Mr. Weaver also confides
that if the Good Lord had asked him whose voice he'd want to sing with, it would
be Don Williams's voice. However, the voice is still in Mr. Williams's
possession as he sings ''I Believe In You,'' the No. 2 song, and the show winds
toward a conclusion that is overdue.

The No. 1 song? It's ''Driving My Life Away,'' by Eddie Rabbitt, for anyone
who'd rather not wait two hours to find out.

On Sunday at 10 P.M., Channel 13 will offer ''El Salvador: Another Vietnam?'' a
tough, disturbing documentary made by Glenn Silber. The hour-long program
includes interviews with President Jose Napoleon Duarte, with Roman Catholic
church figures (among them Terence Cardinal Cooke of New York and Archbishop
Arturo Rivera Damas of El Salvador), with representatives of the Office of Human
Rights and the State Department. It also includes footage of an interview with
Ita Ford, one of the American nuns recently murdered in El Salvador, and with
Melida Roper, president of the Maryknoll Sisters, the order from which Sister
Ford came.

Mr. Silber's footage is quite diverse, ranging from schoolchildren singing a
Christmas song about United States intervention, to scenes in a valley where, a
Salvadoran says, 15 to 20 bodies are found each week. President Duarte and Col.
Jose Guillermo Garcia are questioned about the role of the military in such
proceedings, and Colonel Garcia, the director of the National Security Forces,
maintains that his men ''carry out purely security responsiblities, as their
name implies.'' This is contrasted by the account of a mother who identified her
son, an accountant she says had no political ties, after another woman saw him
carried off on a bus by ''the men in green.''

The documentary also includes criticism of President Duarte's policy of agrarian
reform, which according to a University of Wisconsin agricultural economist is
regarded with much skepticism by the people of El Salvador. There is also grim
footage of those who have died violently. Mr. Silber paints a cogent and
alarming picture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dennis Weaver

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood's Defense Rests Without Calling Him

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 204 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 16


The defense rested its case today in the court-martial of Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood, the only American serviceman to be charged with collaboration with the
enemy in Vietnam.

The 34-year-old marine, who has not testified in his own behalf, faces the
possibility of life imprisonment, dishonorable discharge and loss of $146,000 in
pay and benefits if convicted of charges of desertion and collaboration.

The defense was able to limit the introduction of information from what it
called ''highly prejudicial'' letters that Private Garwood was said to have
written to Vietnamese acquaintances while he was held captive in 1968 and 1969.
The prosecution said that Private Garwood wrote that American soldiers fired at
him as he called to them with a bullhorn from outside their base camp and
encouraged them to lay down their arms.

The proceedings are scheduled to resume Tuesday, when the prosecution is
expected to present testimony from Government psychiatrists. Defense
psychiatrists have contended that Private Garwood was driven insane by
isolation, torture and deprivation in his 14 years after being captured outside
Da Nang in 1965.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM PRESIDENT'S LAST MESSAGE TO CONGRESS ON THE STATE OF THE UNION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2863 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


Following are excerpts from President Carter's written State of the Union
Message to Congress, issued by the White House today:

The State of the Union is sound. Our economy is recovering from a recession. A
national energy plan is in place and our dependence on foreign oil is
decreasing. We have been at peace for four uninterrupted years.

But, our nation has serious problems. Inflation and unemployment are
unacceptably high. The world oil market is trouble spots throughout the world,
and 53 American hostages are being held in Iran against international law and
against every precept of human affairs.

However, I firmly believe that, as a result of the progress made in so many
domestic and international areas over the past four years, our nation is
stronger, wealthier, more compassionate and freer than it was four years ago. I
am proud of that fact. And I believe the Congress should be proud as well, for
so much of what has been accomplished over the past four years has been due to
the hard work, insights and cooperation of Congress. I applaud the Congress for
its efforts and its achievements.

In this State of the Union Message I want to recount the achievements and
progress of the last four years and to offer recommendations to the Congress for
this year. While my term as President will end before the 97th Congress begins
its work in earnest, I hope that my recommendations will serve as a guide for
the direction this country should take so we build on the record of the past
four years.

- Almost all of our comprehensive energy programs have been enacted, and the
Department of Energy has been established to administer the program.

- Confidence in the Government's integrity has been restored, and respect for
the Government's openness and fairness has been renewed.

- The Government has been made more effective and efficient: The Civil Service
system was completely reformed for the first time this century; 14
reorganization initiatives have been proposed to the Congress, approved and
implemented; two new Cabinet departments have been created to consolidate and
streamline the Government's handling of energy and education problems;
inspectors general have been placed in each Cabinet department to combat fraud,
waste and other abuses; the regulatory process has been reformed through
creation of the Regulatory Council, elimination of unnecessary regulation and
passage of the Regulatory Flexibility Act; procedures have been established to
assure citizen participation in Government, and the airline, trucking, rail and
communications industries are being deregulated.

- Critical social problems, many long ignored by the Federal Government, have
been addressed directly. An urban policy was developed and implemented to
reverse the decline in our urban areas; the Social Security System was
refinanced to put it on a sound financial basis; the Humphrey-Hawkins Full
Employment Act was enacted; Federal assistance for education was expanded by
more than 75 percent; the minimum wage was increased to levels needed to ease
the effects of inflation; affirmative action has been pursued aggressively -
more blacks, Hispanics and women have been appointed to senior Government
positions and to judgeships than at any other time in our history; the E.R.A.
(equal rights amendment) ratification deadline was extended to aid the
ratification effort, and minority business procurement by the Federal Government
has more than doubled.

- The nation's first sectoral policies were put in place, for the auto and steel
industries, with my Administration demonstrating the value of cooperation
between the Government, business and labor.

- Reversing previous trends, real defense spending has increased every year
since 1977; the real increase in fiscal year 1980 defense spending is well above
3 percent and I expect fiscal year 1981 defense spending to be even higher.

- The NATO Alliance has proven its unity in responding to the situations in
Eastern Europe and Southwest Asia and in agreeing on the issues to be addressed
in the review of the Helsinki Final Act currently underway in Madrid.

- The peace process in the Middle East established at Camp David and by the
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel is being buttressed on two fronts: steady
progress in the normalization of EgyptianIsraeli relations in many fields, and
the commitment of both Egypt and Israel, with United States' assistance, to see
through to successful conclusion the autonomy negotiations for the West Bank and
Gaza.

- The Panama Canal treaties have been put into effect, which has helped to
improve relations with Latin America.

- We have continued this nation's strong commitment to the pursuit of human
rights throughout the world, evenhandedly and objectively; our commitment to a
worldwide human rights policy has remained firm, and many other countries have
given high priority to it.

- Our resolve to oppose aggression, such as the illegal invasion of the Soviet
Union into Afghanistan, has been supported by tough action.

Ensuring Economic Strength

During the last decade our nation has withstood a series of economic shocks
unprecedented in peacetime.  The economy has proved to be remarkably resilient.
Real output has grown at an average rate of 3 percent per year since I took
office, and employment has grown by 10 percent. We have added about 8 million
productive private sector jobs to the economy. However, unacceptably high
inflation - the most difficult economic problem I have faced - persists.

Calls for Budget Restraint

This inflation, which threatens the growth, productivity and stability of our
economy, requires that we restrain the growth of the budget to the maximum
extent consistent with national security and human compassion. I have done so in
my earlier budgets, and in my fiscal year 1982 budget. However, while restraint
is essential to any appropriate economic policy, high inflation cannot be
attributed solely to government spending. The growth in budget outlays has been
more the result of economic factors than the cause of them.

We are now in the early stages of economic recovery following a short recession.
Typically, a post-recessionary period has been marked by vigorous economic
growth aided by antirecessionary policy measures such as large tax cuts or big,
stimulation spending programs. I have declined to recommend such actions to
stimulate economic activity, because the persistent inflationary pressures that
beset our economy today dictate a restrained fiscal policy.

Accordingly, I am asking the Congress to postpone until January 1, 1982, the
personal tax reductions I had earlier proposed to take effect on January 1 of
this year.

However, my 1982 budget proposes significant tax changes to increase the sources
of financing for business investment. While emphasizing the need for continued
fiscal restraint, this budget takes the first major step in a long-term tax
reduction program designed to increase capital formation.

The failure of our nation's capital stock to grow at a rate that keeps pace with
its labor force has clearly been one cause of our productivity slowdown. Higher
investment rates are also critically needed to meet our nation's energy needs,
and to replace energyinefficient plants and equipment with new energy-saving
physical plants. The level of investment that is called for will not occur in
the absence of policies to encourage it.

Therefore, my budget proposes a major liberalization of tax allowances for
depreciation, as well as simplified depreciation accounting, increasing the
allowable rates by about 40 percent.

The 1982 Budget

The fiscal year 1982 budget I have sent to the Congress continues our four-year
policy of prudence and restraint.  In 1976, before I took office, the budget
deficit equaled 4 percent of gross national product. It had been cut to 2.3
percent in the 1980 fiscal year just ended. My 1982 budget contains a deficit
estimated to be less than 1 percent of our gross national product.

The rate of growth in Federal spending has been held to a minimum.
Nevertheless, outlays are still rising more rapidly than many had anticipated,
the result of many powerful forces in our society:

Sees Threat to Security

We face a threat to our security, as events in Afghanistan, the Middle East and
Eastern Europe make clear. We have a steadily aging population and, as a result,
the biggest single increase in the Federal budget is the rising cost of
retirement programs, particularly Social Security. We face other important
domestic needs: to continue responsibility for the disadvantaged; to provide the
capital needed by our cities and our transportation systems; to protect our
environment; to revitalize American industry, and to increase the export of
American goods and services so essential to the creation of jobs and a trade
surplus.

Yet the Federal Government itself may not always be the proper source of such
assistance. For example, it must not usurp functions if they can be more
appropriately decided upon, managed and financed by the private sector or by
state and local governments. My Administration has always sought to consider the
proper focus of responsibility for the most efficient resolution of problems.

PICKUP ADD

Enhancing National Security - American Military Strength

The maintenance of national security is my first concern, as it has been for
every President before me.  We must have both the military power and the
political will to deter our adversaries and to support our friends and allies.

The U.S.-Soviet Relationship

We are demonstrating to the Soviet Union across a broad front that it will pay a
heavy price for its aggression in terms of our relationship. The Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan and the imposition of a puppet government have highlighted in the
starkest terms the darker side of their policies - going well beyond competition
and the legitimate pursuit of national interest, and violating all norms of
international law and practice.

Bilateral Communication

U.S.-Soviet relations remain strained by the continued Soviet presence in
Afghanistan, by growing Soviet military capabilities and by the Soviets'
apparent willingness to use those capabilities without respect for the most
basic norms of international behavior.

But the U.S.-Soviet relationship remains the single most important element in
determining whether there will be war or peace.

Poland

Now, as was the case a year ago, the prospect of Soviet use of force threatens
the international order. The Soviet Union has completed preparations for a
possible military intervention against Poland. Although the situation in Poland
has shown signs of stabilizing recently, Soviet forces remain in a high state of
readiness and they could move into Poland on short notice. We continue to
believe that the Polish people should be allowed to work out their internal
problems themselves, without outside interference, and we have made clear to the
Soviet leadership that any intervention in Poland would have severe and
prolonged consequences for East-West detente, and U.S.-Soviet relations in
particular.

Defense Budget

The Soviet Union has built a war machine far beyond any reasonable requirements
for their own defense and security. In contrast, our own defense spending
declined in real terms every year from 1968 through 1976.

We have reversed this decline in our own effort. Every year since 1976 there has
been a real increase in our defense spending, and our lead has encouraged
increases by our allies. With the support of the Congress, we must and will make
an even greater effort in the years ahead.

The fiscal year 1982 budget would increase funding authority for defense to more
than $196 billion. This amount, together with a supplemental request for fiscal
year 1981 of about $6 billion, will more than meet my Administration's pledge
for a sustained growth of 3 percent in real expenditures and provides for 5
percent in program growth in fiscal year 1982 and beyond.

The trends we mean to correct cannot be remedied overnight; we must be willing
to see this program through. To ensure that we do so I am setting a growth rate
for defense that we can sustain over the long haul.

The Human Dimension of Foreign Policy

Human Rights

1980 has been a year of some disappointments, but has also seen some positive
developments in the ongoing struggle for fulfillment of human rights throughout
the world. In the year we have seen:

- Free elections were held and democratic governments installed in Peru,
Dominica and Jamaica. Honduras held a free election for installation of a
constituent assembly. An interim government was subsequently named pointing
toward national presidential elections in 1981. Brazil continues on its course
of political liberalization.

- The ''Charter of Conduct'' signed in Riobamba, Ecuador, by Ecuador, Colombia,
Venezuela, Peru, Costa Rica, Panama and Spain affirms the importance of
democracy and human rights for the Andean countries.

- The Organization of American States, in its annual General Assembly, approved
a resolution in support of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission's work.
The resolution took note of the Commission's annual report, which described the
status of human rights in Chile, El Salvador, Paraguay and Uruguay, and the
special reports on Argentina and Haiti, which described human rights conditions
as investigated during on-site inspections to these countries.

The United States, of course, cannot take credit for all these various
developments. But we can take satisfaction in knowing that our policies
encourage and perhaps influence them.

Those who see a contradiction between our security and our humanitarian
interests forget that the basis for a secure and stable society is the bond of
trust between a government and its people.

Humanitarian Aid

The United States has continued to play its traditional role of safe haven for
those who flee or are forced to flee their homes because of persecution or war.
During 1980, the United States provided resettlement opportunities for 216,000
refugees from countries arund the globe. In addition, the United States joined
with other nations to provide relief to refugees in country of first asylum in
Africa, the Middle East and Asia.

The great majority of refugee admissions continued to be from Indochina. During
1980, 168,000 Indochinese were resettled in the United States. Although refugee
populations persist in camps in Southeast Asia, and refugees continue to flee
Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea, the flow is not as great as in the past.

In addition to the refugees admitted last year, the United States accepted for
entry into the United States 125,000 Cubans who were expelled by Fidel Castro.
Federal and state authorities, as well as private voluntary agencies, responded
with unprecedented vigor to coping with the unexpected influx of Cubans.

Major relief efforts to aid refugees in countries of first asylum continued in
several areas of the world. In December 1980, 32 nations, meeting in New York
City, agreed to contribute $65 million to the continuing famine relief program
in Kampuchea.

It cannot be ignored that the destructive and aggressive policies of the Soviet
Union have added immeasurably to the suffering in these three tragic situations.


The Control of Nuclear Weapons

We have been proceeding on a number of fronts:

- First, we have been seeking to encourage nations to accede to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty. The U.S. is also actively encouraging other nations to
accept full-scope safeguards on all of their nuclear activities and is asking
other nuclear suppliers to adopt a fullscope safeguards requirement as a
condition for future supply.

- Second, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (I.N.F.C.E.), which
was completed in 1980, demonstrated that suppliers and recipients can work
together on these technically complex and sensitive issues. While differences
remain, the I.N.F.C.E. effort provides a broader international basis for
national decisions which must balance energy needs with nonproliferation
concerns.

- Finally, we are working to encourage regional cooperation and restraint.
Protocol I of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which will contribute to the lessening
of nuclear dangers for our Latin American neighbors, ought now to be ratified by
the United States Senate.

Limitations on Strategic Arms

I remain convinced that the SALT II Treaty is in our nation's security interest
and that it would add significantly to the control of nuclear weapons. I
strongly support continuation of the SALT process and the negotiation of more
far-reaching mutual restraints on nuclear weaponry.

Conclusion

We have new support in the world for our purposes of national independence and
individual human dignity. We have a new will at home to do what is required to
keep us the strongest nation on earth.

We must move together into this decade with the strength which comes from
realization of the dangers before us and from the confidence that together we
can overcome them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Carter

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STORM KING SETTLEMENT WAS RIGHT FOR CON ED

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


To the Editor:

As president of the Hudson River Fishermen's Association, I never thought I
would defend Chairman Charles Luce of Con Edison, but the ignorant and reckless
assertions by Alexander Muller (letter Jan. 3) demand a rebuttal. Mr. Muller, a
Con Ed stockholder and customer, seeks to have Mr. Luce censured for
''unconditional surrender'' to ''environmental extremists'' in settling the
Hudson power plant issues. Such muddle-headed charges are ridiculous.

For 17 years, Federal authorities, who examined witness after witness under
oath, upheld our objections that the proposed Storm King plant would wreak
biological devastation upon the Hudson.

Con Edison faced at least another 10 years of litigation, with no prospects of
winning and building the plant. Mr. Luce - wisely, in the opinion of all
involved in the settlement - finally decided to stop throwing good money after
bad in a financial Vietnam.

Moreover, by agreeing to give up on Storm King and to modify operations at
existing plants on the river, Mr. Luce and his counterparts at other utilities
using Hudson water achieved their objective in not having to build cooling
towers, a fight they had been losing. At Indian Point alone, cooling towers
would have cost $300 million to construct and $90 million a year to operate,
costs that would have been borne by rate-payers, Mr. Muller among them.
ROBERT H. BOYLE, Cold Spring, N.Y., Jan. 4, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Is Left Out of Parley

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 77 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Jan. 17


A spokesman for India's External Affairs Ministry said today that Cambodia had
not been invited to next month's meeting of foreign ministers of nations calling
themselves nonaligned. He said that India, which recognizes the Vietnam
-installed regime in Cambodia, was abiding by the nonaligned nations' 1979
decision to keep the question of Cambodian representation in the organization
open.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INMATES IN 60'S TEST OF A POISON SOUGHT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Jan. 17


The Federal Environmental Protection Agency is searching for 70 former inmates
of Ho@l@m@e@sburg Prison here who received applications of the virulent poison
and carcinogen dioxin in testing by the Dow Chemical Company from 1964 through
1967.

But all records have apparently been lost or destroyed, none of the men have
been found and, according to Anne Lindsay, a staff assistant in E.P.A.'s
Washington headquarters, ''We're not at all sure what we're going to be able to
do.''

Information about the Holmesburg tests, apparently an unusual instance of human
exposure to controlled doses of dioxin, would be invaluable in resolving the
question of how safe the poison is when used in herbicides. Its safety has been
questioned in a lawsuit by Vietnam Veterans Against the Federal Government and
Chemical Companies, contending that their exposure to the defoliant Agent
Orange, which contains dioxin, produced tumors and other ailments in them and
birth defects in their children.

Dr. Albert M. Kligman of the University of Pennsylvania conducted two series of
dioxin tests at Ho@l@m@e@sburg Prison under a $10,000 contract with Dow, its
manufacturer. The existence of the tests was disclosed in testimony at an
environmental agency hearing on other herbicides two months ago.

Availability of Records

Dr. Kligman could not be reached for comment. But an E.P.A.  investigator, who
asked not to be identified, said that Dr. Kligman had told the department that
he did not keep records for such a long period.

Dow ordered the tests after an outbreak in 1964 of the skin disease among
workers at its herbicide plant in Midland, Mich. Forty-nine employees developed
chloracne, a skin disease characterized by a distinctive pattern of blackheads.

In 1966, testimony at the environmental hearings disclosed, Dr.  Kligman
administered small doses of from 0.2 to 16 micrograms of dioxin to 60 prisoners.
No one suffered reactions.

The following year, Dr. Kligman applied much greater dosages of 7,500 micrograms
to the skin of 10 prisoners every other day for a month. Eight of those subjects
developed inflamed lesions of chloracne lasting from four to seven months. It is
those 10 the environmental agency is particularly interested in finding.

Since published reports last week disclosed the dioxin tests, said Janet Luffy,
press officer for the agency's office in Philadelphia, the agency has received
''a lot of calls from prisoners, probation officers, wives.'' ''But we haven't
found any of the prisoners,'' she added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Art View;
TWO POLEMICISTS RESPOND TO THE MOOD OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Hilton Kramer

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1419 words


The way art responds to the historical mood of the times, and even to certain
specific events of the times, is bound to vary greatly in a culture like ours,
which places a high value on subjective expression and lacks, in any event, the
sort of tradition that allows art to deal with public themes in an impersonal or
conventional manner. For an artist to address his work to the historical mood,
therefore, requires a prior decision about style. His attitude toward style will
determine not only the formal attributes of the work but his attitude toward his
subject. Most especially will it determine the degree of polemical intensity he
brings to it.

No living painter now invests his work with a more heated polemical intensity
than Peter Saul. This is not necessarily a compliment, but it is certainly a
distinction. Early on in a career that began in the 1960's he chose to work in a
fiery-tempered cartoon style that called for violent subjects and lurid effects.
The history of the last two decades has been gruesomely efficient in supplying
him with the former, and his own proficiency has made steady progress in
developing the latter. As a painter he now has few equals -and indeed, few
rivals - in conjuring up images of what he himself describes as ''violence and
gore.'' If there is such a thing as the pornography of violence, then Mr. Saul
is unquestionably its painter-laureate.

Nothing is more obvious in his work than the rage that animates it. To whom, or
to what, this rage is addressed is not easily determined, however. In the new
paintings he is currently showing at the Allan Frumkin Gallery, 50 West 57th
Street (through Jan. 30), there is a mural-size canvas called ''Subway''
depicting a train wreck that has turned into a phantasmagoria of police
violence. Smaller paintings on paper give us equally unappetizing accounts of
''The Rapist'' and ''The Arsonist.'' Even the painting called ''Young
Executive'' metes out its disproportionate punishments to the flesh and the
spirit. Its emotional violence is so excessive for its banal subject, in fact,
that it seems more an attribute of the painter's sensibility than an essential
aspect of his theme.

Is Mr. Saul a political artist, then? I suppose, in some sense, he is. He once
gave us pictures of the Vietnam War that were not very different from ''Subway''
or ''The Rapist'' in their obsession with blood, guns, sex and the mutilation of
the flesh. In the current exhibition there is the requisite entry on the ''Three
Mile Island'' theme, too - though, by Mr. Saul's standards, this is a remarkably
benign fantasy. The imagination of disaster seems to have failed him here. But
generally there is no shortage of liberal piety in his work. Yet it is sometimes
difficult to make out exactly what political point of view is being upheld here.
In ''Subway,'' the victims are made to look quite as repulsive as their
executioners, and in all of Mr. Saul's work there is an abundance of the kind of
racial stereotypes once associated with publications of the extreme Right. If
there is a political line in this art, it may only be the politics of paranoia.

However we may want to interpret the politics of this art, its sense of rage is
unmistakable and overwhelming. But it is not, I think, a rage primarily
addressed to the social themes it exploits with so much flashy virtuosity. It is
a rage directed, above all, at the art public. Mr. Saul has said as much
himself. He is out to shock the jaded art public - to awaken us, as rudely as
possible, to the notion that there may be something more important for art to do
than look attractive and benign in an art gallery. There is a ferocious mockery
of the purely esthetic in his work, and this mockery determines the artist's
attitude toward art as much as it shapes his attitude toward politics.

For this reason, Mr. Saul's best pictures (not included here) are the wicked
parodies he has made of other artists -among them, Francis Bacon and Willem de
Kooning and Picasso as well as certain works of earlier masters. These parodies
are often very funny and very shrewd, yet they do not entirely escape being
cartoons - cartoons of style that mock the solemnity of the art experience. They
coarsen their subjects - deliberately, of course. But this coarsening costs the
artist something; it leaves his art somewhat reduced in scope. In the end, its
polemical intensity is the only emotion that really counts, and all the
technical virtuosity that is brought into play seems a little orphaned, as if it
had no esthetic ground of its own to occupy. It is the final paradox of Mr.
Saul's art that all its rackety attention to public themes turns out to be
secondary to its style, yet its style remains hostage to a polemical impulse
that has no solid object of its own upon which to grow.

If the paintings of Peter Saul recall us to the Pop styles and populist
sentiments of the 60's, the new paintings of George McNeil - now on view at the
Gruenebaum Gallery, 38 East 57th Street (through Feb. 7) - take us even further
back, to the aspirations of the 40's when the esthetics of abstraction had not
yet severed its attachment to poetic symbols and the Expressionist preoccupation
with psychological archetypes and psychoanalytical myths. This, too, is painting
that registers a certain response to the historical mood of the times, but its
vision is inward and metaphorical. Its focus is not on the world ''out there,''
but on the inner life of the psyche.

For its account of this life it calls upon two standard resources of modernist
sensibility. One is the use of primitivist, or naive, drawing to conjure up an
imagery of figures, birds and other symbols of the unconscious. The other is
Expressionist facture - the creation of a busy, heaving, intensely painterly
surface. The former provides this art with an atmosphere of symbolic menace,
while the latter gives it a certain lyric freedom. The result is a style that
ought to look dated, but somehow doesn't. Color - applied in rough, jewel-like
encrustations - really sings in this painting, yet it never degenerates into a
mere decorative pattern. The emotion remains fresh and immediate.

Mr. McNeil, who next month will observe his 73d birthday, is a veteran of the
tradition in which he is now working so successfully.  He was one of the
founders of the American Abstract Artists group in 1936, and thus belongs to the
generation for whom the esthetics of abstraction was an article of faith, the
foundation upon which everything in art was to be based. What came to be
rejected in the 1940's was not abstraction itself, but its Utopian illusions -
the rationalist bias that elevated geometric form to an ideal paradigm of
worldly order. Whether from Surrealism or from psychoanalysis or some
combination of the two, a sense of the unconscious - a deliberate invocation of
irrationalist disorder -was cultivated as a means of gaining access to a more
authentic vein of feeling.

This, in any case, is the tradition in which Mr. McNeil works. It owes something
to Dubuffet's art brut, and it has certain affinities with the paintings of the
Cobra group founded in Europe after World War II - most especially, perhaps,
with the paintings of Asger Jorn.  A painting like ''Punk Rock'' in the current
exhibition is very close to Dubuffet, while certain others - ''Bactrain Birds,''
say, or ''The Encounter'' - are closer to Jorn. How interesting, by the way,
that Mr. McNeil should choose to paint a subject like punk rock - itself an
Expressionist phenomenon that (no doubt unconsciously) parodies the look and
manner of the Expressionist style.

To successfully revive this style, as Mr. McNeil has, is no small feat. But I
doubt if it signals a more general revival of the 40's esthetic. Mr. McNeil's
paintings have the look and feel of a ''late'' style - a style that summarizes
experience, a style that looks back, entrenching itself in its own premises and
reexploring its possibilities. It is painting that brings certain impulses to a
triumphant conclusion, finishing some of the unfinished business of the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of painting by McNeil

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOSTAGE CRISIS CRACKED U.S. MIRROR-AND THE WORLD'S

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1849 words


PARIS THE story of the American hostages in Iran was a peculiar episode in
United States and world history, not unique in itself, because the fate of
prisoners is one of the oldest recurrent dramas, but quite extraordinary in its
impact.

The first result - and it must not be forgotten because it was surely the motive
for the act - was the fall of the Bazargan Government in Teheran. An
international crisis developed duly and immediately. But only slowly came
widespread understanding that the arousal of emotional hostility to the United
States was a crucial element of Iranian revolutionary politics, not merely an
act of defiance or retribution and not at all the mindless, crazy gesture it
seemed.

The shock traveled much faster than perception of its purpose. For Americans, it
was an inexplicable affront and all the more frustrating because it appeared
pointless and out of all proportion to the presumed grievance, admission of the
dying, deposed Shah to the United States and to a New York hospital. To
governments everywhere and to millions of their people, it was an outrage, a
dangerous challenge to the fragile structure of international relations, which
rests on so little law and so much force and deceit. If even the essential code
of diplomatic immunity were to be flouted, how could there be reliance on any
kind of order except jungle violence, where mosquitoes were free to drive lions
wild?  Terrorism, attacks on and even murder of diplomats had become familiar
headlines. But this time it wasn't freelancers or rebels seeking explosive
attention, it was a regime accepted, if not admired, by the whole community of
nations.

The seizure of the embassy and the hostages brought an unpredictable, awesome
risk for countries in the area and countries that depend on the area for their
oily economic blood. If the United States reacted to the provocation militarily,
as the Iranian militants seem to have expected and even hoped, where would that
lead? Would the whole Persian Gulf take fire from the sparks? Would other
regimes be forced to take sides? Would the Russians intervene?

Feeling menaced by the Iranian precedent on one side and the possible American
response on the other, American allies accepted with a certain relief the United
States call to the United Nations Security Council and other ritual deplorings.
President Carter ordered nonstudying Iranian students deported - an emotionally
satisfying move to television viewers appalled by the hateful grimaces of the
self-styled students in front of the United States Embassy in Teheran, but one
that fizzled in a country that doesn't require identity cards and can't track
down illegal immigrants.
Puzzling and Sneering

Then he ordered a ban on oil from Iran and froze Iranian assets.  Some hostages
were freed, but after zealots seized the Grand Mosque at Mecca, there was a
sudden rise of tempers between much of Islam and the West. United States
embassies in Pakistan, Turkey, Bangladesh and India were attacked. Other
governments, trying to puzzle out the direction of events, began to worry about
the lack of forceful American action as much or more than about the danger of
it, and officials in various capitals took to private little sneers about how
much tougher they would have been. Israel's raid on Entebbe to free hijacked
plane passengers was a favorite comparison, though none suggested how the tactic
might have been applied to Teheran.

The focus was still on the deposed Shah as the supposed heart of the problem.
Mexico, where he had gone to live in exile, refused to readmit him. Panama gave
him temporary refuge in December 1979, and in March 1980 he was welcomed to
Egypt in a gesture of widely admired courage and courtesy by President Anwar
el-Sadat.

Gradually, Iranian militants, officials and assorted spokesmen, often
contradicting each other, shifted the emphasis of their tirades. There was only
a brief flurry of complaint that the United States had somehow colluded with
death in cheating the revolution of its most coveted victim when Mohammed Riza
Pahlevi died in Cairo in late July.

The factional infighting, the absence of decisive authority, and the importance
of the American hostages to Iranian politics grew more evident. The Iranians,
after the intoxication of revolutionary victory, were trying to organize a new
regime. Each stage was described as a kind of watershed, a period too critical
and politically delicate to permit consideration of the face-saving compromises
proposed by a series of would-be mediators. A new Constitution gave Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini supreme power for life. But it turned out he didn't want to
use his power to seek a settlement.

The United States called at the United Nations for sanctions on Iran, but the
Russians vetoed them. After some hesitation, Washington proclaimed economic
sanctions itself and urged its friends to do likewise. By then, mid-January
1980, the momentum of world reaction was ebbing. The invasion of Afghanistan had
provoked a new and far more direct international issue for America's allies to
consider. The hostage drama became familiar, the shock began to wear off and few
people elsewhere realized how deeply offended and infuriated the American public
remained.

Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, who as Foreign Minister and Finance Minister had issued
encouraging words about a possible settlement, was elected President and more
meetings were planned. But each time there appeared to be some chance of real
negotiations, nothing happened except to remind America of its failure and
increase its frustrations.

Sympathy soured into renewed allied carping about American performance of its
role in the world. The West argued about how to register protest over
Afghanistan. Again, sanctions were sought but limited mostly to United States
action, and attention was concentrated with little result on who would go to the
Moscow Olympics.

Diplomacy was spinning its wheels and nothing else was moving.  Then, suddenly
on April 25 came the almost incredible news of the United States rescue mission
aborted with casualties in the Iranian desert before a shot was fired. That was
a blow that thundered around the world. In foreign countries, people came up to
Americans to express their sorrow, but compassion had turned to pity and then
disdain. In the United States, there were recriminations over who was to blame
and what went wrong. Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, who had opposed the
operation, resigned.

The rest of the world, however, was stunned by the simple question of what it
meant about America, for two generations the model of modernity, efficiency,
technological expertise and, above all, the very symbol of military power. Was
it all a myth? Did the giant have clay feet up to its noggin? If American forces
couldn't even successfully launch the rescue of American hostages, was the
United States capacity to rescue allies still credible?

The questions were extravagant, but so was everything else about the story. It
looked more and more like Grand Guignol, awful but not to be taken all that
seriously by people with problems of their own.  As a consequence of the
American raid, the hostages were dispersed, ruling out any chance of a luckier
second rescue try but also demonstrating that their captors did not intend to
kill them.
Lurching and Sputtering

After that, the impasse was obvious. Iran lurched on through its endless
upheaval, a replay of the French revolution complete with reign of terror,
internal war with the Kurds, teetering struggles for power. Exchanges about
conditions for release of the hostages sputtered through the press, but no one
in Teheran seemed to have the authority and the will to make anything stick.

In September, a spate of border clashes between Iran and Iraq suddenly escalated
into full-scale war. Ayatollah Khomeini had been preaching export of
Iranian-style revolution around the Persian Gulf and doing what he could to
provoke the downfall of Iraq's President Saddam Hussein. After purges in the
army, continued chaos and signs of disillusion in Iran, the Baghdad leader
obviously thought a quick, fierce strike would topple the Ayatollah.

Iraq's aggression wasn't exactly a Bay of Pigs, but it had the same boomerang
effect of consolidating domestic support for the Teheran regime against the
foreign invader. Once again, there was a sense of looming global crisis. Efforts
to produce a cease-fire failed and the war still drags on fitfully. But so far
it has been contained and has not seriously disrupted the vital flow of oil from
the Persian Gulf.

Still, Iran began to hurt, and predictably found itself unable to drive out the
foe. Money and arms could no longer be brushed aside by mullahs as imperialist
concerns of little importance, and it mattered more that Iran found itself with
few friends in the world.

The war forced a tilt in perceptions and probably a tilt in the political battle
still being waged in Teheran. But that took time, and meanwhile the United
States was waging an election campaign. The hostages, the whole history of
policy toward Iran, were a domestic American issue. It was played with a
theatricality that advertised cynicism.

It isn't clear what factors influenced Teheran to go on toying with Washington's
hopes right through the elections, but the calculations evidently shifted when
it was settled that a new Administration would take office Jan. 20. Whoever
makes decisions in Teheran decided the time had come for an earnest attempt to
end the affair. There was still a try at bazaar bargaining on a scale of
billions. With the help of Algeria, the price was narrowed essentially to
release of the hostages in return for Iran's frozen assets.

In a way, that would restore the situation of 14 months ago for both sides.
There is still suspense. It will bring tremendous relief for Americans if the
hostages are home on Inauguration Day, providing a symbol of reconciliation and
of a fresh era after the elections.  But the whole incident leaves deep scars,
not only on IranianAmerican relations but on America's profile in the world.

It was one thing that the United States fought a war in Vietnam.  What does it
mean, however, that hatred of America should be an effective political weapon in
the internal struggles of a distant country? When the drama has finally ended
and the pains and passions subside, that question will have to be pondered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARBITRARY DATES, HARD CASH COUNTED MORE THAN ISLAMIC FERVOR;
WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2371 words


ONE of the worst aspects of the hostage crisis for Jimmy Carter was that for the
last 14 1/2 months of his Presidency, he often appeared as much a prisoner of
Iran as the 52 Americans held captive. If he succeeds, in the waning days and
hours of his office, in liberating them, he also will insure that Ronald Reagan
can start his term in office on Tuesday with a much freer hand, not only toward
the Persian Gulf region, but toward his overall foreign policy objectives, no
matter how imprecise they seem now.

Mr. Reagan is hardly likely to embrace the Iranians, whom he referred to last
month as ''barbarians'' because of their treatment of the hostages. But the end
of the crisis may, over time, open the way to a return to the situation that
existed in the months preceding the hostage takeover, when the Carter
Administration and the Bazargan Government were tentatively probing for a new
relationship, to replace the intimacy that existed under the Shah.

Among the chief side effects of the storming of the United States Embassy by the
radical mob on Nov. 4, 1979, it should be recalled, were not only the
estrangement of Iran from the United States and from most of the West, but also
the undermining of the power and prestige of the pragmatic politicians such as
Mehdi Bazargan who had just begun to open a dialogue with the United States.

Despite the ever-present radicalism in the Iranian Parliament, and the strident
rhetoric that Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Prime Minister Mohammed Ali Rajai and
other leading figures have employed, a striking aspect of the last four months
of intensive diplomacy has been that the pragmatism traditionally associated
with the Iranian bazaar has seemed to flower in the negotiations.

The Iranian demands, first set forth suddenly by Ayatollah Khomeini on Sept. 12,
were noticeably materialistic and unrevolutionary.  Throughout the first months
of the crisis, the Iranians had seemed almost cavalier in their unconcern about
the frozen assets, the trade embargo, the political condemnation they received
in the United Nations.

What they wanted in return for the release of the hostages, they claimed, was
public condemnation of the American role in the Shah's Iran and an airing of the
''crimes'' of the Pahlevi family, as well as the return of the wealth that the
Shah was said to have stolen from their country.

But since September, to the surprise of the Americans, and often to their
irritation, the Iranian Government, as reflected in its proposals, appeared to
be playing less the role of fervent Islamic revolutionaries than of tough rug
merchants.

They seemed not to care about American apologies, but only about their own
billions of dollars that Mr. Carter had ordered frozen on Nov. 14, 1979. Their
list of proposals dealt with the intricate world of Western finance and they
haggled over sums even into the Carter Administration's last weekend.

This more pragmatic attitude toward the negotiations may not, of itself, presage
a more outward approach by Iran to the United States or other Western countries,
but solving the hostage crisis would allow Iran's leaders that option.
Iraqi Invasion Changes Picture

Freeing its frozen assets would markedly improve Iran's balance of payments
situation; lifting the trade embargo would make it easier for Iran's economic
planners to organize and renovate its decaying industrial plant; an end to
political isolation would make it easier for Iran to win friends around the
world, particularly in the light of its continuing struggle with Iraq.

Throughout the crisis, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr. Carter's global strategist, was
concerned that the United States, in its reaction to the hostage takeover, might
ignite emotions that could overtake reason in Teheran. He worried that the
Iranians, under pressure from the rest of the world, would begin to splinter and
to turn violently toward the left, allowing the Soviet Union to exert undue
influence and thus to threaten the Persian Gulf region.

After the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan 13 months ago, Mr.
Brzezinski was even more determined to persuade the Iranians that their best
interests centered, not in confrontation with the United States, but in
countering the Soviet presence on their borders.

Teheran did oppose the Russians, although not as fervently as they did the
Americans. And they disliked the Iraqis even more.  With the onset of the
Iran-Iraq war in September, just when the Carter Administration was nurturing
hopes that quiet diplomacy might begin to make progress toward freeing the
hostages, Iran's outlook gradually began to change.

Initially, the Iranians in their propaganda, blamed the United States for
collusion in the Iraqi attack. This had a certain logic, given the trouble Iran
had made for the United States in the months previous, but it was hardly
credible in view of the lack even of formal diplomatic relations between Baghdad
and Washington.

More recently, the attacks on the United States have diminshed somewhat as the
Iranian authorities, strapped for financing, needing military spare parts and
seeking world support, seemingly took the decision to bring the hostage crisis
to an end.

In a sense, the Iranians and the Carter Administration found themselves caught
up in a kind of deadline diplomacy, with arbitrary dates seeming to expedite the
negotiations. This experience was not unprecedented.

Other American Presidents, in election years, have also found themselves in the
midst of negotiations, with the intensity of the efforts growing as Election Day
neared. The results, however, were not uniformly satisfying to the Presidents
involved.
Johnson's Travails With Saigon

President Lyndon B. Johnson, in 1968, although he had withdrawn as a candidate
for re-election, was able to bring about the start of Vietnam negotiations. He
limited bombing raids on North Vietnam and persuaded Hanoi that the discussions
would aid Hubert H. Humphrey's campaign and thus could help defeat Richard M.
Nixon.

But the strategy backfired when the South Vietnamese, hoping that Mr. Nixon
would win, boycotted the talks.  Mr. Johnson also sought, in his last days in
office, to persuade the Russians to begin strategic arms limitation talks. But
Moscow refused because the incoming Nixon Administration said it would not have
anything to do with such discussions.

In 1972, the North Vietnamese, after desultory negotiations over the preceding
four years, suddenly showed new interest as Election Day neared. Mr. Nixon was
the clear favorite and the Vietnamese did nothing to aid his antiwar opponent,
Senator George McGovern.

Instead, Hanoi, believing that Mr. Nixon would be more forthcoming before,
rather than after the elections, sought to force an agreement prior to the end
of October, 1972. The effort failed, in part once again because of Saigon's
delaying tactics.

The eventual cease-fire accord was brought about after the elections, but only
after Mr. Nixon's ruthless bombing of Hanoi and his accompanying tough threats
to cut off aid to Saigon forced both Vietnamese sides to accept the formula
negotiated by Henry A.  Kissinger.

It is difficult to say with certainty what propelled the Iranians into the
decision to negotiate seriously with the Americans. Many officials in the Carter
Administration believe it was a combination of political, economic and military
factors.

But it seems clear that the Iranians only were able to move after Prime Minister
Rajai and his Islamic Republican Party took over the Government in late August.

Until then, President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, the ranking Government official, was
unable to move toward a settlement because anything he did was opposed almost
automatically by the Islamic Republicans, his chief rival.

At that time, when virtually no one in Washington was paying much attention to
Iran, Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie sent his first message to Teheran
since he replaced Cyrus R. Vance. Mr. Vance resigned after vainly opposing the
unsuccessful hostage rescue attempt in April.

Mr. Muskie's letter, which Mr. Rajai mocked in public, called on the two
countries to open a new chapter in relations by taking up the hostage question
which had lain dormant for so many months.

This approach was taken after diplomats in Teheran reported that the Rajai
Government would probably be amenable to ending the crisis.  On Sept. 12,
Ayatollah Khomeini, in a message broadcast to Moslems around the world that was
largely a vitriolic attack on the United States, unexpectedly interjected four
conditions for the release of the hostages.

These were: the return of the property of the late Shah, the cancelling of all
claims against Iran, the unfreezing of Iran's assets, and a promise not to
interfere in Iranian affairs.

Significantly, the list omitted any mention of the usual call for an American
apology, or any other ''ideological'' element meant to humiliate the United
States.

Publicly, the Carter Administration responded cautiously to the remarks, but
privately, some experts saw them as the first solid opening offered by Teheran
since the breakdown of efforts in February to bring about the hostages release
through the United Nations.

The foreign policy advisers to the Republican candidate, Ronald Reagan, saw the
Khomeini statement as a possible sign that the Iranians wanted to aid the Carter
candidacy by freeing the hostages and helping Mr. Carter win re-election.

Even before Mr. Carter responded, Mr. Reagan on Sept. 13 issued a statement
saying in essence that the terms outlined by Ayatollah Khomeini seemed an
acceptable basis for negotiations. This was to be the Carter Administration's
position as well.

Much of the Iranian negotiation is necessarily still cloaked in secrecy. What is
known, however, provides a fascinating chapter in the art of diplomacy. Much as
in the efforts in the mid-1960s to open a channel of communication to Hanoi,
many countries and free-lance individuals played a role.

But in the end, just as Hanoi had chosen to deal directly with Washington, the
Iranians decided on a relatively direct approach through messages and Algerian
intermediaries.

Before the Algerians became involved in November, Deputy Secretary of State
Warren M. Christopher, a low-key, proficient administrator with a talent for
difficult negotiations, was given the assignment of trying to pursue the
Khomeini opening. On Sept. 15, he and his Iranian experts, accompanied by some
State Department European specialists as ''cover,'' flew to Bonn for what was
advertised as routine consultations on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and other world affairs. Not until much later was it learned that, during that
mission, the Americans had held secret talks in Bonn with Iranian emissaries.
Mr. Christopher outlined the American desire to solve the problems, and offered,
in essence, to negotiate on the basis of Ayatollah Khomeini's four points.

American officials say now that they believed the Iranians were eager to resolve
and end the crisis in September. But on Sept. 19, when Iraqi forces invaded
Iran, the attention of the Iranian leadership was diverted.

Mr. Carter, hoping to sustain the Iranians' interest, said on Sept. 22 that Iran
had every reason now to free the hostages because Iran ''needs friends.''

By Sept. 30, the Iranian Parliament got around to the hostage issue again,
setting up a special commission to study the problem.  More than a month was to
pass before the commission would issue its report. In that intervening period,
Prime Minister Rajai came to New York to present Iran's case against Iraq to the
United Nations Security Council. He did not meet with American officials, but
while in New York, he told a press conference on Oct. 18 that the Iranian
Parliament would soon take up the hostage issue.

And on Oct. 22, Mr. Rajai added that he was ''sure'' that the United States
would meet Ayatollah Khomeini's four conditions.  ''The hostages are not really
a problem for us; we are in the process of resolving it,'' he said, in one of
the first of a series of optimistic statements he would make in succeeding
months.

Carter Administration officials began to sense that the Iranians were
deliberately taking into consideration the American election campaign; Mr.
Reagan's advisers warned of ''an October surprise,'' meaning that the hostages
might be freed, in an effort to help Mr.  Carter.

But the Iranians could not get their act together quickly enough to do more than
confuse matters. On Nov. 2, just two days before the elections, the Iranian
Parliament published its four conditions, which were virtually the same as
Ayatollah Khomeini's.The terms, Mr.  Muskie said, provided the basis for
negotiations, but they could not be accepted as they were.

After Mr. Carter lost the election, the Iranians prepared their next substantive
message to reach the Americans in time for Christmas. That proposal, calling for
cash guarantees of $24 billion, seemed so absurd that crestfallen officials in
Washington lost hope of making headway before the inauguration of Mr. Reagan.

But the Iranians clearly wanted to reach an agreement before having to deal with
Mr. Reagan. And during the last 10 days, the negotiations became a serious and
intense effort, carried on through the Algerian intermediaries.

As the tempo speeded up last week, hopes again were rising for an agreement that
would release the 52 hostages and at the same time would free the American
Government to turn the page on a tumultous and tragic chapter that, far too
long, had lacked an ending.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini photo of Edmund S.
Muskie photo of Ali Rajai photo of Warren .M Christopher

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ENJOYING ITS MAJORITY, G.O.P. MAKES PLANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2380 words


ON Tuesday, there will be a Republican in the White House, a Republican majority
in the Senate and a strong minority in the House. The Week in Review asked
Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, chairman of the Budget Committee,
Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, House minority whip, and Senator Bob
Packwood of Oregon, chairman of the Republican Conference, to talk about how
this new balance of power will work, from the G.O.P. perspective.

Excerpts of their discussion with Judith Miller, Martin Tolchin and Steven V.
Roberts, correspondents in the Washington Bureau of The New York Times, and
Caroline Rand Herron, an editor of The Review, follow.
Republican Priorities

Question. In the Carter years there was talk, especially from Republicans, about
reasserting Congressional prerogatives. What about with a Republican White
House?

Mr. Domenici. Six or seven months ago I offered a proposal that if we don't have
the courage to make cuts, why don't we set a budget level and then say to
President Carter, ''We give you the prerogative, within the following
parameters, to bring (the budget under) control.''

In matters fiscal, if we don't bring some kind of control, my prediction is:
Either a constitutional amendment will be passed on balanced budgets, or some
kind of impoundment authority will be given to Presidents.

Mr. Lott. The other side of that might be that, now that you have the power, you
might guard it a little bit jealously - as the Democrats have, I think to the
extreme.

Mr. Packwood. During the zenith of the anti-Vietnam feeling and the argument on
the imperial Presidency, we beat our breasts and passed only a couple of acts,
really: the war powers act and the budget act, which also contained recision
(Presidential authority, subject to Congressional concurrence, to cancel an
appropriation). It's not going to make any difference in the relation of
Congress to the President just because the Republicans had a big sweep.

Mr. Lott. In my opinion, Congress has been a little bit out of hand for several
years - not just in the budget area, also in foreign affairs. I said that during
the Carter Administration, when I disagreed with a lot of what he was doing.

Q. Where specifically did Congress overexert?

Mr. Lott. Well, of course you could argue over any one you might cite. Cyprus
was one; I don't think it worked out too well on either side for us.

Maybe we should get into certain areas. But the sale of military weapons in the
Middle East: while Congress certainly has a say on money affairs, the President
has an extraordinary role. To set the broad interest is one thing. But on an
issue-to-issue basis I think there's a risk.

Mr. Packwood. There were specific actions which I expect any Congress will
continue to take if we are riled up enough. I don't think anybody is saying that
the President ought to have a free hand to do whatever he wants in foreign
policy, including committing us to appropriations.

Mr. Domenici. But don't you agree that one of the most significant instruments
in foreign policy is America's military preparedness? Is there any doubt that
starting with Nixon, we've been at such odds that we end up with a President who
doesn't have the instruments he thinks he needs?

Mr. Packwood. You're mixing apples and oranges. You recall a year ago when we
went down to see Carter. This was Congress asking a President to support us in
an arms increase, not the other way around.

Mr. Domenici. But in the first couple of years of his Administration, we were
saying the opposite.  Mr. Lott. In the House, we'll be able to find quite often
enough Democrats agreeing with 192 Republicans to pass appropriate defense
funding.

Q. What are your plans for working with, corralling, seducing - whatever word
you want to use - the 30 to 35 House Democrats who have put conservative
pressure on the leadership and whose votes could swing control?

Mr. Lott. We'll have some Republicans who have specific duties to work with
Democrat Congressmen from Texas or Florida or Georgia or Oklahoma.

One of the things we're going to do is to not demand their purity.  When it's
purely a party-line vote, we (won't) go to them and really twist arms. We will
wait for those issues where it is really important. And that does include the
economy, first off, and defense.

Q. Alexander Haig said that he does not consider himself bound by the party's
foreign policy plank because he didn't play much of a role in creating it.

Mr. Lott. I don't agree with everything in it and I was vicechairman of it.  Q.
Do Congressional Republicans feel commitment to the Republican platform?

Mr. Packwood. To the good parts of it.

Mr. Domenici. That platform contains a very specific list of military hardware
and it contains some very precise figures on what they ought to be spending. I
personally don't feel bound by that list in its entirety. I hope that we have a
team that will also look at what we can afford.

Q. How about language concerning abortion, busing, school prayer?  Is there
commitment there?

Mr. Lott. President-elect Reagan has indicated, and we're saying, that at least
initially we are going to be concentrating on the economy.

Q. Would it be a mistake to get into these other areas?

Mr. Domenici. I hope we're capable of improving the procedure which lets us vote
on those issues. If we could take the issues of abortion, busing, prayers in the
schools and get them out of the appropriation process...

Mr. Lott. That's been our problem in the House. We can't get any of those things
out of Judiciary Committee. This route has been taken because they've been
stymied on even getting a hearing.

Mr. Packwood. Governor Reagan was elected because of foreign policy and defense
spending and the economy. He would be making a tragic mistake if he were to now
put abortion and school busing and prayer on the front burner. All it would do
is divide the country, divide Congress. I'll be very surprised if this
Administration makes any effort to push those issues.

Q. Does being in the majority mean you have to look at some of these issues
differently?

Mr. Packwood. It's different only in this sense. There's always a natural
tendency for the party to want to support its President.  That's been true I
guess as long as we've had parties and Presidents.

Obviously it would also have been different had there been a Democratic
President who was not advocating policies we agree with.  But not with the
Republican President who I assume is going to advocate what we agree with.

Q. That's a unitary we. How many Republican Parties are there?

Mr. Packwood. On most of the issues of defense, foreign policy, budget cuts
there is going to be very close harmony.

Mr. Domenici. Would you not add some major effort to restrain abusive regulatory
processes and a multi-year tax cut or tax reform program? That's an item on the
fire...

Mr. Packwood. It's an item. Although I find more difference of opinion even in
the Administration on effective dates and business cuts or individual cuts with
reports of the deficit getting bigger and bigger.

Mr. Lott. You know, it's always a matter of priority. When you're in the
minority you can have a shotgun blast, but when you become a majority or you
potentially have a working majority, you have to have a list.

Q. But there's been a very vocal element in your party that has put strong
priority on some of these issues you now are saying should be put on the back
burner.

Mr. Lott. But they recognize the economy has got to be dealt with.  I don't
think it's a matter of putting anything on the back burner.  It's deciding that
you must act here first or all these other issues - they may not have a chance
at all unless we deal with the economy.

Mr. Domenici. I don't want to let my friend from Oregon's statement about the
issues of abortion, prayer in the school and the like - I think he was saying
that they're not of national significance enough to concern a President in terms
of what should be on his platter. I don't agree.

But I agree that this President has learned, and his advisers have learned, that
one of the major shortcomings of President Carter is that he had too many
legislative items.
Party Strategy

Q. What you were talking about could come under the general heading of getting
Congressional Republicans off the hook. Aren't you abdicating responsibility?

Mr. Domenici. Absolutely not. Neither Dave Stockman nor the President-elect's
other economic advisers claim to know it all.  They're getting many of the ideas
from the good staff people here.  It's kind of a collegial effort, for a change.

Beyond that, it will be up to our own good leadership to get an agenda that will
get the work done and still leave room for those other issues.

Mr. Lott. Right now we're stuck with the Carter budget. There are limitations on
what we can do without the President taking some action. And so we may ask him
to, because our hands are tied. And then we will take up his battle.

On the social issues: Certainly they will be volatile. But they are there. I
still hope that a little momentum may fall by the wayside.  Busing, for
instance, has been pushed awfully aggressively sometimes. The way the
Administration handles those issues may quieten them down. It may not be such an
emotional thing if handled differently.

Mr. Packwood. Good point.

Mr. Lott. But secondly, when we finally do come to a decision or some votes on
these issues, it won't split the party. We will disagree; we may vote
differently. But it's always been a philosophical rather than a partisan issue.

Mr. Packwood. I still sense that the majority of the people do not want to upset
the Supreme Court's decision legalizing abortion. I can't tell on school prayer
one way or the other. But I sense a growing irritation about quotas. And in
busing - I don't care how you cut it - you have to count.

Mr. Lott. I see we've already resolved one issue here.  Mr. Packwood. Now we're
down to only two.
Techniques and Goals

Q. Let's get down to procedure. In budgeting, when the time comes for a vote on
issues affecting your state, all of a sudden there is a different view about
what is indispensible. What will Republicans do to enhance the ability of
Congress to make those painful cuts?

Mr. Domenici. We are going to attempt to come up with a mechanism whereby there
will not have to be literally scores of individual votes...

Mr. Packwood. That's the key.

Mr. Domenici. ... and that there is a reconciliation-recisiondeferral package,
that may end up with only four or five major votes in each body to carry out at
least the first thrust of a multi-year budget-control package.

Q. Is that to spread the political risk, so...

Mr. Packwood. Let me rephrase it: So the entire public that's affected feels
that everybody is taking a cut. If you start coming down the road with a $700
million cut in the sewer program, and a $1.1 million cut in a highway program,
and each of them are individual votes, and each of us has a sewer plant and a
highway - If we cannot get a reasonably consolidated vote, then you're going to
see the power delegated back to the President.

Q. During the campaign, when asked repeatedly how he would balance the budget,
cut taxes and increase defense spending, the Presidentelect's answer was: Cut
fraud and waste and abuse. Are you all saying that was unrealistic?

Mr. Domenici. The word waste does not mean that the law, as it is on the books,
is being abused. It can mean that the law has vested certain people with rights
to get benefits that the average American would think wasteful. You very well
could be saying there's a better way to structure the benefits so that those
most in need continue to get food stamps, and maybe even more.

Mr. Lott. That could apply to farmers' home loans.

Q. In other words, however you define waste, there are going to have to be
substantive cuts in programs.

Mr. Packwood. They could be cut off, or you may tighten further eligibility. You
may almost freeze it.  Mr. Lott. I'm not a budget expert, but I just have to say
I don't necessarily think it means a significant number of people are going to
be cut off. We still need that safety net there. It's just a matter of how it's
administered.

Mr. Packwood. For example, if you have a program which requires eligibility of
$6,000 income or below, then you simply don't change the $6,000 (regardless of
inflation).

Mr. Lott. You've seen Stockman's list. The cuts don't involve very many people.
You're talking about junk mail subsidy. You're talking about arts and humanities
programs.

Q. One year from now, what would you like to have done?

Mr. Domenici. In energy, I hope that pricing of crude oil and gasoline will have
been deregulated. I hope our President exercises his prerogative.

On the budget end, I would hope that we would have forced a vote which would cut
this year's budget somewhere between $12 and $15 billion; basically modify the
flow of tax dollars under current law, about $30 to $40 billion; and put in
place a multiyear tax-reform tax-cut package that is heavy on the side of
reinvesting in this nation.

Mr. Packwood. I echo that. And that we don't wander off into extraneous,
unrelated matters.  Mr. Lott. I just hope that after a year it will be evident
to the American people that we are determined that Congress and the President
work together, and that the economy is going to be turned around.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Domenici photo of Senator Packwood
photo of Representative Lott cartoon

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOHRN GOT PROBATION, BUT WHAT OF THE OTHERS

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2212 words


In a Chicago courtroom last week, Bernardine Dohrn, the former Weather
Underground leader, was fined $1,500 and placed on probation for three years.
Before the sentencing, Miss Dohrn, who recently emerged from 10 years in hiding,
pleaded guilty to charges stemming from violent protests against the Vietnam
War.

The reappearance of Miss Dohrn revives memories of other clashes, both open and
covert, between the forces of government and the radicals of the 1960's. With
the memories come questions: In the end, who won? How did freedom of speech
fare, the right to criticize the Government in times of stress?

Reviewing the formal outcomes of the most publicized cases, the historian would
have to conclude that the Government lost. Conspiracy was the charge the
Government used most often, but it never succeeded in proving one. Juries or
appellate courts almost always found the evidence wanting. Not a single
defendant went to prison as a result of conviction in the great conspiracy
prosecutions.

The trial of the Chicago Seven was perhaps the most spectacular.  Abbie Hoffman,
Tom Hayden, Jerry Rubin and friends were charged with conspiring to cross state
lines to incite riot with anti-Vietnam War protests at the 1968 Democratic
Convention. The 103-day trial was a circus of insults. The Seven were convicted
and, with their lawyers, subjected to heavy additional sentences for contempt of
court. The conspiracy convictions were reversed on appeal. A Federal judge
assigned to review the contempt findings dismissed most of them and imposed no
sentences for those that remained because of what he called the trial judge's
''condemnatious conduct.''

The Gainesville Eight, seven of them members of the Vietnam Veterans Against the
War, were charged with plotting violent disruption of the 1972 Republican
Convention in Miami Beach. A Federal jury in Gainesville, Fla., acquitted them
all in September 1973. Dr. Benjamin Spock and three other defendants were
convicted in June 1968 of a conspiracy to counsel evasion of the draft during
the war. The four convictions were reversed by a Federal appeals court.

Perhaps, the most amazing charge was that the Rev. Philip F.  Berrigan and six
others conspired to kidnap Henry Kissinger. In April 1972, a jury divided 10-2
for acquittal on that charge after a lengthy trial in Harrisburg, Pa., and the
Government decided against a retrial. In September of that year, Father Berrigan
and Sister Elizabeth McAlister were found guilty of smuggling letters into and
out of prison. All but one of those counts were reversed on appeal.
The Government Overreached

Those were the legal results of the big cases. But there is much more to the
balance than that, in both legal and human terms.  Legally, the significance of
the cases lay less in the fact that the Government lost than in how it lost. A
crucial element, in one trial after another, was the disclosure that Government
agents had used dubious methods against the defendants.

Michael Tigar, a prominent defense lawyer, believes that the prosecutors in many
of the radical cases ''overreached.'' The Government had used ''repressive
techniques'' against supposed radicals for a long time, he says, but starting in
1969, the Nixon Administration ''sought a judicial imprimatur'' for those
techniques and the evidence they produced. The courts said no, most tellingly
the Supreme Court in its 1972 decision rejecting the claim that, under inherent
Presidential authority, Federal agents could wiretap without warrants in
domestic security cases.

In every case, then, defense lawyers pressed motions to discover what Federal
agents and prosecutors had done. Some cases failed because of Government
misconduct, notably the prosecution of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo for
disclosing the Pentagon Papers - dismissed when the Government belatedly
admitted a tap. The taint of informers also hurt. The Court of Appeals reversed
the Berrigan letter convictions because a supposed friend had been a Government
informer who carried or even caused the sending of the letters.

But even when the Government lost, its prosecutions sometimes left indelible
marks. Ramsey Clark, the former Attorney General and defense counsel at the
Harrisburg trial, once made a speech in which he mentioned the vindication of
the Gainesville Eight. A woman in the audience got up at the end and said, ''I
am the mother of one of the eight. He is in an institution, and we don't know
whether he will recover.'' Mr. Clark concludes: ''There was trauma even when
people were acquitted. Nothing was proved against the Harrisburg defendants, but
it consumed years of their lives and took a terrible toll.''

Freedom of critical speech was also at issue in some other cases, less
publicized and less grand in prosecutorial conception, that did end in
convictions. When David Paul O'Brien burned his draft card as a Vietnam protest,
the Supreme Court rejected his claim that his act was a constitutionally
protected form of ''speech.'' Other prosecutions for destruction of draft cards
followed that test case.

The courts also limited freedom of speech and other forms of protest by those in
military service. In what was probably the most publicized military case, Capt.
Howard Levy, a dermatologist, was convicted for refusing to give special medical
training to Green Berets about to go to Vietnam. Dr. Levy served 26 months in
prison.

Actual violence to make a political point was, of course, in a different
category. The outstanding example was the bombing of the Army Mathematics
Research Center at the University of Wisconsin, in which a physicist died.
Karleton Armstrong was paroled last January after serving half of a 14-year
sentence for murder and arson in the bombing.

In weighing the balance of free speech and repression during the protests of the
1960's and early 1970's, one must also take account of the use by many
Government agencies of covert methods such as infiltration, surveillance,
defamation and provocation. When the wrongdoings of Federal intelligence
agencies began coming to light in the mid-1970's, it was learned that the
National Security Agency had electronically scanned every overseas telephone
call and cable to and from this country between 1967 and 1973. The purpose was
to locate communications of 1,680 suspected Americans, some of whom were singled
out because they were dissenters.

The Central Intelligence Agency conducted an extensive program of domestic
spying, in violation of its charter. The Internal Revenue Service set up
dossiers on 8,585 political activists and 2,873 organizations. Military
intelligence branches carried out their own domestic surveillance of political
dissenters. The Center for National Security Studies, a Washington research
organization, estimated in 1975 that more than 250,000 Americans had been the
subject of ''active surveillance'' and that ''hundreds of thousands more had
information about their lawful political activity included in intelligence
agency files.''

The exact effect of such surveillance on citizens' willingness to speak freely
is hard to measure. But one official scheme was designed to have an intimidating
effect and evidently did: the Cointel program of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The bureau acknowledged committing 238 burglaries aimed at
domestic dissidents.  In Cointel, it went beyond break-ins and wiretapping to
harassment of those it could not charge with crimes. Agents used forged letters
and anonymous telephone calls to raise suspicions about targeted persons. For
example, a still-pending lawsuit by the Socialist Workers Party has brought out
evidence that the bureau harassed that tiny Trotskyite group for decades.
Cointel was a crude but classic example of official punishment - though not
inflicted through the legal system - for exercising the constitutional rights of
peaceful speech and association.
Wiretaps and Bugs

The director of the agency through those years, J. Edgar Hoover, seemed to have
a particular ferocity in dealing with black movements and their leaders. The
bureau wiretapped and bugged Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and then sent him a
recording and a letter designed to embarrass him into committing suicide. Agents
suggested to headquarters that it plant in a gossip column an item saying that
Jean Seberg, the actress, was having a child by a Black Panther leader. There is
no evidence that headquarters agreed, but the item appeared and Miss Seberg,
after years of distress, committed suicide. What happened to the Black Panthers
is a story in itself. Mr. Hoover urged intense activity against the Panthers,
and F.B.I. documents recently released show that the bureau tried to disrupt
their activities with forged letters and other devices. A number of Panthers
were killed during internal feuds. At least 10 were killed by local police in
1968 and 1969.

Several local police forces were active against alleged radicalism of all kinds
in the 1960's. The Chicago Red Squad used disruptive tactics similar to Cointel.
The Michigan State police had files on 38,000 persons and individuals.

Looking at the whole picture, how bad a time was it for freedom of speech and
association? Melvin L. Wulf, a leading civil liberties lawyer, wrote in 1972
that ''immeasurably more latitude'' had been given to free speech during the
Vietnam War ''than in previous wars.'' Looking back at the era from the 1980's,
that still seems a sound judgment.

In World War I, some who voiced even ineffectual protest drew savage penalties.
Similarly, in the Communist hunt of the 1950's, freedom of speech and
association suffered heavily. Leaders of the Communist party went to prison over
the First Amendment dissents of Supreme Court Justices Hugo L. Black and William
O. Douglas. The House Un-American Activities Committee and Senator Joseph
McCarthy harried alleged Communists.

By comparison, the Vietnam period brought few successful prosecutions for
dissent, although many did go to prison or into exile for actually refusing to
register or be drafted. Mr. Wulf said that critical speech had this time escaped
''massive retaliatory measures,'' whether because of ''executive forbearance or
of the strength of our social and legal institutions.'' But he said that before
he knew of the massive covert activities by Federal agencies and local police
against suspected radicals and dissenters.

What lessons may the country have learned from the way questions of free speech
and dissent were handled in the 1960's and 1970's? Have official attitudes
changed?

One evident lesson is that a strong society can allow critical speech in times
of stress. Presidents Johnson and Nixon both told aides that the Vietnam critics
were being supported from abroad to sabotage the war effort; they put the
intelligence agencies to great and unsuccessful efforts to prove those
suspicions. When The New York Times printed the Pentagon Papers, Nixon
Administration lawyers told the courts that disclosure of that war history would
do terrible damage. But after continued publication, The Times' lawyer, the late
Alexander M. Bickel, observed drily: ''The Republic still stands.'' And it kept
standing, despite the Pentagon Papers and Dr. Spock and the Chicago Seven. A
fair conclusion would be that the few efforts made directly in court to suppress
information or punish dissent were counterproductive.

As to the covert harassment of dissenters, the Ford and Carter Administrations
both disowned such tactics. Edward Levi, President Ford's Attorney General,
called Cointel ''outrageous'' and began framing departmental regulations to
prevent its repetition. Under President Carter, Attorneys General Griffin B.
Bell and Benjamin R.  Civiletti carried on the regulation process. They also
pressed the prosecution of two former F.B.I. officials, Mark Felt and Edward
Miller, for conspiring to violate citizens' constitutional rights when they
authorized break-ins in pursuit of the Weather Underground. The conviction of
Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller last November, and Bernardine Dohrn's emergence from
hiding, seemed to mark the end of an era.

On the other hand, the intelligence agencies remain strongly opposed to critical
public examination of their activities and public support for restraints on them
has ebbed. In the new Congress, the agencies will doubtless seek exemptions from
regulation and from disclosure requirements under the Freedom of Information
Act.

No one can be sure how long Government will remember the other evident lesson of
the 1960's - a lesson for officialdom and for some of the dissidents, too: That
the end does not justify the means.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bernardine Dohrn photo of Philip F. Berrigan
photo of Tom Hayden 1971 antiwar demonstration

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Times Magazine January 18, 1981

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


William Safire 6 On Language

Getting Down
Russell Baker 10 Sunday Observer

Jimmy Stewart's Best Friend
Leslie H. Gelb 14 Memorandum to the President

Some counsel for the new man in the Oval Office from an old Washington hand.
Deborah Trustman 18 France's First Woman 'Immortal'

The election of the writer and poet Marguerite Yourcenar to the hitherto
all-male French Academy is casting the reticent Maine resident in unaccustomed
limelight.
Didi Moore 26 The Only-Child Phenomenon

Once thought to be at a disadvantage, onlies have been found smarter, more
creative and more ambitious than children with siblings - encouraging news since
more and more couples are deciding that one is definitely enough.
Stewart McBride 28 New Life for Nuclear City

Livermore scientists, hit by inflation and a decade of fallout from Vietnam, are
back in the spotlight with new designs for peaceful energy and nuclear weaponry.

36 Fashion

Keeping Up With the Reagans
Terry Robards 38 Wine

A Great Vineyard Revived
Craig Claiborne 52 Food with Pierre Franey A Deliciously Depressed Cake
John Duka 54 Design

Newport at the Armory
69 Puzzles

Answers, Page 53
71 Letters
Cover: Photograph by Michael Evans/Sygma
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

TYPE: index

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORANDUM TO THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; Leslie H. Gelb is a senior associate of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace and previously served as a Senate aide and a
senior official in the Departments of Defense and State.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4789 words


By now, you have received a barrelful of memos telling you how to organize the
Government, making it very clear who your friends and enemies will be and
explaining how you can solve most problems by applying the best business
techniques to the business of running the Government. However, if your
transition period is anything like that of your predecessors, no one has sent
you a memo telling you - given what you said in the campaign and how the
transition has gone to date - where you might, just might, have some major
misperceptions and be heading toward some major mistakes.

You may wonder why the editors of this newspaper called on me, a former member
of the Carter and Johnson Administrations, to give you the bad news. I can only
assume that it is partly because of my long experience with observing and
committing errors of policy and politics. Also, I am among the very few people
in Washington who could not even dream of filling an office in your
Administration, and, alas, in the eyes of editors, such hopelessness is often
confused with objectivity.

This memo is intended to caution you about: (1) the misperceptions you might be
entertaining about the general political and governmental setting in Washington,
and (2) the policy mistakes that might be inherent in the intellectual and
political baggage you and your team carry.  I. The setting This is a euphemism
for all those things that will make it very difficult for you to do your job. In
particular, it's about all the others on the stage with you who do not realize
that they are only Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to your Hamlet and about the
institutions that will survive us all.  Doubtless you believe that liberals are
going to give you a lot of trouble. For sure, they will not agree with most of
your policies and will say so. But the fact of the matter is that most of these
people are far more interested in disputing points of philosophy with one
an-other than in fighting conservatives. They cannot operate without a political
philosophy, and right now they have nothing but a political hodgepodge. Most
have been reduced to muttering some newconservative incantations and to
defending old-liberal (and now unpopular) causes like the rights of blacks and
illegal aliens and the need for detente with the Soviet Union. Editorial writers
refer to this as being in disarray, but we know it's worse than that.

When you think about it, your real problems will come from your conservative
friends - from conflicts between the Old Right and the New Right, the ones who
were with you from the start fighting the new boys - and from those who simply
know what God wants better than you do. A lot of these people actually believe
that you were elected on the strength of their philosphy. To them, you are a
means and not an end. Such people are most concerned with doctrinal purity, and
you never will be able to live up to their standards.

Just look at whom the National Conservative Political Action Committee, those
friends of the Moral Majority, put on their hit list for the next senatorial
elections - Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, a decidedly moral and
anti-Communist man. If Henry Jackson is next, can Ronald Reagan be far behind?
Hell hath no fury like an ideological purist scorned.  Among conservatives, The
Bureaucracy is often cited as the enemy.  They see it as filled with Democrats,
people who have never met a payroll and other ne'er-do-wells. Actually, about 95
percent of The Bureaucracy consists of people who work from 9 to 5 doing the
routine chores mandated by laws they do not make. The Bureaucracy is more blob
than enemy.

As for that other 5 percent, it is made up of a combination of high civil
servants and political appointees. Most of the high civil servants are not
Democratic spies but professionals who will do what they are told. Don't listen
too hard to those conservative legislators who like to malign Foreign Service
officers. Just the other day, some of your closest associates in the Senate were
calling for your nominee for Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr., to clean
out the State Department. But I can attest to endless cases of these
professionals simply saluting and implementing Jimmy Carter policies that they
felt were nothing short of bizarre.

If you're worried about public brawling within your Administration, be advised
that such skywriting about internal differences will almost always be the work
of your political appointees. These are the highfliers, fighting for power,
position and policy, tearing one another apart and denying it all the while.
Reflect on two facts. All the serious struggles in the Carter Administration
were within this group and not among or with the professional civil servants.
Most of the trouble you have had so far, for example, has stemmed from the
transition teams you appointed to the various departments and agencies. These
people have spent the months since the election leaking horrible stories to the
media about one another (''The Kissinger people are trying to take over'' is one
variant, answered by ''The right-wing crazies are in charge'') and trying to
force your hand on policy by announcing or leaking their own policy-position
papers. You should also note that most of these leaks have emanated from your
most conservative allies.

The sub-Cabinet appointments that you are now making are a critical factor in
being able to control the internecine warfare.  These dozens of men and women,
from deputy secretary to assistant secretary, work at the point where policy and
operations come together. The central question is: Should the people you appoint
to these posts in Commerce, say, represent a single, cohesive point of view, or
should they represent the various ideological views in your Administration? If
they reflect a single strain of thought, that may be politically dangerous, and
it will certainly not provide you with all viewpoints on any given issue. On the
other hand, if they reflect a variety of approaches, they're likely to eat each
other up. Whichever way you decide, you'll pay a penalty.  You have promised
that you are going to rid the executive branch of the Departments of Energy and
Education. On the face of it, who could argue? And yet ... I have no special
brief for the Department of Education, but it has to go somewhere. The functions
that come under its wing have to be performed, pretty much as a package, whether
they're put back in Health, Education and Welfare or left where they are. As to
the Department of Energy, another monstrosity: It's so diverse, any way you
split it up would lead to separate pieces going into different agencies, just as
it was more than three years ago when everyone was screaming about how
inefficient the arrangement was.

The question is: Do you really want to waste your time and your power juggling
these bureaucratic problems, knowing that, in the end, such decisions will not
have much effect upon the policies these outfits crank out?  The stronghold of
the enemy, right? That's what most conservatives are telling you, and you've
been saying the same kind of thing yourself for years. Yet it's not necessarily
so, particularly if you play your cards correctly. It is probably true that most
reporters from the major dailies and weeklies and from the television networks
are liberals and Democrats. But precisely -and paradoxically - because of this,
most bend over backward to be ''fair'' to conservatives.

Not only that. You have to realize that journalists are bright people who spend
most of their days waiting around and peering through keyholes. This is not fun,
particularly since these people secretly want to be included and even loved.
John F. Kennedy and Henry A. Kissinger understood this and enjoyed considerable
success in having stories written the way they wanted them.

It's true, however, that, even if you are nice to them, every once in a while
journalists have to take a swipe at you, if only to maintain their self-respect.
And beware of mispronouncing a word, using a singular verb with a plural noun,
tripping on a rug or otherwise showing signs of weakness. In such instances, an
otherwise docile press can become a snarling mob.  On the face of it, you have a
Republican majority in the Senate and a working majority of Republicans and
conservative Democrats in the House of Representatives, and the newly elected
are saying they owe much of their good fortune to your coattails and to the new
conservative trend in the country. But don't count on gratitude or anything else
lasting long in Washington. The institutional and individual assertiveness in
Congress, while somewhat on the wane, is still strong.

The individual pulls are in very different directions. Take the economic scene
in the Senate: Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, a liberal, will head the
Appropriations Committee; Bob Dole of Kansas, a conservative, the Finance
Committee, and Jake Garn of Utah, proudly of the far right, the Banking
Committee. Or take the national security scene: John Tower of Texas, a hard-line
conservative, will head the Armed Services Committee, and Charles Percy of
Illinois, a liberal-moderate, will run the Foreign Relations Committee.

And the Democrats can be counted on to stir up at least a touch of trouble. Some
Democrats in Congress will fight to the end to protect Federal payments to their
urban constituents. Other Democrats will be waiting for any signs that you are
faltering on your pledges to enhance American military strength - they'll be
looking to take away the national-security issue from the Republicans, as John
F. Kennedy did in 1960.

In this regard, you probably have already made an extremely costly mistake by
failing to appoint Senator Jackson as your Defense Secretary. This would have
given you total bipartisan domination over defense issues. It also might have
triggered an exodus of conservative and moderate Democrats to the Republican
Party, the only thing that can truly transform the G.O.P. into a majority party.
Many Democrats who now believe that foreign policy should have priority over
domestic issues increasingly see themselves as closer to Republicans than to
Democratic liberals.  It looks as though your model here is the Administration
of Dwight D. Eisenhower. You seem to be planning a Cabinet Government. Big
decisions would be discussed by a select few Cabinet members and by Edwin Meese
3d, as the boss for policy; James A. Baker 3d, as the man in charge of
operations, and principal White House aides, like Richard V. Allen and Martin
Anderson. Only the most significant issues and disagreements would be thrown up
to you for adjudication.  Of course, President Eisenhower never really ran the
executive branch this way, nor have any of the other Presidents who talked about
it.

I have to admit to a secret desire for you to give this idea the full college
try. Seeing it fail might finally persuade organizational experts to forget it
for another generation. No Cabinet secretary is going to want to sit around
while others talk about his business - nor is he going to want his deputies to
be running his department while he spends all his time at the White House. At
Mr. Eisenhower's Cabinet meetings, the only one who was prepared to let the
others hear his business was the Postmaster General.

Unless you are very different from all your post-World War II predecessors, your
White House staff is going to end up being more important than your Cabinet. And
within that staff, it is not likely that the policy group under Mr. Meese will
be able to hold its ground against the grind of daily decisions being made by
Mr. Baker's operational group. Operations tend to set a lot of policies in
concrete.

Beyond the idea of Cabinet government, what you seem to be doing is organizing
yourself out of a job on the ground that it is necessary for the proper business
management of government. This casts you in the role of a passive President, a
kind of overseer and chairman of the board, rather than a President and chief
executive officer.

The theory behind such an approach, I take it, is the one set forth by Alfred S.
Bloomingdale, your adviser and former board chairman of the Diners Club:
''Running the Government is like running General Motors. It's twice General
Motors or three times General Motors - but it's General Motors.'' In fact, what
this country wants and needs is not a board chairman or a passive President, but
a strong one - even, yes even - something approaching the old and besmirched
Imperial Presidency.

There is no substitute for personal Presidential power. Jimmy Carter never
exercised it, and you seem to be talking as though you're going to follow his
lead. It is one thing - and a necessary thing - to step back from an immediate
problem in order to insure that you see the big picture in perspective; that's
the appropriate board-chairman aspect of the job. It's something very different
to let the matter end there and not move back into the fray as a chief executive
officer must.

In Washington, power is fragmented into thousands of small pieces, and thousands
of people are able to use their little chunk of power to stop the gears from
meshing. Mr. Carter acted as if there were nothing a President could do about
this. It became fashionable, given the profundity of such seemingly unsolvable
problems as inflation and energy, to speak of the inevitability of the weak
Presidency. But of our last several Presidents, most - John F.  Kennedy, Lyndon
B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon - have been strong. (It is often forgotten that in
1972 Mr. Nixon held Washington firmly in his grip, having just defeated George
S. McGovern in an electoral landslide. Not the war in Vietnam or Cambodia, but
Watergate began to strip him of his enormous power.)

The element common to all three of these Presidents was toughness.  True enough,
Jack Kennedy charmed the American people, L.B.J. was a wizard at one-on-one
persuasion and Richard Nixon could explain policy choices to the public very
cleverly. But the main strength of each of them was a reputation for using
power, for making opponents pay a price.

There was never any cost to anyone for opposing Jimmy Carter. His own political
appointees testified against his policies before Congress in open session.
Hardly anyone was fired. There was no bloodletting to show seriousness.

Even before his inauguration, Mr. Carter revealed that he would back off from a
hard fight. First, he nominated Theodore C.  Sorensen, the former Kennedy aide,
to be the Director of Central Intelligence. Then, some senators announced that
Mr. Sorensen would face a tough confirmation battle because of claims that he
had not been a strong enough supporter of the C.I.A. So Mr. Carter backed down.

Precisely on these grounds, you were right to stick with General Haig. If you
had backed off because some senators said there would be a confirmation
struggle, it would have sent a resounding signal of weakness throughout the
city.

In Washington, it is better to be feared than loved. Mr. Carter won neither
tribute. It is not clear what combination of love and fear you hope to make your
own.  There is a powerful tendency for every new Administration to put its own
mark on Washington immediately and to make sure that mark is different from the
previous Administration's. Jimmy Carter succumbed to the siren songs of his own
campaign pledges and campaign criticisms of the Ford and Nixon Administrations:
Not only would everything be new, it would be comprehensive. There was the
comprehensive energy proposal, the comprehensive Middle East peace package, the
comprehensive strategic-arms-limitations proposal to the Soviet Union. None of
these were adequately thought out and all had to be changed. It is one thing,
and a very important one, to make clear the direction of policy, but it would be
a mistake to try to do it all at once. You have to set your own agenda and make
it achievable. Unless you do so, the media will set the public agenda for you
and the public timetable and evaluate you every 100 days.  I like economists
better than so-called foreign-policy experts, people like me. That's because
economists are the only specialists I know who are more difficult to understand
and more often wrong than we are. The evidence strongly suggests that no one -
particularly economists -has a good idea of how to solve the interrelated
problems of inflation, unemployment and economic growth. In spite of that, you
made inflation, and your solutions to inflation, your No. 1 campaign issue, and
you will have to deliver.

From what I understand, you are saying that you will cut taxes, increase defense
spending, drastically reduce other kinds of Federal spending, balance the
budget, increase productivity and beat inflation and unemployment. If the Reagan
Administration does these terrific things, there will be a lot more Republicans
in this country when the next election rolls around. But your approach seems
internally contradictory and doomed to failure.

Your plan depends on the economy's growing at about 4.5 percent a year after
allowing for inflation, when almost all the experts are predicting a maximum
growth of about 3 percent. It also depends on Congress's agreeing to cut an
average of between $30 billion and $40 billion a year from the Federal budget
over the next five years. As Representative Jack Kemp, Republican of New York
and one of your close advisers, said some weeks ago, this would leave ''blood on
the floor'' - and you might lose the battle on top of it.

The way you handled this situation in California will not fare well in
Washington. You campaigned on a pledge not to increase taxes, but four weeks
after your inauguration you proposed a $254 million tax increase, and a month
later, you asked for close to $1 billion. We just had a President who did that
sort of flip-flopping, and it did not work for him or for us.

Nor will it help your economic program to scare the hell out of people.
Representa-tive David A. Stockman of Michigan, the directordesignate of the
Office of Management and Budget, recently put together a paper for you that
began: ''The momentum of short-run economic, financial and budget forces is
creating the conditions for an economic Dunkirk during the first 24 months of
the Reagan Administration.'' He then went on to propose a blueprint for
emergency actions in the first 100 days. It is arguable whether Congress would
buy many of his proposals - but that aside, to the extent that Washington and
the American economy run on confidence in the future, Dunkirk-talk can be
expected to create nothing but panic in the financial community.  You and many
of your advisers have been talking as though we were facing another kind of
Dunkirk - in our national-security affairs. It is one thing to run a campaign on
the issue of a security gap, suggesting that the United States is a midget
confronting a 10-foottall Soviet giant, but it is quite another thing to try to
run a foreign policy on that slogan. First, it is not true. We have some serious
problems, as with the volunteer Army, but they are solvable.  Meanwhile, Moscow
faces many fundamental economic problems that affect its overall power, and
these may not be solvable. Second, if your Administration stresses only American
weaknesses and only Soviet strengths, it will undermine your foreign policy.
Foreign relations, like economic relations, turn in large measure on confidence,
and if we are telling our friends and adversaries that we cannot defend Western
interests, they will all reposition themselves accordingly.  You cannot have
powerful alliances if you insist that our defense capability is feeble.

Maintaining American military might will require continued increases in defense
spending, but dealing with Pentagon budgets is a tricky business, and it is well
to re-call the recent advice of Melvin R. Laird, who was Secretary of Defense in
the Nixon Administration. Mr. Laird wrote that a sharp increase in military
spending, jolting the delicate balance between guns and butter, was likely to
lead eventually to a reaction against the Pentagon and a decline in defense
spending. Another consideration, as Mr. Laird pointed out, is that the military
services are not likely to spend a sudden fistful of new dollars very wisely.

Perhaps the most serious national security problems are not those that can be
solved by throwing money at them. For example, the ability of the Rapid
Deployment Force to deal with situations where ground forces may be needed
quickly, as in the Persian Gulf, must be made credible. But doing so will
require that we finally clarify whether the R.D.F. will be run by the Marines or
by the Army. It will also depend upon whether we decide to buy a great deal more
airlift capability, on the one hand, or store equipment and ammunition in the
region ahead of time in ships and bases.

The volunteer Army lacks troops with the necessary skills and motivation, but
more money is not going to attract people of much greater capacity. Most experts
who have looked at the issue, including your own, will tell you that the answer
is a resumption of the draft - the very solution you have opposed so far. Yet if
I could choose one issue on which you could make your mark in history, and along
the way send a signal of strength and determination abroad, nothing would be
better than the draft. And you should do so despite the very real political
cost.  C. Foreign Policy Given the volatility of domestic politics in countries
around the world, foreign policy nowadays is like a house of cards. It can be
knocked down by a breeze, a misstep, an inadvertent move of the hand. You and
your advisers have been saying that the United States must be more assertive of
our interests. All well and good. But other nations are doing precisely the same
thing, and it is becoming increasingly difficult to match up their interests
with our own. New and independent groups, basically unfriendly to the United
States, continue to spring up in third-world countries. There can be an eruption
in a place like Iran, overturning decades of American diplomacy, and little can
be done about it.

Without half-trying, you could destroy American relations with our closest
allies in Western Europe, Japan and elsewhere by insisting on a pure and simple
confrontationist policy with the Soviet Union. That kind of approach will not
work with Moscow (especially if the Russian military is anywhere near as strong
as you say it is), and our allies see Moscow as being more influenced by a
combination of carrots and sticks than by sticks alone. It may be true that some
of our Western European friends have allowed themselves to become too dependent
on trade with the Soviet Union. The answer, however, is not to bludgeon these
allies - whose econo-mies are, to an important degree, tied into such trade -but
rather to help them reshape their dependency.

The need to disentangle our allies from the Soviet Union was never more evident
than in the case of Poland. Like us, our allies would regard the use of force by
the Soviet Union against Poland as a catastrophic event. Yet, unlike us, they
would find it difficult to take action against their Soviet trading partners.

It would also be a mistake to believe that our friends in the Middle East and
Persian Gulf perceive the Soviet threat as you do or believe it is more
important than other matters. For example, Egypt's President Anwar el-Sadat was
really talking to you when he recently cautioned against allowing an anti-Soviet
crusade to overshadow Egyptian interests in a Middle East peace settlement. ''I
want to tell the American people,'' he said, ''at this moment in particular,
that when they urge President Reagan to follow a hard-line policy toward the
Soviet Union, they should not include America's friends in this policy.''

Our relations with China are not yet on enduring ground. It would be a strategic
error of the first magnitude if you sought to fulfill your campaign rhetoric
about establishing official ties with Taiwan.  The policy of the last three
Administrations has been that there is only one China, with its capital in
Peking, but that the United States will not foresake Taiwan. Any tampering with
that stance could begin to turn Peking back toward Moscow.

There is a likelihood, from what we hear, that you will reverse Mr. Carter's
human-rights policy. Few would disagree that, as usual, he overstated and
overmoralized his position. Yet foreign policy is not simply a game, a matter of
the balance of power; Mr. Carter's intention - to practice our values in our
policy - remains valid. It would be tragic to revert to the simplicities of the
1950's, when every supposed anti-Communist nation was automatically a friend of
the United States. My guess is that the American people would find that brand of
power politics neither realistic nor desirable in the world of the 1980's. When
to roll with change and when to fight it represents one of the toughest of
foreign-policy decisions.  D. Energy Policy Only a few people in the field of
energy really seem to know what they are talking about, and those few disagree
with one another. Not knowing which path to pick, President Carter's approach
was to pick them all, and that may not be as outlandish as it sounds. If we can
afford to pay for synthetic fuels, nuclear energy and solar energy and the rest,
it makes sense to me, given how essential the problem is to our national
security and our economy.

Your approach, as I understand it, is to bet on greater domestic oil and gas
production by deregulating prices and to place less emphasis on conservation and
Government support of synthetic fuels.  Is there really all that oil and gas
lying around in and near the United States, fuel that the companies will be able
to start pumping within the next 10 years? Does their finding it really depend
upon their being permitted to make the consumer pay the bill, however high it
may be? You may be creating the impression that the deregulation of prices
represents a quick fix.

I think you should declare a War On Energy. It will be very important for you to
tell the American people that the W.O.E. will not be over for the rest of the
century. If defeating the energy problem turns out to be much tougher and more
expensive than you're saying, and if the oil and gas companies are meanwhile
getting rich at the consumer's expense, woe is you.  E. Other Domestic Issues
There are a batch of issues affecting how people will live from day-to-day:
environmental controls, welfare, Social Security, aid to cities, women's rights.
Policies here come down to judgments about who is to bear what burden for
society as a whole.

You have often spoken against the excesses of environmental regulation as it
affects business. But what action would these businesses have taken to clean our
air and water on their own? And just how important are these regulations in the
larger scheme? Were Federal auto-emission standards really a significant reason
for the collapse of the Chrysler Corporation? Or didn't the Chrysler problem,
and others like it, go much deeper - to the basic question of how to stimulate
productivity in our society and how to develop once again competent business
leaders?

Then, there are the poor, the old and the disadvantaged. These are the unseen
people of our society: We feel the weight of their presence in our taxes; we
catch two-second glimpses of their lives on a television screen. Yet their
increasing problems have an impact upon all of us. Prejudice, even hatred,
between whites and blacks is palpable in the schools and on the streets. As the
recession has imposed new disciplines on the middle class, it has decomposed the
lives of the poor. It would be a mistake for you to look at the poor from your
high place as mere shadows on a screen, and see only welfare cheats and
criminals.  III. Conclusion You are far better prepared for Washington than most
commentators have allowed. Much of what goes on in the capital is theater. You
should know, however, that a good run - even for a terrific show - is about a
year. After that, Presidents have to fall back on their accomplishments.

It is sobering to remember what happened to our last four chief executives:
Presidents Carter and Ford were defeated at the polls, Mr. Nixon was forced to
resign and Mr. Johnson chose not to run for reelection. The American people will
forgive indiscretions, poor English, lack of physical coordination, rhetorical
inconsistencies, hypocrisy and maybe even a lie and a minor crime or two - in
sum, almost anything except failure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Reagan photo of Afghanistan photo of N.J.
nuclear plant

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LIFE FOR NUCLEAR CITY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5931 words


Stewart McBride is a correspondent for The Christian Science Monitor. By Stewart
McBride Building 111's Blue Battle Room: The scientist pushes a plastic button
and switches on nuclear war. A squadron of 10 Soviet T62 tanks, supported by
tactical nuclear artillery and a trio of Hind attack helicopters, has smashed
through the West German border near Hunfeld and is rumbling toward a lone
American platoon defending the ridge northeast of town. The Russians open fire
on the hillside. A cloud of white hyphens (computerized symbols for explosions)
erupts at tree line, and a capital ''C'' (conventional kill) flickers nearby. An
American antitank unit has bitten the dust; the clock is running. Nuclear war in
the Blue Battle Room has been known to last three or four hours. This, however,
is a limited engagement, 20 minutes. The scientist is scrimmaging the Russians
in lieu of lunch.

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory is to nuclear weapons what Yankee Stadium
is to baseball: the traditional home of big-league might. Polaris, Poseidon and
Minuteman, the power hitters in America's strategic stockpile, were all
conceived on the outskirts of Livermore, Calif., a cowtown-turned-suburb 42
miles east of the Golden Gate Bridge. Indeed, every single nuclear weapon in the
United States arsenal has been designed at the Livermore lab or at its older
sibling rival in Los Alamos, N.M.

No warheads are actually manufactured here; they are imagined, designed,
mathematically modeled, then relayed to Pentagon colonels and defense analysts
who ''explode'' them during computer war games such as those in Livermore's Blue
Battle Room. Months later, beneath the Nevada desert, custom-built prototypes
are detonated. If tests are successful, classified blueprints are distributed to
seven production plants from Miamisburg, Ohio, to Amarillo, Tex., where the
weapons are assembled before being dispatched to ballistic-missile submarines,
bombers and underground silos.

Between them, Livermore and Los Alamos constitute the collective brains of the
Department of Energy's nuclear-weapons complex, which employs 30,000 people and
is spread over nine states. During the last decade, inflation and political
fallout from the Vietnam War eroded both the labs' morale and the scope of their
weapons research. A generation ago, 95 percent of Livermore's staff worked on
nuclear weapons; today, greatly increased effort is devoted to energy,
environmental work and nuclear-waste disposal, and less than half of the lab's
employees are involved strictly in weapons work. Since 1970, Congressional
appropriations for Livermore's weapons program have been cut in constant dollars
by 40 percent; detonations at the Nevada Test Site, a true barometer of the
lab's health, have dropped 80 percent.

But after Ronald Reagan steps into the Oval Office on Tuesday, Livermore's
controversial weapons designers will come back into the national spotlight again
- to the satisfaction of those who believe the new Administration should and
will ''carry a bigger nuclear stick''; and to the dismay of those who worry
about the implications of a new round of arms development or about the hazards
of radiation near development or testing sites.

One Livermore scientist predicts that ''Reagan's National Security Council is
going to tell the Pentagon to bring in its list of weapons. ... The Department
of Defense will strike while the iron is hot -and they've got a friend in the
White House. We'll start taking down the new-flavored nukes that have been
sitting on our shelves for the last decade.'' Livermore and Los Alamos are
currently battling it out for assignments to design new nuclear warheads,
including those for the Trident submarine and for the proposed MX
intercontinental missile. In addition, Livermore is pushing ahead with proposals
for a wide range of new nuclear weaponry to offer the incoming Administration.
The first task of the Reagan Administration, say Livermore scientists, should be
securing the ''survivability'' (against a Soviet ''first strike'') of United
States strategic nuclear-weapons systems.

At the very moment, however, that a former California Governor is coming to
Livermore's rescue the incumbent Governor is attacking the lab with some of the
most severe criticism in its history. The University of California is the
nominal administrator of both Livermore and the Los Alamos National Laboratory
under Department of Energy contracts that expire in 1982. Renegotiations must
begin in the coming months, but Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. is attempting to
persuade the University's Board of Regents to sever all ties with the two labs
and terminate its 37-year affair with the nuclear-weapons business.

Governor Brown is not the only source of rumblings. A series of earthquakes a
year ago gave Livermore a good shake; then, last April, there were several
publicized accidental spills of highly toxic radioactive plutonium; a report
later surfaced of unusually high cancer rates among Livermore employees. Now, a
group of environmentalists, physicians and local officials warns that the
several hundred pounds of plutonium stored at the lab constitute a serious
health hazard to the four million San Francisco Bay area residents within 50
miles of Livermore. Last year five northern California Congressmen demanded that
the Department of Energy remove the plutonium from Livermore, lest the lab
become what one critic called the ''Three Mile Island of the West.''

Providing cover for his Cobra helicopter on reconnaissance, the scientist lofts
a volley of Dragon antitank missiles into the valley. He is tall, clean-cut,
with slight bags under his eyes. On the street he could pass for the basketball
coach of a small Christian college in the Middle West. This morning the Russians
have him cornered in the hills, outgunned by odds that would have made George
Patton squirm. One of the scientist's choppers flies into the teeth of the enemy
and is reduced to hyphens. ''C.'' Choosing his ace in the hole, the scientist
moves to press the button marked: ''NUCLEAR FIRE PLAN.''

Shortly after breakfast on Nov. 1, 1952, the nuclear physicist Edward Teller was
surreptitiously escorted to the basement of a seismological laboratory on the
University of California's Berkeley campus. He was about to eavesdrop on the
detonation of the world's first hydrogen bomb, Mike, a device he and the
mathematician Stanislaw Ulam had spent several years creating. The test would
take place on Eniwetok Atoll in the Marshall Islands. Teller calculated that the
explosion's tremor would waggle its way in 1,000 seconds from the South Pacific
Basin to Berkeley bedrock, 5,000 miles away.  Like an Apache scout with his ear
to the ground, counting the hoofbeats of the approaching wagon train, Teller
would size up Mike's nucleonics by the flutter of a seismograph's slender beam
of light on photographic paper.

At dawn, on the other side of the international dateline, Mike was exploded. Its
fireball expanded three miles; the yield was fearsome, 800 times more powerful
than the 13-kiloton atomic bomb that leveled one-third of Hiroshima and killed
more than 100,000 Japanese. Mike erased the atoll island of Elugelab. When the
seismic record reached Berkeley, Teller cabled a three-word telegram to Los
Alamos: ''It's a boy!'' He had fathered a new kind of fire.

The creation of the hydrogen bomb was a quantum leap in nuclear weaponry. But
Edward Teller had made another significant, though less dramatic, contribution
to the arms race two months earlier, when he and the Nobel laureate Ernest O.
Lawrence (father of the cyclotron), along with 50 other young scientists,
established the nation's second nuclear-weapons lab, in an abandoned naval air
station in Livermore. The objective of Teller's new laboratory: to compete
openly with Los Alamos, and to forge ahead more aggressively with research to
refine the H-bomb.

In 1954 an already strained relationship between the two laboratories grew
acrimonious when Teller testified against J. Robert Oppenheimer, former Los
Alamos director, at hearings before the Atomic Energy Commission. Among the
accusations against Oppenheimer was that he lacked ''enthusiastic support'' for
the hydrogen-bomb program. (In 1949, the year the Soviet Union detonated its
first atomic bomb - called ''Joe 1,'' after Josef Stalin - a quartercentury
sooner than Americans expected, Oppenheimer and the A.E.C.'s General Advisory
Committee, of which he was chairman, had voted against the crash program to
build the H-bomb proposed by Teller.) After the 1954 hearings, Oppenheimer's
security clearance was permanently revoked.

The bitterness between the labs has waned during the last two decades, though
the rivalry has not. ''The competition is not unlike that between the United
States and the Soviet Union,'' says a young scientist. ''The standing joke at
Livermore is that there are four degrees of secrecy: classified, secret, top
secret and don't-tell-Los Alamos.''

The labs have two basic responsibilities: filling Pentagon orders to keep the
design of the basic stockpile up to date, and advancing research on new weapons.
The first is known as ''turning the crank''; the second, ''blue-yonder work.''
According to a veteran Livermore scientist who has close ties with Washington,
''The nuclear weapons business is a two-way street. When the Pentagon needs a
new bomb, they say, 'We want this much energy, heat, form, gamma radiation. It
must be packaged to have this shape, weigh this much, and use so much of a
specified nuclear material.'

''The other way it works is pure salesmanship on the lab's part. I call it
educating the only customer in town. We come up with a new bomb. The lab's sales
office, the Military Applications Program, writes up the specs and sends one of
its salesmen to the Air Force, Navy or Army. The salesman says: 'General,
wouldn't you like a new bomb for the B-1?' If he says yes, the specs then go
from the Pentagon to the Joint Chiefs (of Staff), who ask the National Security
Council, which makes a recommendation to the President, who issues a directive
to the Department of Defense, which orders the bomb from the Department of
Energy and the lab. Defense gets a new bomb and the lab has the prestige of
getting its weapon in the stockpile.''

Hugh DeWitt, a theoretical physicist who works on unclassified astrophysics
research at Livermore, says: ''The United States has such a large variety of
fission and thermonuclear weapons in its arsenal largely because lab scientists
want to keep busy and protect their jobs and further their careers.'' (In August
1979, the Livermore lab management asked the F.B.I. to investigate DeWitt, who
had filed three affidavits that spring on behalf of The Progressive magazine,
which was fighting the Justice Department to publish a detailed article on the
makings of a hydrogen bomb. The Progressive claimed its article was based on
unclassified documents, including an article by Teller on the hydrogen bomb in
the 1970 edition of the Encyclopedia Americana.) Charles Schwartz, a University
of California, Berkeley, physics professor, views the rivalry of the two labs as
an ''internal arms race.'' As they ''lobby to get their products accepted in
Washington and block any arms-control measures which might diminish their
budget,'' he says, ''they are doing a dance of death.''

Livermore's chief project currently, in addition to work on the Trident
submarine and MX missile (a mobile, land-based ICBM to augment and perhaps
eventually replace the existing Minuteman and Titan missiles), is developing
five new weapons systems: the Lance missile, the 8-inch artillery gun, the
155-millimeter howitzer, the ground-launched cruise missile and the B83, the
''modern strategic bomb.'' ''Strategic'' weapons are generally more powerful
intercontinental ones, in contrast to ''tactical'' weapons for battlefield use.
The warheads for the Lance and the artillery-gun and howitzer shells are neutron
bombs (''enhanced radiation weapons''), which the Soviet newspaper Literaturnaya
Gazeta recently described as the ''supercapitalistic weapon: It leaves property
intact but destroys people.''

In the next few months, Mr. Reagan is expected to select an assortment of
delivery systems to upgrade missiles, bombers and submarines designed 20 years
ago: replacing the manned B-52 bombers, perhaps with an updated B-1 bomber,
which was canceled by the Carter Administration but has already consumed $6
billion in research and development; installing the B83 strategic bomb in
whatever plane the President decides upon; accelerating deployment of the MX
missile, perhaps basing the system in existing Minuteman III silos instead of
constructing new silo fields in the Southwest; equipping NATO artillery in
Europe with neutron bomb warheads; and preventing an anticipated
nuclear-material shortage by refurbishing production reactors at Savannah River,
S.C.

A number of Livermore's weapons designers believe the ''high ground'' in the
future arms race will be outer space. With a boost from President Reagan's
defense budget, they hope to continue developing a ''new generation of weapons''
- high-energy lasers and particle beams that some have dubbed ''death rays.''
The Pentagon projects spending $1 billion during the next decade on its
beamweapon program, now going on at Livermore and several other national
laboratories.

Of Livermore's $435 million budget for fiscal year 1981, $171 million will go to
the nuclear weapons program and $72 million to other defense programs, including
$58 million for developing laser fusion, a process that Livermore has pioneered.

Livermore's scientists are trying to develop a method to trigger ''clean''
fusion explosions - that is, extremely powerful blasts without radioactive
fallout. With something called the ''drip and zap'' method, laser beams converge
on pellets, the size of a grain of sand, containing deuterium and tritium. The
aim is for the lasers to compress these hydrogen isotopes to 13 times the
density of lead and to heat them to 10 times the temperature of the sun's
center. So far, the scientists have been able to achieve the high temperatures
but not the high density. If they do - and it may take them decades - the
process could also provide a cheap, clean source of nuclear energy that could
turn the deuterium in a quart of water into enough electric energy for a family
of four for a year.

Whether the Livermore laser, named Shiva, after the Hindu god of destruction and
reproduction, is creating minature stars or testing tiny H-bombs depends on
one's prospective. Says John Emmett, the young physicist who directs the laser
work: ''If you don't like the program, you say it's 100 percent military. If you
like it, then it's 100 percent energy. The House Armed Services Committee is our
authorizing agent. As far as they are concerned, this is weapons work and any
energy is gravy.''

Coming through the pass, the Soviet tanks have made the mistake of clumping
together in the classic conventional tactic they used in World War II at Kursk -
the flying wedge. From his 155-millimeter and 8-inch guns hidden in the hills
north of Hunfeld, the scientist fires a couple of small but accurate hometown
products - a low-yield fission warhead and a neutron bomb.

With certain discomfort, Terry Fox, Livermore banker and mobilehome dealer,
recalls his visit to the Soviet Union two years ago with a delegation of
American air-conditioner salesmen. After a floor show of husky ballerinas at the
Arbat restaurant near Red Square, a young Muscovite asked Fox, ''Where do you
come from in America?''

''A little town in California called Livermore,'' he replied.  ''Oh, where you
make the neutron bomb!'' Fox observes that ''we used to have bumper stickers on
our cars which read: 'Where the Hell Is Livermore?' Now we need one that says,
'Ask the Russians!'''

In the Soviet Union, Livermore is known as the ''City of Death.'' In 1952, when
Edward Teller and Ernest Lawrence drove into town, it was nothing more than a
medley of 4,400 feisty Western folk, most of whom raised either cattle, roses or
the grapes for white wines. The town, named after an English seaman, Robert
Livermore, who jumped ship off northern California and settled in the valley in
1835, initially served as a hitching post for bandits, gold prospectors,
railroad surveyors, Basque shepherds, German vintners, men who lassoed bulls and
fought bears for fun.

The former hick town now has a Ph.D. and a P.T.A. mother on every block. Ivy
League scientists and their Westchester wives created their own local haute
culture: a symphony orchestra, light opera company, and a small theater group
whose production of ''Threepenny Opera'' was attacked from local pulpits. Old
timers weaned on backroom politics still bristle at the insufferable intrusion
of engineers and astrophysicists, who bring to local boards, commissions and
councils the alien logic of probability curves and flow charts.  ''You used to
hear talk of crops, cows and weather,'' says Herbert Hagemann,
seventh-generation descendant of a Spanish soldier whose family was given
several hundred acres in Livermore Valley by the Mexican Government. ''Now it's
bridge clubs and how's-yourscientific-project?'' Hagemann's old tomato patch is
now part of a housing subdivision.

At 8 A.M. of a weekday, 7,200 Livermore employees begin flowing into a
mile-square compound that, architecturally, is a cross between an industrial
park and a northern Florida trailer camp. They arrive in modest cars bearing
bumper stickers: ''Know Nukes,'' ''Physics Makes the World Go Round'' and
''Bible Recording 24 Hours 462-9600.'' They dress in pressed khakis and penny
loafers. Clipped to shirt pockets are identification badges and dosimeters,
which measure exposure to radiation. (At Los Alamos, one obstreperous scientist
once pasted a picture of a chimpanzee on his ''Top Secret'' clearance badge and
went undetected for several weeks.)

Livermore lab is not an institution of Dr. Strangeloves. But it does have its
zealots. One scientist, still in his office recently at 2:30 A.M., says, ''I
sleep when it is least costly to the endeavor in which I am working. Sometimes
that is between 6 and 10 in the morning.'' As he talks, he playfully whittles at
his dosimeter with a Swiss Army knife. ''It costs 100 kilobucks a day if you
hold up a test in Nevada, and sometimes we work around the clock. We don't keep
it up indefinitely. People have gone to the hospital and marriages have
frayed.'' He is single. ''The lab has 1,000 Ph.D.'s, but the leadership cadre
here is a couple dozen. We are the exceptions, the fanatic monomaniacs to whom
only a few things are important - and that doesn't include home, family, peer
approval or money. We are interested in advancing scientific frontiers and
seeing Soviet imperialism decidedly lose. We want cheap abundant energy for
everyone. But 90 percent of the lab's personnel are nonunusual people. They work
9 to 5 and are indistinguishable from those at industrial parks in San Jose.''

These ''nonunusual people,'' many of whom spend their working hours designing
the deadliest weapons known to man, are an athletic, wholesome bunch. The lab
telephone book lists 37 extracurricular clubs - all part of what one employee
calls ''the Japanese happyworker formula'': Weight Watchers, flag football,
archery, the Cycletrons bike club and the Hydramatic Hobos, a
recreational-vehicle camping club. One of the lab's 44 softball teams was named
Neutron Bombers because, as the first baseman put it: ''We had no visible
effect.''

The mix of California mellow and scientific efficiency extends to the lowliest
salami and cantaloupe slices. The lab's sandwich and salad bar is computerized.
A cafeteria worker in a lime green uniform apologizes: ''I can't tell you any of
the prices, only the code numbers. For one piece of bread I push 787. Two pieces
is 680. Your fruit salad is 420.''

During lunch hour the lab looks like a summer camp for adults: jazzercise
classes, volleyball matches, Bulgarian folk dancing.  Serious sun bathers sprawl
on blue lounge chairs beside the lab's Olympic-size pool, a stone's throw from a
plutonium containment facility that contains enough nuclear material to level a
half-dozen Hiroshimas.

''If I stopped to think that this work would be used to kill thousands of
people, I couldn't do it,'' confesses one weapons designer. ''If we ever see a
nuclear weapon used, we've failed. But the only way to insure peace and deter
the Russians is to build more accurate and efficient nuclear weapons.''

Nuclear war and atomic holocaust remain abstractions to these scientists. Most
of them, even Edward Teller, have never witnessed a full-scale thermonuclear
explosion. Harold Agnew, a former director of Los Alamos who flew on the
Hiroshima mission, once suggested that every several years a demonstration
nuclear weapon should be detonated in the atmosphere and witnessed by chiefs of
state ''in their underwear'' so they could feel the heat. One way to avoid the
heat is to speak in scientifically aloof jargon. The talk at Livermore is
euphemistically of ''shots,'' not explosions; ''devices,'' not bombs; nuclear
''events,'' not wars. Weapons are coded ''W70 Mod 3'' and ''Camembert.''

The two American missiles hit the Soviet tanks dead on. When the vapor clears,
the valley is strewn with an alphabet soup of ''N's'' and ''T's.'' Six of the 10
Russian tank crews were annihilated by the blast and fireball. Those not killed
instantly will die of delayed radiation effects in the next several hours, or
worse, days.

When the Russians abrogated the three-year nuclear-testing moratorium in
September 1961, President Kennedy ordered Livermore and Los Alamos to resume
testing in the Nevada desert and the Pacific.  The next year radioactivity in
Utah's milk supplies rose measurably.

Utah, because of prevailing winds, ''was getting clobbered, people began raising
hell, and the (Atomic Energy) Commission was on the hot seat,'' recalls Dr. John
Gofman. He was the University of California medical-physics professor who was
hired in 1963 by Livermore to open a biomedical division to monitor the effects
of radiation.

Gofman's research convinced him that Government radiation safety standards were
appallingly low. In 1969, he testified before a Senate subcommittee that 32,000
additional cancers would result annually in the United States if the American
public were exposed to the Government's yearly ''maximum average permissible
dose'' of 170 millirems. (A rem is a unit used to measure harmful radiation.) He
later denounced the Government's radiation standards as nothing short of
''licenses to commit the number of random murders convenient for its
operations.''

Gofman's sharp tongue irked the A.E.C., which in 1972 withdrew funding for his
research on radiation, cancer and chromosome damage.  The following year Gofman
quit Livermore, but the controversy continued.

Since 1960, at least 40 Livermore lab employees have been struck with melanoma,
a skin cancer. Last April, Dr. Donald Austin of California's Department of
Health Services reported the incidence of melanoma to be three to five times
higher inside the Livermore lab than in the surrounding communities.

The widows of Richard McSwiggin and Stuart Gunn, two of the four lab employees
to die of melanoma since 1974, have filed multimilliondollar ''wrongful death''
suits against Livermore and the University of California for ''falsely
representing the risk of radioactive material.'' Gunn, a senior chemist, had
twice the maximum permissible lifetime dosage of radioactivity for occupational
exposure in his body when he died. A Livermore spokesman contends that Gunn was
exposed to radiation while a student at Berkeley; studies are still being
conducted on Gunn's remains at the United States Transuranium Registry in
Richland, Wash., and at Los Alamos.

Exactly how much radiation is sufficient to cause cancer and chromosomal damage
is a subject of bitter controversy. Mortimer Mendelsohn, who took over when
Gofman was forced out as director of the biomedical division at Livermore, says
his predecessor is given to hyperbole. ''The risk of radiation danger here is
less than that from the tritium in a digital watch. The dilemma is how much
radiation to allow when the risk never goes to zero.'' Gofman, however, claims
that plutonium is 1,000 to 10,000 times more carcinogenic than Government
estimates. Conditions at weaponsproduction plants elsewhere may be even more
dangerous than those at Livermore, where the work is in design testing. One
recent study among workers at the Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons plant near Denver
showed an excess of brain cancer eight times greater than other white males in
Colorado.

In April 1979, John Gofman, now professor emeritus at Berkeley, told an Energy
Department hearing board that a major accident at the Livermore lab could cause
''from 10,000 to a million lung cancer deaths in California'' and render much of
the state uninhabitable for ''hundreds or even thousands of years.''

The nuclear blast has touched off a small forest fire. Green dots shimmer red.
These war games are dry runs for tactical (limited) nuclear warfare, and for
evaluating new technology in the stockpile.  ''When the chips are down,'' says
the scientist, ''and you're in a nuclear war, it's nice to have been there
before.''

In Building 332, Livermore uses or stores several hundred pounds of
plutonium-239 (the precise amount is classified information), which is machined
inside sealed ''glove boxes'' for nuclear-bomb test parts. It took only a few
dozen pounds of plutonium to destroy Nagasaki; furthermore, it can be one of the
most toxic substances known. Scientists say you can hold a five-pound chunk in
your hand and nothing will happen, but if you breathe in enough plutonium oxide
dust you will be dead in a matter of days.

On April 8, a very small amount of plutonium was blown out of an overpressurized
''glove box'' at Livermore and, according to the lab, 3 micrograms escaped
through the filtration system into the atmosphere. It was a ''minor'' accident,
says H. Wade Patterson, head of the lab's Hazards Control Department. ''You
could have been standing on top of the stack, breathing the air that went by,
and it wouldn't have been enough to irradiate you.''

Jeffrey Garberson, head of the lab's public-information office, says,
''Employees get less radiation here than going for a chest Xray.'' Garberson is
past president of the lab's organic garden club, which cultivates a
33,000-square-foot plot a few blocks downwind of the plutonium facility.
Apparently he and the club's 90 members (''plus 40 people on the waiting list,''
he says), sense no danger: ''Our biggest problem is gophers,'' he says. When the
state's melanoma report was issued in April, Garberson and lab director Roger
Batzel told the press that lab employees frequently exercised outdoors on their
lunch hours and were probably getting too much sun.

Unlike many of the lab's critics, John Gofman supports the weapons work (''Who
wants to hand the Soviets a first strike on a silver platter?''), but winces at
the possibility of a major accident at the plutonium building.

In January, a pair of earthquakes, measuring 5.5 and 5.6 on the Richter scale
(moderate to heavy), caused $2.5 million in damages to the lab, and wrecked a
wall and staircase in Building 332. The lab reported that no plutonium was
released. John Rutherford, a structural engineer, inspected the plutonium
building for Friends of the Earth. He doubts the building could withstand the
maximum-predicted earthquake along the 13 active faults crisscrossing the area.
Part of Building 332 was constructed in 1961 to survive up to 0.5 G's force
(equivalent to half the acceleration of gravity), but recent studies that
earthquakes could occur in the Livermore area that would be equal to O.8 G's
force. Seismologist James Scheimer, who is preparing an environmental impact
statement for the lab, says, ''There are two very different intepretations of
the geology. That disparity is what we're trying to pin down.''

''The only safe place to work on plutonium is in a mountain,'' says Gofman,
whose recently completed book, ''Radiation and Human Health,'' will be published
this year by the Sierra Club. He means, literally, that a mountain should be
carved out and the work moved inside. ''The lab is working with a hell of a lot
of plutonium, and the potential for disaster is much worse than Three Mile
Island. An earthquake, explosion or fire in the lab, with a wind blowing in the
right direction, and you're risking the lives of hundreds of thousands of people
in the Bay area. The lab arrogantly says that is far-fetched, but those may be
their famous last words.''

The Russians are holding Hunfeld hostage. They have three artillery pieces left,
stationed in the town itself, on the hunch that the Americans won't shell a
friendly German town. But the scientist chooses to clear the board of red
jerseys. He dials for a neutron weapon with enough blast to knock out the
Russian guns while saving ''friendly'' buildings. He drops the bomb on the
outskirts of the city. ''N.'' Yellow squares go red, then crumble into
horizontal hashmarks.

In the padded orange booths of an all-night diner on Market Street in San
Francisco, Steve Ladd of the War Resisters League is mobilizing his tired
troops. Most of them are students from Berkeley, Los Angeles, Santa Cruz and
Davis, and are members of U.C.N.W.L.C.P., which translates without much poetry
as the University of California Nuclear Weapons Labs Conversion Project.  They
have put down their ''No More Nuclear'' and ''Wage Peace'' signs long enough to
fill thermoses with coffee, spoon down hot Cream of Wheat and buy fried-egg
sandwiches to go. It is 7:30 A.M.; they have been up all night picketing the
U.C. Extension Center across the street where the University's Board of Regents
is voting on breaking ties with the two nuclear-weapons labs.

While they resume their picketing, Governor Brown is inside the center arguing
the case for severance: ''The university is profoundly compromising itself by
becoming the intellectual home of nuclear weapons and participating in a runaway
arms race. The Board of Regents may be competent to discuss parking facilities
at U.C.L.A. It doesn't have the time or temperament to manage nuclear-weapons
labs.  It acts as a cover, giving the labs protection from the Department of
Energy bureaucracy. In the confusion of that management gap, the lab is free to
act. If you believe we need more nuclear weapons, then this gap is creative. I
intend to do everything in my power to separate the University of California
from the nuclear-weapons business.'' At this meeting the vote down Brown's
severance motion, but the pressure is continuing to build.

The lab's critics charge that most ''outside checks'' on the labs are,
ironically, performed by former weapons designers who have graduated from
Livermore and Los Alamos to high positions in the Departments of Energy and
Defense. The fox, they say, is guarding the coop.

Heavy traffic between Livermore, Los Alamos, the Department of Energy and the
Pentagon is undeniable. When Herbert York, Livermore's first director, went to
the Pentagon in 1958 as director of Defense Research and Engineering, a young
physicist named Harold Brown took over as Livermore's director. Brown followed
in York's shoes to become Robert McNamara's director of Defense Research and
Engineering. When in 1965 Brown was appointed Secretary of the Air Force, the
man who had succeeded him as Livermore's director, John Foster, took his place
at the Defense Department. In 1977 President Carter appointed Brown Secretary of
Defense. Most recently, Duane Sewell, the deputy director at Livermore, was
appointed the Department of Energy' s Assistant Secretary for Defense Programs,
in charge of overseeing the entire nuclear-weapons complex.

In the past Livermore scientists have played important though little-known,
roles in formulating national policy - lobbying successfully against the Carter
Administration's signing of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty with Britain and
the Soviet Union in 1978, for example.

Livermore weapons scientists concede that they have actively lobbied for their
weapons and against the treaty but they say they have done so openly and in the
national interest. They are now worried that the regents, under pressure from
Governor Brown and lab critics, might withdraw their ''academic cover'' and,
with it, what they regard as key elements of their effectiveness in the
weaponsdevelopment field - autonomy and independence. One Livermore veteran
says, however, ''The regents may eventually end up dumping us. But as far as
we're concerned, with Reagan, the weapons business is full steam ahead.
Livermore will keep running even if we have to call in the Boy Scouts to do
it.''

Having vaporized his opponent, the scientist swivels a blue office chair and
reviews a digital scoreboard of his weapons' accuracy and kills. He has again
outwitted the muscle-bound Soviets, who made the mistake of relying on World War
II battle tactics. Some day the Russian Goliath, with its heavy, cruder
megatonnage, may wise up and match America's superior technology and more
accurate weaponry. For the moment, however, the scientist on his lunch hour can
still outfinesse brute force. Switching off tactical nuclear war in Europe, he
leaves the Blue Battle Room to prepare an artillery briefing for several
Congressmen and NATO representatives. This game is over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Livermore

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SORT OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words


WAYSOFESCAPE By Graham Greene.  320 pp. New York: Simon and Schuster. $12.95.

By JAMES ATLAS

''ASORT OF LIFE,'' the first volume of Graham Greene's autobiography, was not
equivocal in its title alone. Depicted there was a typical Georgian childhood
among the British intellectual middle class, a world of nannies, eccentric aunts
and uncles, doting if remote parents who fostered an early love of literature,
unhappy school experiences followed by an Oxford education: in short, the world
depicted - with some variations - in Cyril Connolly's ''Enemies of Promise,'' in
Evelyn Waugh's ''A Little Learning,'' in Peter Quennell's ''The Marble Foot.''
Typical, perhaps, yet hardly complacent; on several occasions in his youth, the
author claimed, he had
---------------------------------------------------------------------
played Russian roulette with a loaded revolver discovered in his brother's
cupboard.

No self-respecting writer would lay claim to a happy childhood, but the image of
a 19-year-old boy wandering out to a meadow and applying a pistol to his head
has always seemed to me implausible, melodramatic in a way Greene's novels
rarely are. Yet reading this sequel to ''A Sort of Life,'' I found myself
persuaded by his claim to a flirtation with suicide. The figure portrayed in
''Ways of Escape'' is a ''manic-depressive temperament'' who ''enjoyed'' the
London blitz because it provoked a ''sense of insecurity''; who found in
Indochina during the troubled 1950's ''that feeling of exhilaration which a
measure of danger brings to the visitor with a return ticket''; whose incessant
quest for adventure has served the same purpose as those suspense-charged
afternoons when he spun the chamber of his revolver and waited for a click or an
explosion: ''escape from boredom, escape from depression.''

Greene's compulsion to visit the most troubled corners of the world - Vietnam in
the years of French occupation; Malaya in the early 1950's, during the Communist
insurrections against the British; Kenya dur-
ing the Mau Mau rebellion; a leper colony in the last days of the Belgian Congo
- may have been a way of ''tempting the end to come,'' but it had a literary
motive as well. Just as Dostoyevsky seemed to draw inspiration from the threat
of financial ruin, Greene has drawn his best material from these arduous
voyages. Tranquil domestic environments don't interest him; even ''The End of
the Affair,'' a tale of adultery set in London, unfolds against the backdrop of
the blitz.

A master portraitist of the dreary, Greene returns in ''Ways of Escape'' to the
sorry realm of his novels, those exotic, shabby outposts in Africa, Haiti, Latin
America, the Far East, where overhead fans whir in empty saloons, policemen
swelter in the public squares and a glint of ominous intrigue lurks in the eyes
of minor public officials. The narrative voice - guarded, laconic, world-weary,
depressed - is the voice of Greene's protagonists: of Fowler, the British
journalist in ''The Quiet American''; of Bendrix, the tortured novelist in ''The
End of the Affair''; of Querry, the famous architect who escapes from the
pressures of celebrity in ''A Burnt-Out Case.''

But where the novelist's versions of himself are men confused by their own
contradictory impulses and humbled by the savage events they witness, men
unnerved by the pitiless waste of history, the autobiographer disposes of the
crises in his life with the bland dispatch of a civil servant out of one of
Greene's own novels, rubbing his hands and efficiently resolving some difficulty
over a passport. Despite his persistent intimations of despair, the dour,
death-haunted novelist is less in evidence than the club man dining out on
well-rehearsed anecdotes.

''Ways of Escape'' begins where ''A Sort of Life'' left off, with an account of
Greene's early literary career. When only 25, he had published ''The Man
Within,'' a novel successful enough to warrant the tentative support of his
publishers after he decided to leave his job as an assistant sub-editor on The
London Times. But his next two novels were, in the author's own estimate, ''of a
badness beyond the power of criticism properly to evoke,'' and at the age of 27
he found himself married and with a child on the way, 20 in the bank and no
prospects whatever. Everything depended on the success of ''Stamboul Train''
(otherwise known as ''Orient Express''). The writer on the verge of penury,
insomniac in his rural cottage, awaiting the verdict of his publisher, only to
be notified by a telephone call of its immediate success: The scene has a
dramatic rightness Greene rarely settles for in his novels, and the note of
belated selfcongratulation triumphs over his dutiful efforts to conjure up an
image of disorder and early sorrow.

What Greene has decided to offer his readers in ''Ways of Escape'' is a
desultory chronicle of the events that inspired his plots and the people on whom
his characters were based (a chronicle, it should be noted, that draws liberally
upon various prefaces to his novels).  ''Writing is a form of therapy,'' he
observes. ''Sometimes I wonder how all those who do not write, compose or paint
can manage to escape the madness, the melancholia, the panic fear which is
inherent in the human situation.'' Yet writing seems to induce in him the very
condition it is supposed to allay. He complains of novels abandoned, of boredom
and terrible isolation, of interminable years spent in the company of some
intransigent fictional character, ''picking up his jealousies, his meanness, his
dishonest tricks of thought, his betrayals.''

Candid about his literary problems, Greene is resolutely impersonal about
everything else. ''Ways of Escape'' is one of the most evasive autobiographies I
know. ''Those parts of life most beloved of columnists remain outside the scope
of this book,'' he announces - but columnists aren't the only ones thwarted by
his reticence. In 1946, he reports, he was suicidal - ''at a loss,'' a ''carrier
of unhappiness to people I loved'' -and briskly moves on to the political
situation in Malaya. Twenty years later, he confides, ''a difficult decision in
(his) private life'' prompted him to leave England and settle in France - and
there he leaves the matter.

His descriptions of others are no less grudging: Herbert Read, an admired
mentor, invites the young novelist to dinner with T.S. Eliot - and that is the
last we hear of them, apart from the disclosure that the company ''talked of
Arsene Lupin.'' In Hanoi, Greene obtains an interview with Ho Chi Minh and goes
on at great length about his efforts to procure the beer and opium that gave him
''the energy to meet Ho Chi Minh at tea.'' Of the interview itself, not a word.
The failure to explain verges on provocation.

Well, never mind, one is tempted to say: The truth is that novelists are seldom
great autobiographers. The great literary selfportraits in England have
generally come from writers famous in other genres - Gibbon, Mill, Cardinal
Newman, Edmund Gosse - while novelists have tended to produce rather tepid
redactions of their imaginative work. One has only to compare, say, the masterly
reminiscences of Cyril Connolly or Peter Quennell to the reticent confessions of
Anthony Powell or Evelyn Waugh. The autobiographer discovers some necessity to
chronicle his life, and usually does it only once; the novelist does it in every
novel. Greene has recounted in his work the crucial episodes of his life. Anyone
acquainted with his principled, arrogant, suffering protagonists already has an
autobiography of their creator.

...........................  James Atlas is an editor of the New York Times Book
Review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Graham Greene (pages 1 and 28)

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND THE BEST SELLERS;
PHILIP CAPUTO

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


Four years ago ''Rumor of War,'' Philip Caputo's widely-acclaimed memoir of his
combat experience in Vietnam, appeared briefly on the nonfiction best-seller
list. Now ''Horn of Africa,'' his novel about soldiers of fortune in Ethiopia,
appeared on the fiction best-seller list last week. Add to that a Pulitzer Prize
in 1972 for reporting on voter fraud in his hometown, Chicago, and it would seem
that the 39-year-old former foreign correspondent leads a charmed life.

But Mr. Caputo's literary career came perilously close to ending even before it
began. While covering the Lebanese civil war for The Chicago Tribune in 1975,
two Moslem gunmen jumped from behind a barricade in Beirut and ran toward him
firing their weapons.

''I ran too, but a bullet hit me in the left ankle and another got me in the
right foot,'' Mr. Caputo told us the other day from his home in Key West. ''In
Beirut one block was literally the difference between the Moslem and Christian
area, and I managed to crawl around the corner into a Christian street, and
luckily the gunmen were afraid to follow. I started crawling down this totally
empty street, yelling that I had been shot. A Christian came out of a cul-de-sac
and helped me into an apartment where a very skillful vascular surgeon happened
to live. I had blood all over and I thought it was all over. But the doctor
said, 'You're not in good shape but you're going to make it.'''

After six weeks in hospitals in Beirut, Germany and Chicago, Mr.  Caputo spent
the next year convalescing - and finishing ''Rumor of War,'' which he had
actually begun as a novel in 1967 while he was still in the Marine Corps, but no
longer in Vietnam. ''I couldn't seem to make it work as a novel,'' he said.
''The big problem was structural. Writers about other wars had the experience of
the war to structure their books. But Vietnam was an existential war of
meaningless episodes, five-minute fire fights, and I was having trouble making
sense of them.'' So he put the book aside and became a journalist. One day in
March 1974, after he had become a foreign correspondent, he was sitting on a
bench in Rome when it occurred to him to make ''Rumor ...'' a memoir instead of
a novel.

He wrote 10,000 words during the next two years, submitted it to a publisher
while he was on home leave in September 1975, then left for Lebanon - and his
rendezvous with the Moslem militiamen. ''While I was in the hospital in
Chicago,'' he said, ''I got a telegram saying Holt had accepted the manuscript
and would give me a $6,000 advance.''

The book's success earned Mr. Caputo a ''solid five-figure advance'' for ''Horn
of Africa'' and led him to resign as The Tribune's correspondent in Moscow in
order to finish the book.

Critics have noted echoes of Conrad in ''Horn of Africa.'' ''Mention of a
Conradian influence doesn't trouble me. I read and greatly admired his work when
I was in high school,'' said Mr.  Caputo, who is a graduate of Loyola University
of Chicago. ''But I am troubled by the reviewers who describe my central
character, Nordstrand, as being like Kurtz in 'Heart of Darkness.' I think the
difference is striking: Kurtz is a man of good intentions who's corrupted by the
wilderness. If Nordstrand has any literary ancestor it's Raskolnikov in 'Crime
and Punishment,' who starts out to fulfill a criminal destiny and has no good
intentions whatsoever.''

Although he says ''nostalgia'' prompted him to cover the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan briefly for Esquire last year, Mr. Caputo, who is already at work on
a second novel, appears content to leave war correspondence to others.
''Afghanistan was a very, very rough assignment, because of the countryside and
the rag-tag nature of the guerrillas,'' he said. ''And because I went over there
at age 38 with a bad leg, it didn't take long to realize it's very much a young
man's game.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Philip Caputo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INNOVATION IS VANISHING AT RAMAPO

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER

SECTION: Section 11; Page 1, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2041 words


MAHWAH EVEN on the bitterest of winter days, the sleek buildings on the Ramapo
College campus here seem to give off a shimmering warmth. But the warmth - like
the college's spirit of innovation and adventure - is an illusion that runs no
deeper than the buildings' mirrored facades.

Innovation and adventure were the bricks and mortar of the state college's
foundation. In the 10 years since it was opened, the school earned a reputation
as a force for progress within New Jersey's often-criticized system of higher
education.

But now, faculty members and administrators say, the foundation is crumbling.
''Much of the dream has not come to pass,'' said Frederick R.  Brodzinski, the
dean of students. ''The student constituency has changed, and so have job
markets, society and expectations. We still have the vestiges of a 60's
atmosphere, but we are tightening the curriculum and moving toward a more
traditional outlook.

''Let's face it, most colleges, and to some degree I mean Ramapo, are simply
looking for warm bodies.'' Although members of the School of Environmental
Studies have recently made plans to heat a newly approved dormitory with solar
collectors, and the Alternate Energy Center, in the back of the campus, includes
a geodesic dome and a functioning windmill, the college, as it celebrates its
10th anniversary, is finding that it may have to abandon many of its original
ideals to attract enough students to remain financially healthy.

Several factors have jeopardized Ramapo's future as a progressive institution.
Foremost has been the huge discrepancy between the approximately 10,000 students
the college planned for and the 3,340 full-time students enrolled today. The
budget shrinkage of 1976 changed expansion plans, and the end of the World War
II baby boom also altered enrollment projections.

With the state pinched financially, the public-education system has fared poorly
in the jockeying for funds. During Ramapo's first five years, state
appropriations were generous, with budget expansion averaging 33 percent a year.
But in the last five years, funds increased an average of only 7.3 percent a
year, while inflation ranged between 10 and 12 percent.

These problems, along with a heavily tenured faculty that limits the
administration's ability to satisfy the growing demand for a ''marketable''
education, have forced college authorities to reassess their goals.

''Ramapo is struggling to retain some attachment to its original mission,'' said
George Potter, the idealistic Englishman who has been the college's only
president. ''These are not easy times for liberal institutions, and there has
been a retreat from some of the innovations that allowed us to begin here.''

Ramapo was to have been the showcase of New Jersey's revitalized
higher-education system. Mr. Potter dedicated himself to the concept of an
interdisciplinary education, which at Ramapo centered on a group of five schools
largely independent of one another.

To encourage the freedom to explore new interests, students received grades no
lower than C and were free to study as they chose. Academic sanctions did not
exist, and only those teachers who were willing to merge their career interests
into those of the Ramapo community - being more interested in innovation than in
publication - were hired. Today, academic sanctions prevent students from taking
part in extracurricular activities if they are below grade.

Mr. Potter has been a frequent spokesman for experimental education in this
country. In his inaugural address, he said he was ''fed up with the rigidity of
college education'' in America and set as his goal the development of a
university that was not afraid to be innovative.

During the expansive days of the late 1960's, the achievement would have seemed
possible. Experiment within public education gained strong backing throughout
the nation and officials who sought to push New Jersey into the center of the
academic establishment were happy to support a progressive institution that
would reflect the times.

''With Ramapo, the state finally committed itself to something exciting,''
recalled Florence Thomases, an original member of the college's board of
trustees. ''We were given generous start-up funds and assurances that the state
would stand behind a public school with an unconventional philosophy.''

The demand for good public education had grown steadily since the end of World
War II. By 1965, New Jersey had become a densely populated state with a weak
network of six public institutions, most of them teachers colleges. Only two
universities in the state - Princeton and Rutgers - enjoyed excellent
reputations, and Princeton was, and still is, privately endowed.

New Jersey's top educators hoped that a modern university that emphasized
interdisciplinary learning and individual tutorials modeled on Oxford's school
system might attract students from around the country and help stem the
migration of New Jersey students.

For years, New Jersey had exported proportionately far more college students
than any other state. By 1968, more than half of New Jersey's 150,000 college
students were forced to go to out-of-state institutions each year. In addition,
New Jersey ranked 50th in per capita educational expenditures, with an average
of 1.5 percent of personal income spent on higher education.

Things had improved somewhat by 1972-73, when the state was 43d in per capita
expenditures on education with a figure of $32.28, compared with a national
average of $41.46. Also, in 1975 only 34 percent of New Jersey's college
students, 99,880 of 290,890, were leaving the state. But the projections for
1980 were that the percentage would rise to 40 percent, with 61,000 of 153,000
New Jersey students going elsewhere for their college educations.

With so many people fleeing the state in the 60's in search of a good, or even
mediocre, education elsewhere, public officials finally decided to bolster the
New Jersey system by doubling the enrollment ceiling at existing colleges and
establishing two new ones, Ramapo in Bergen County and Stockton in Pomona,
Atlantic County.

When Ramapo College opened, Sister Elizabeth MacAlister taught courses such as
''Using Nonviolence'' while awaiting sentencing. She was one of the ''Harrisburg
7'' - a band of anti-Vietnam War protesters who were charged with plotting to
kidnap Henry A.  Kissinger, then the Secretary of State, and blow up heating
tunnels in the Capitol in Washington.

In addition, Ramapo became one of the first thoroughly ''barrierfree'' colleges
in the nation. There is no door on the campus that has not been made accessible
to the handicapped, and Ramapo has educated many disabled students who might not
have otherwise attended college.

Yet, by the late 1970's, Ramapo found that its progressive label was not
attractive enough to students who wanted college to give them concrete skills.

''There was a spiritual community on this campus once,'' said Frank Teixiera, a
recent graduate of Ramapo who still lives nearby.  ''But now its just a prep
school for I.B.M.''

In 1979, bowing to economic necessity, the college, which had resisted granting
school status to its Department of Business Education, established a School of
Administration and Business. Its enormous success has transformed the campus and
put strains on existing programs to release faculty members to accommodate the
demand for business education, with 55 percent of the students being served by
only 9 percent of the faculty.

The pressures to expand the business program at a time when enrollmemnt has
fallen and to cut back the more experimental elements of Ramapo have caused
bitterness among many faculty members. They view these developments as symbolic
of a movement to the right.

''The innovation and experiment that made Ramapo exciting is over,'' said Howard
Radest, who last year left his position as a professor of philosophy to become
director of New York's Ethical Culture Society. He blames the state's reliance
on formula financing for many of the problems now facing Ramapo.

''New Jersey officials spout a lot of brave rhetoric about supporting different
types of colleges,'' Mr. Radest said. ''Then they use a body-count formula to
determine funding policy. This is a complete misreading of higher education.
Education is not a commodity.''

The formula referred to by Mr. Radest is based strictly on enrollment, with no
consideration given to the needs of the institution.

Anthony LaManna, director of the college's School of Administration and
Business, feels that the direction Ramapo must take is clear.  ''Look, all that
these 60's people care about is theory,'' he said. ''But we have to move to meet
the market. Sixty percent of this year's freshmen are studying business.''

Because the administration sought to reassure many teachers for whom a
commitment to Ramapo in its early days was a professional gamble, fully 83
percent of the faculty members now have tenure, and many of those tenured people
teach courses whose popularity is not high. By comparison, whereas only half of
the faculty at Stockton, Ramapo's sister school, is tenured, it serves
approximately the same number of students.

Ramapo cannot continue to support a growing business school without drawing on
teachers from other parts of the college, many of whom are unwilling to serve a
cause they feel will dilute the purity of Ramapo's progressive mission.

''The battle lines were drawn when the business school opened,'' said Michael
Edelstein, an assistant professor in the School of Environmental Studies. ''We
can still buck the conservative tide, but its getting harder every day.

''A chasm developed between the radical faculty that had been hired in the late
60's and the increasingly conservative student body that we were bringing in
from Bergen County. We ought to stick to our guns.''

But for most of Ramapo's students, the 60's hold only a vague historical
interest. The philosophical battles that gave birth to the school have grown
distant. There is a tendency to regard idealistic institutions as anachronistic
at a time when most people want to prepare for a career.

Throughout the country, declining enrollments, reduced budgets and the fear of
losing students in a competitive market have pressured colleges into cutting
back on the reforms of the 60's. Responding to a new generation of
practical-minded students, many schools have placed new emphasis on
preprofessional programs.

Perhaps because the aspirations of experimental colleges like Ramapo were more
exalted, their failings seemed greater. This month, tiny Goddard College in
Vermont, long a pioneer in progressive education, lost its accreditation and may
have to shut its doors.

As Ramapo struggles to cope with its problems, New Jersey remains unable to keep
its college-age residents at home. By 1977, although state aid to public
education had increased nearly 500 percent since 1964, New Jersey was still
losing almost three times as many students through migration as any other state.
Unless these figures can be reversed, the Legislature will have little choice
but to supply funds only to those colleges that attract many applicants.

''I voted for Reagan,'' said John G. Conlon, the student body's only
representative on the college's Board of Trustees. ''A little swing to the right
isn't going to hurt anyone, is it?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Ramapo College

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New Jersey Guide

BYLINE: By Martha G. Wilson

SECTION: Section 11; Page 21, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BLOOMFIELD PIANO CONCERT

Works by a range of composers from Haydn to Gottschalk will be presented in
Bloomfield this afternoon by Joseph Smith, a pianist who has been on the faculty
of Mannes College in New York.

Mr. Smith has been described as a ''thoughtful, feeling artist who relies on
sensitive understatement to make his musical points; his technical equipment is
equal to all challenges, yet it is never on display for its own sake.''

His program, part of the Performing Arts Series of the Bloomfield Public
Library, will include Haydn's ''Andante con Variazioni,'' the Sonata in F minor
(Op. 5) by Brahms, Debussy's ''Children's Corner'' and the ''Battle Cry of
Freedom'' by Gottschalk.

Tickets are $3 (students, $2; the elderly, $1.50, and children under 13, $1) at
the door. The performance begins at 3:30 P.M. in the library's Vogt Theater, 90
Broad Street, Bloomfield. Information: (201)429-9292.

SUPER SCIENCE SUNDAY

The State Museum in Trenton is marking the mounting of six new installations
today with a program entitled Super Science Sunday.  Enticements are planned for
the whole family.

The new exhibits, which help to complete the second-floor Hall of Natural
Sciences, include depictions of the origin of the universe, the origin of the
solar system and the origin of life. A fourth deals with the structure of
matter, and two others provide an update on New Jersey's geology and
paleontology.

All afternoon, Ozzie Tollefson will demonstrate how he makes dinosaur puppets,
and Ernst Hoffman of the New York Herpetological Society will show off some of
his snakes and reptiles. Also, at 1:30, 2:30 and 3:30 P.M., Neil Shulman, who is
described as a chemical magician, will perform experiments said to combine
scientific principles with the dramatic.

Special planetarium shows will be ''Who Stole Jupiter?'' (for the very young at
1:30, 2:30 and 3:30 P.M.) and ''Dinosaurs: Was Their Fate in the Stars?'' (for
older viewers at 2, 3 and 4 P.M.).

The museum will be open from 1 to 5 P.M., with the first 50 visitors receiving a
free T-shirt. Everyone will be given buttons, and free refreshments will be
served. The museum is at 205 West State Street. Admission is free.

SWISS MIME TROUPE

Since its first New York appearance in 1973, Mummenschanz, the Swiss mime
troupe, ''has left delighted audiences of all ages chortling in their seats and
rising to their feet in well-deserved ovations,'' said Anna Kisselgoff, dance
critic of The Times.

''They dress up as fantasy figures with human foibles to comment on the human
condition,'' she added. ''The key element is their use of masks. Mummenschanz,
whose name comes down from the Swiss masked players of medieval times, always
encases its performers in shapes of stretch jersey or masks.''

Following its long Broadway run, the group has appeared all too infrequently in
this area. It will return next week, however, giving performances at the
McCarter Theater in Princeton on Jan. 26 and 27 at 8 P.M. Ticket prices range
from $7.50 to $10.50, and, since the troupe's engagements often sell out,
reservations are a must.

The McCarter also has a daytime treat in store for youngsters: Two screenings of
Walt Disney's ''Pinocchio'' next Saturday at 11 A.M.  and 2 P.M. Admission is $2
at the door.

The theater is at 91 University Place. Reservations: (609)921-8700

AUTHOR! AUTHOR!

Plays by any aspiring or established New Jersey playwright are being sought for
''Dialogues at the George Street Playhouse,'' a series of five programs to be
held at the New Brunswick theater beginning in March.

The programs will attempt to show, through play readings and discussions, the
history and current status of particular humanities issues in contemporary
American life. Before the readings, experts will discuss the different issues,
with the audience invited to participate in the discussion and to evaluate the
plays.

The program is being financed by a $10,000 grant from the New Jersey Committee
for the Humanities.  The topics are: ethnic groups and relations, the Vietnam
War, feminism, the modern American family and the artist in America.
Playwrights must be from New Jersey, and a New Jersey background or setting for
the play is encouraged but not required.

Submitted works must be postmarked no later than Feb. 1 and include a stamped,
self-addressed envelope. No payment will be made for the plays that are
selected.

Plays should be sent to Alexis Greene, project director, George Street
Playhouse, 414 George Street, New Brunswick, N.J. 08901.  Information:
(201)846-2895.  Martha G. Wilson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXPERTS SEE CHANCE TO PRESS ARMS TALK

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


Negotiation of the next step in Soviet-United States nuclear arms limitations is
likely to remain possible for the next year or so because neither Moscow nor
Washington is likely to build new strategic weapons during that period.

This is a conclusion reached by the Carnegie Endowment Panel on United States
Security and the Future of Arms Control. The panel was sponsored by the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.

A report made public on Saturday said that the only military steps open to
Washington and Moscow in the next two years would be the addition of several
hundred missiles and warheads to existing weapons.

The Russians, the report added, have been adding about 1,000 warheads a year
through a ''very active'' program involving intercontinental missiles with
multiple independently targeted warheads.

The report predicted that if the Russians continued at that pace, but remained
within the sublimit of 820 multiple warhead missiles stipulated in the second
strategic arms treaty - signed but not ratified - they would have 9,000 to
10,000 warheads by 1983.

U.S. Held a Warhead Lead

At the end of 1979, the Soviet strategic arsenal had 6,000 strategic warheads
compared with 9,200 in the United States forces.  The panel said that the
defense spending goals of the administration of Ronald Reagan, like those of the
Carter Administration, cannot be met without ''sustantially cutting social
programs, enlarging the budget deficit or retracting promises to cut taxes.''

Dealing with the relationship between economic policy and military expenditures,
the panel noted that contemporary economy differed markedly from that which
absorbed the increased expenditures of the Korean and Vietnam wars.

The economy was growing at an annual rate of 5.1 percent in the 1950-54 period
and at a 4.6 percent rate in 1965-68.  The present projected defense increases
will come, the report said, when most estimates of average annual gross national
product growth range from 2.5 percent to 3.5 percent. The report said that
current proposals would increase defense outlays from 5 percent to 6.5 or 7
percent.

The report takes a more optimistic view of the United States' present position
in strategic arms than is found in some sections of the Pentagon.

Soviet Gains 'Rough Parity'

But it notes that ''it is evident that the Soviet Union has overcome the
substantial American lead in strategic forces in the 1950's and 1960's and is
now in a position of rough parity.''

In some respects, the Russians are depicted in the lead, particularly in the
quantitative aspects of weapons ''such as explosive power and size of
missiles.''

''The primary Soviet lead,'' the report continues, lies in the greater ability
to ''hit hardened targets quickly.'' But the Russians, the panel concluded, are
not likely to deploy new strategic weapons that will increase American strategic
problems in the next year, and ''the United States cannot achieve a military
capability to make the problems appreciably more manageable.''

These four options, the panel said, lie before the new Administration and
Congress:

- ''Informal'' extension of the first strategic arms treaty's limits of 1,710
American and 2,350 Soviet land-based and sealaunched missiles and of the
qualitative limits laid down by the second strategic treaty on missiles with
warheads that can be independently targeted, and on the number of warheads on
each missile.

- The second strategic treaty could be renegotiated through ''cosmetic'' changes
such as American rights to build heavy missiles, extension of the treaty's
expiration date or limitation on long-range nuclear weapons in Europe. Another
course would be major alterations to the treaty. These could include the
elimination of heavy Soviet intercontinental missiles or inclusion of the
supersonic bomber known in the West as Backfire.

- The major provisions of the second strategic treaty could be set aside and
sizable reductions sought in the level of 2,250 strategic delivery vehicles
during an early round of negotiations ''or after an American military buildup
intended to gain greater U.S. bargaining leverage.''

- Concentration on solving American strategic security problems ''unilaterally
through new weapons programs.'' The report predicted that the Soviet Union ''can
and probably will'' research and develop weapons to meet the threat poised by
the projected MX mobile missile, the air-launched cruise missile, the Trident II
submarine missile and the long-range ground-launched cruise missiles and
Pershing II surface-to-surface missile that will be produced late in this
decade.

The Soviet Union, the report added, may well plunge into new programs ''despite
their adverse effects both on the prospects for future arms control'' and a
Kremlin propaganda campaign that seeks to portray the Soviet Union as the ''the
champion of disarmament.''

One major step would be an increase in strategic nuclear launchers. This could
raise Soviet strength to about 2,700 launchers. Under the second strategic
limitiations treaty, the limit is 2,500.

This program could include revival of the SS-16 mobile missile, banned under the
second strategic treaty; deployment of the huge new Typhoon ballistic missile
submarines without retirement of submarines of the class known in the West as
Yankee, an increase in the numnber of launchers for mulitiple warhead missiles
and also in the number of warheads per missile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ANALYSTS GIVE CARTER HIGHER MARKS IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS THAN IN DOMESTIC POLICY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1970 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


As Jimmy Carter ends his term as the 39th President, political analysts and
historians are already debating his record and the mark he will leave. The most
common view is that while he can point to a few notable accomplishments, Mr.
Carter will not bequeath a particularly distinguished legacy to the nation.

''He just never got his act together,'' said R. Gordon Hoxie, president of the
Center for the Study of the Presidency in New York.  ''I'm afraid he will be
remembered as a mediocre President, which is what we don't need in this very
challenging period.''

But Mr. Carter and his supporters feel strongly that the former Governor of
Georgia has not received the understanding or appreciation that he deserves,
that he did as well as could be expected, given the crushing economic burdens
that were thrust upon him by outside forces.

''We are obsessed with greatness but should be pleased enough with goodness,''
Thomas E. Cronin, a scholar on the Presidency, wrote recently. ''The
disappointments of the Carter Presidency have been exaggerated.''

Paid for Failure on Election Day

Critics and supporters generally agree, however, that President Carter failed to
communicate with his countrymen, to transmit a galvanizing sense of purpose and
achievement, and that he paid for that failure on Election Day.

From the White House point of view, the President's problems served to mask his
real achievements and deprived him of the credit he was due. ''We were not very
skillful in communicating what we accomplished,'' said David Rubenstein, deputy
director of the White House policy staff.

But to the President's critics, this failure of communication was an integral
part of a broader problem, his inability to forge and carry out a coherent
program that would leave any sort of lasting legacy. In this view Jimmy Carter,
the genius of electoral politics, never mastered the politics of government,
never learned how to put his ideas into practice.

Carter partisans argue that many of the President's political failures were not
entirely his fault. They point out that in the post-Vietnam and post-Watergate
period, Congress increased its power while the White House lost considerable
authority. At the same time, they say, leadership in Congress was badly
fragmented by declining party loyalty and rules changes that undermined the
seniority system.

No Coordination With Congress

Mr. Carter himself acknowledged that his lack of Washington experience and
unfamiliarity with Congress had cost him dearly in his early years in the White
House. ''I think,'' he told a group of editors last year, ''the lack of close
coordination with the Congress at the beginning to lay down a clear agenda and
my overoptimism about the speed with which Congress could act on controversial
matters was the biggest misjudgment I made.''

In evaluating the Carter legacy today, most analysts give him higher marks in
foreign affairs than in the domestic arena. One reason, says James R. Fallows,
editor of The Atlantic and a former Carter speech writer, is that foreign
problems placed more emphasis on what Mr. Carter did best - intensive analysis
in searching for the ''correct'' solution to a problem - and less emphasis on
the politics of government that the President often found distasteful. What
follows is the President's record in foreign affairs:

MIDDLE EAST PEACE - The agreement between Israel and Egypt that was reached at
Camp David in 1978 is considered the most important achievment of the Carter
Administration. But the success in establishing a framework for peaceful
negotiations between the two nations has since been marred by a slowdown in
talks between Israel and Egypt and the United States' action in voting with the
majority on a key United Nations resolution that criticized Israel's stance on
the status of Jerusalem.

WAR - Mr. Carter takes great pride in the fact that no American soldiers have
died in combat during his Administration. Yet many Americans were ambivalent on
this point, grateful that no troops were dying, but concerned that the country
was being humiliated, as they saw it, by Iran and other small countries.

IRAN - The seizure of American hostages in the United States Embassy in Teheran
on Nov. 4, 1979, was the most damaging foreignpolicy development for the Carter
Administration. Although that 14-month crisis seemed near resolution in the
Administration's final hours, the long imprisonment, and Washington's apparent
impotence in dealing with it, cost the Administration an enormous political
price.

CHINA - Building on a foundation started by President Nixon, the Carter
Administration established full diplomatic relations with China and formed new
ties with Taiwan, despite ferocious right-wing opposition.

PANAMA CANAL TREATIES - The White House reached an agreement with Panama under
which this country would relinquish jurisdiction over the canal in the year
2000, and then piloted it through Congress, against thwarting conservative
opposition.

HUMAN RIGHTS - Mr. Carter placed great stress on the human rights practices of
other nations, including this country's longtime allies. In the view of many,
this enhanced America's reputation with dissidents through the world. But some
foreign leaders accused the President of naivete, and Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
of West Germany said that Mr. Carter acted like an evangelist and formulated
''policy from the pulpit.''

RELATIONS WITH THE SOVIET UNION - In his first years in office the
Administration followed a conciliatory line, negotiating a strategic arms
limitation treaty that was assailed by conservatives as too generous. After the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 Mr. Carter said that he had
underestimated Russian intentions and took a harder line. The arms treaty was
put aside, Mr. Carter led a drive to boycott the Moscow Olympics and curtailed
grain supplies to the Soviet Union, a measure that critics said hurt American
farmers more than Soviet consumers. In his final message, Mr. Carter warned
against growing Soviet power and advocated higher military spending.

PERSIAN GULF - The President enunciated the ''Carter doctrine,'' a pledge to
intervene in the Persian Gulf if American oil supplies were threatened. The
Administration also overcame protests from friends of Israel and pushed through
Congress a deal to sell warplanes to Saudi Arabia.

The 'Bearer of Bad News'

The Carter record on domestic issues was clearly less impressive, but
Administration supporters argue that the President was largely a victim of
circumstances. Professor Cronin asserts that Mr. Carter was forced to become
''an unpopular bearer of bad news'' about inflation and energy supplies that
Americans did not want to hear.

Following are the main areas of Mr. Carter's domestic activity: ENERGY -
Asserting that tackling the energy shortage was the ''moral equivalent of war,''
Mr. Carter led the drive for the creation of the Department of Energy and
proposed a series of actions to increase United States production, conserve
existing supplies and lessen dependence on the Middle East. In Congress, the
White House coupled the decontrol of crude oil prices to encourage production
with a ''windfall'' profits tax designed to provide $227 billion in revenues
over 10 years, and pushed through a program to develop a synthetic fuels
industry. But by last year only 2 per cent of the voters identified energy as
the nation's leading problem, as opposed to 30 per cent the year before, and Mr.
Carter failed to win approval of several programs, including an Energy
Mobilization Board.

MILITARY - After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, President Carter exercised
standby authority granted by Congress and instituted draft registration for
18-year-old men, but his accompanying proposal to include women was defeated. As
a candidate, Mr. Carter promised to cut the military budget by $5 billion to $7
billion, but by his third year in office, the President was calling for a real
increase of 3 percent in arms outlays. Critics on Capitol Hill said even that
increase was too small.

GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY - Mr. Carter generally promoted civil service reform and
led a successful drive to deregulate such key industries as airlines and
trucking. He also made increased use of his Vice President, Walter F. Mondale,
as a diplomatic emissary, a public spokesman and a top-level policy adviser.

ENVIRONMENT - In his final speech Mr. Carter placed great emphasis on protecting
the environment. In his Administration Congress approved a bill that set aside
104.3 million acres of Alaska lands as environmentally protected areas. Other
legislation expanded the national parks system, regulated strip mining of coal
and created a $1.6 billion fund to finance toxic waste disposal. But as Mr.
Reagan took office, it was unclear that Mr. Carter had convinced the public that
environmental protection was worth the cost.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE - The Administration negotiated, and moved through Congress,
a comprehensive liberalization of trade restrictions. But by the end of Mr.
Carter's term, he was under attack for not adequately protecting such American
industries as automobiles and steel from foreign competition.

RIGHTS OF MINORITIES AND WOMEN - More women and members of racial minority
groups were appointed to Federal jobs and judgeships than ever before. But Mr.
Carter failed to win approval of a tougher fair housing bill or to convince many
Americans that affirmative action in hiring was a proper social policy. The
White House helped win an extension of time allowed for ratification of the
proposed equal rights amendment, but only one state legislature, Indiana's,
ratified the proposed amendment in his tenure.

SOCIAL WELFARE - Social Security financing was placed on a firmer footing, but
by the end of the Carter years, it was in trouble again. The Humphrey-Hawkins
bill mandating a full-employment policy was stripped of all money and numerous
other proposals sent to Capitol Hill never got off the ground, including
hospital cost containment, national health insurance, a new consumer protection
agency, welfare reform and the closing of alleged loopholes in the tax code.

EDUCATION - At the President's urging, Congress approved the creation of the
Department of Education and Congress voted increases in the financing of a
number of education programs. The Justice Department initiated a number of
actions designed to promote racial integration in school systems around the
country, but at the end of the Carter term Congressional opponents of busing
appeared to have the upper hand and were threatening to cut off funds for that
solution.

ECONOMY - The White House pointed to an increase of 8 million in the total
number of working Americans, plus a decrease in the budget deficit as a
percentage of gross national product. But inflation and interest rates rose to
record levels, failing to stem the decline in purchasing power. Perhaps the most
telling comment of the whole Presidential campaign came at the conclusion of the
debate between Mr. Carter and Ronald Reagan, when the challenger asked people if
they were better off today than four years ago. Many Americans answered no.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jimmy Carter Photo of Jimmy Carter signing
Middle East peace agreement

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE AMERICAN AILMENT

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: PARIS


They say here that only one Frenchman ever wrote a good book about the United
States, though many have tried. The one was, of course, Alexis de Tocqueville,
and from what I've seen of others, his superiority resulted not least from the
fact that he liked the country without envying it.

In any case, the usual French report on America is either a diatribe on its
failure to recover from the original sin of having had a non-Marxist revolution,
or a diatribe on France's failure to think in the American, nonideological way.

Now comes a book from a French sociologist who says he started out as a
left-wing Amerophile, an utter anomaly on the Left Bank as he cheerfully admits,
and who has become a viewer-with-dismay. The writer, Michel Crozier, calls his
work ''Le Mal Americain'' which I have translated as ''The American Ailment''
but which lends itself to a pun on what he claims is Americans' refusal to
recognize the existence of Evil, le Mal, in their pursuit of happiness.

His love affair with the United States began in the late l950's, when he
traveled the country with union organizers and found a spirit of fraternity, of
generosity, of easy candor that matched his ideals.

He has returned a number of times. Now, all sorrow without anger, he concludes
that the open road has ended. Without accepting the typically French
generalizations, there are some interesting points in the outsider's view of how
American society has changed in a generation and what went wrong.

The key to all that went before, Crozier holds, was the frontier, in its
metaphoric as well as concrete sense. Until recently, American society was
always expanding, in contrast to settled Europe. That left room for waste, for
error. What didn't work could be fixed, or dumped and done over. In their
adoration of rationalism and science, Americans believed every problem could be
solved. It just took time and effort.

He attributes President Johnson's failure in the ''War on Poverty'' not so much
to double demands on the budget and human energy during the Vietnam War as to
the ''profound connection between two enterprises each of which displayed the
same megalomania of abundance and suffered from the same inability to accept the
limits of all human effort and the necessity of choosing.''

Now, Crozier argues, America is a ''completed'' country, up against its limits.
Now, in his analysis, it has no more margin for the spill that permits infinite
optimism and has to face the other, tragic side of the human condition, the
pessimistic view that things cannot be fundamentally changed for the better.

Though he doesn't say it bluntly, Crozier finds America handicapped by lack of
the complaisant cynicism with which the French can say, ''Plus ,ca change, plus
c'est la meme chose.'' In the French observer's eye, the flaw sapping America's
energy and ability to cope with its problems is that it became a ''completed''
country without a complete world view that accepts the inevitability of bad as
well as good in all people and societies.

There's a measure of nonsense and plain error in his analysis. For example, he
criticizes Americans' dedication to their constitutional system as a dogmatic
refusal to adjust to changing circumstances, and offers as proof that the United
States ''celebrates its national holiday on the anniversary of the
constitution.'' If he ever went to a July 4 picnic, didn't anybody tell him the
fireworks were for Independence Day?

But there is also something to Crozier's insight that American pragmatism has
led to excessive reliance on technocrats, on statistical analysis, and to
neglect of goals in a sometimes compulsive preoccupation with ways and means. He
notes, though with evident misunderstanding of what ''due process'' is really
about, that the role of social arbitration and the task of choosing government's
purpose, which properly belong to the legislature in a representative democracy,
have been shifted too much to the courts.  And he is right that judges, by
definition, are not the best placed to provide the dynamics for society's
decisions.

The discontent, lack of initiative, falling productivity, frustration and
general malaise stem, in Crozier's view, from U.S.  failure to admit the guilty
knowledge of maturity: that unadulterated good is unattainable. That is why, he
says, America has changed from a happily confident country into a country
plagued and braked by doubt, while Western Europe and Japan have drawn new vigor
from past tragedy and are forging ahead.

It's an interesting thought, especially as a new administration sets out with
the renewed notion that a certain amount of tinkering will serve to clean up the
mess. Certainly, there are limits to what the U.S. can do, for itself and
others, and refusal to acknowledge them guarantees more mistakes and more
disillusion. Cynicism doesn't achieve much but it takes a tolerance for healthy
skepticism to get on in a stubbornly misguided world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CULVER CAVALRY LEADING ITS 7TH INAUGURAL PARADE

BYLINE: By B.DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: CULVER, Ind.


It has taken a farrier five painstaking weeks to make special non-slip shoes to
fit the 83 all-black horses that the Culver Military Academy is sending to
Washington for a single hour of precision prancing in Ronald Reagan's inaugural
parade.

Such deatailed preparation is typical for the 66 riding and marching units that
had the requisite professionalism and political pull to merit invitations to
take part in the Pennsylvania Avenue spectacular. Requests for invitations by
more than 600 other bands, choral groups and equestrian organizations were
turned down by parade organizers.

The 1981 parade is to be the seventh consecutive appearance at the inauguration
for the 87-year-old Culver preparatory school's Black Horse Troop, a
spit-and-polish outfit that boasts of being the largest remaining cavalry unit
in the United States, complete with jangling sabres and gleaming spurs that
evoke images of Custer, J.E.B. Stuart and the Light Brigade.

''Not many outfits of any kind can match our record and tradition of getting
invited to take part in the parade, so we don't take any chances when it comes
to getting ready,'' said Maj. R. Jeffrey Honzik, director of horsemanship at the
550-student academy.

A Prestigious Position

The Black Horse Troop not only once more made the final list of parade
participants when the 1981 invitations went out, but it was also honored further
by being assigned a position in the lead element of the procession, only a few
yards behind the incoming President and the parade's grand marshal, General of
the Army Omar N. Bradley.

That means the unit's horses, with their white tack and their ramrod-stiff
riders clad in blue, gray and cavalry yellow, each carrying a billowing state
flag or pennant, will be seen by a maximum number of spectators, especially
television viewers.

''We wanted to start the parade with an impressive number,'' said Terry
Chambers, the parade chairman, ''so we went for the Black Horse Troop. There
just aren't any other cavalry units its size still around. And with all those
state flags flying right at the beginning of things, we'll have the right
symbolism.''

Mr. Chambers, a veteran of 20 Tournament of Roses parade committees and a
commerce and transportation official in California when Mr. Reagan was Governor
there, said he was under orders from the President-elect to keep the 1981
inaugural parade ''short and snappy,'' to hold it to about one hour rather than
the usual two or three.

Concentration on Quality

''To assure preciseness,'' he said, ''we've had to concentrate on quality
instead of constituencies.'' Nevertheless, some of the invitations to take part
in the parade appeared to be politically motivated. While campaigning last
spring in Salem, N.H., Mr. Reagan promised a local high school band a place in
the procession should he win the election. Parade officials balked when reminded
of the promise a few weeks ago but in the end, they gave in and included the
band.

Several inaugural officials complained privately that Senator Strom Thurmond,
Republican of South Carolina, had seen to it that the Strom Thurmond High School
Band of Edgefield, S.C. received an invitation.

By every indication, however, professionalism was the deciding factor in the
Black Horse Troop's invitation.

Respected Academically

Culver Military Academy, situated in rural northern Indiana, appears to have
recovered well from the opposition to the military that accompanied the Vietnam
War. The school, which now shares its campus with a nonmilitary girls' academy,
is respected academically and has an excellent sports program. But for many of
its cadets, Culver is horses.

Preparation for the inaugural parade has been a time-consuming and expensive
exercise. Black Horse troopers have given up weekends to practice massing their
mounts, eight abreast, on icy Indiana roads.

Cadets who choose to join the Black Horse Troop are charged $7,550 annually to
attend the academy. Cadets who join artillery or infantry units pay $6,450. For
the trip to Washington for the inauguration, each trooper had to come up with
$550 to help pay for a charter flight, motel rooms, horse transport vans and
stabling. Alumni gifts added another $250 to each cadet's contribution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Psychiatrist Challenges Garwood's Insanity Plea

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 215 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 20


A prosecution psychiatrist testified today that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood was, in
his opinion, sane in the nearly 14 years he spent behind enemy lines.

The defense says that Private Garwood, charged with desertion and collaboration
with the enemy, was driven insane by Vietcong torture and should not be held
responsible for his actions.

''He gave me a good, clear account of his conduct during that time period,''
said Capt. Patrick F. O'Connell, chief of psychiatry at the Naval Aerospace
Medical Institute at Pensacola, Fla. ''This account did not include any
description of symptoms I would look for in a mental disease in a psychiatric
sense.'' These symptoms would include, he said, anxiety, amnesia or confusion in
Private Garwood's account of his years in Vietnam.

Dr. O'Connell was on one of two military boards that examined Private Garwood
last fall. He said that Private Garwood had told him he carried weapons only
''as baggage'' when ordered to do so by the Vietcong and that he wore a
Communist uniform only because it was something ''more substantial'' to wear
than clothing worn by other prisoners, and that he interpreted for Communist
guards only because he thought that it would help fellow Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Winds of Change

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


It seemed remarkable at first to read that Sam Brown, once a leader of vigorous
protests against the Vietnam War, had changed his mind about the draft. On
leaving a job as the head of Action, the Federal umbrella agency for voluntary
programs including Vista and the Peace Corps, he said the other day, ''As one
who spent a number of years, I think incorrectly, opposing the draft, it seems
to me all of us owe some obligation to society.''

Aging rebels in new suits are, of course, nothing new. Still, such politi-cal
transformations have their fascination. A former draft resister confessed
enviously on our Op-Ed page not long ago that he thought the drafted men of his
generation became ''better men.'' Sam Brown's change of mind seems staid by
comparison, but it gives off a similar aura of sudden enlightenment or apostasy.

On reflection, though, the drama fades from these conversions.  Opposing the
draft to oppose a hated war was one thing; it never did have to mean opposing a
sound national defense or a universal summons to duty. Nor is the question any
longer one that divides liberals and conservatives. After all, the new President
opposes a peacetime draft.

Sam Brown has worked for years with groups of highly motivated patriots. It is
hardly surprising that as an organizer of vounteers he expects ''some obligation
to society.'' It's the same impulse, after all, that made him and others resist
the expenditure of that obligation in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'LET US BEGIN AN ERA OF NATIONAL RENEWAL'

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2598 words


Thank you. Senator Hatfield, Mr. Chief Justice, Mr. President, Vice President
Bush, Vice President Mondale, Senator Baker, Speaker O'Neill, Reverend Moomaw,
and my fellow citizens:

To a few of us here today this is a solemn and most momentous occasion. And,
yet, in the history of our nation it is a commonplace occurrence.

The orderly transfer of authority as called for in the Constitution routinely
takes place as it has for almost two centuries and few of us stop to think how
unique we really are.

In the eyes of many in the world, this every-four-year ceremony we accept as
normal is nothing less than a miracle.  Mr. President, I want our fellow
citizens to know how much you did to carry on this tradition.  By your gracious
cooperation in the transition process you have shown a watching world that we
are a united people pledged to maintaining a political system which guarantees
individual liberty to a greater degree than any other. And I thank you and your
people for all your help in maintaining the continuity which is the bulwark of
our republic.

Severe Economic Problem

The business of our nation goes forward.  These United States are confronted
with an economic affliction of great proportions.  We suffer from the longest
and one of the worst sustained inflations in our national history. It distorts
our economic decisions, penalizes thrift and crushes the struggling young and
the fixed-income elderly alike. It threatens to shatter the lives of millions of
our people.

Idle industries have cast workers into unemployment, human misery and personal
indignity.  Those who do work are denied a fair return for their labor by a tax
system which penalizes successful achievement and keeps us from maintaining full
productivity.

But great as our tax burden is, it has not kept pace with public spending. For
decades we have piled deficit upon deficit, mortgaging our future and our
children's future for the temporary convenience of the present.

To continue this long trend is to guarantee tremendous social, cultural,
political and economic upheavals.  You and I, as individuals, can, by borrowing,
live beyond our means, but for only a limited period of time. Why then should we
think that collectively, as a nation, we are not bound by that same limitation?

Action 'Beginning Today'

We must act today in order to preserve tomorrow. And let there be no
misunderstanding - we're going to begin to act beginning today.  The economic
ills we suffer have come upon us over several decades.  They will not go away in
days, weeks or months, but they will go away. They will go away because we as
Americans have the capacity now, as we have had in the past, to do whatever
needs to be done to preserve this last and greatest bastion of freedom.

In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem;
government is the problem.  From time to time we've been tempted to believe that
society has become too complex to be managed by self-rule, that government by an
elite group is superior to government for , by and of the people.

But if no one among us is capable of governing himself, then who among us has
the capacity to govern someone else?  All of us together - in and out of
government - must bear the burden. The solutions we seek must be equitable with
no one group singled out to pay a higher price.

'Neglected' Interest Group

We hear much of special interest groups. Well our concern must be for a special
interest group that has been too long neglected.  It knows no sectional
boundaries, or ethnic and racial divisions and it crosses political party lines.
It is made up of men and women who raise our food, patrol out streets, man our
mines and factories, teach our children, keep our homes and heal us when we're
sick.

Professionals, industrialists, shopkeepers, clerks, cabbies and truck drivers.
They are, in short, ''We the people.'' This breed called Americans.

Well, this Administration's objective will be a healthy, vigorous, growing
economy that provides equal opportunities for all Americans with no barriers
born of bigotry or discrimination.

Putting America back to work means putting all Americans back to work. Ending
inflation means freeing all Americans from the terror of runaway living costs.

All must share in the productive work of this ''new beginning,'' and all must
share in the bounty of a revived economy.  With the idealism and fair play which
are the core of our system and our strength, we can have a strong, prosperous
America at peace with itself and the world.

Inventory as a Beginning

So as we begin, let us take inventory.  We are a nation that has a government
-not the other way around.  And this makes us special among the nations of the
earth.  Our Government has no power except that granted it by the people.  It is
time to check and reverse the growth of government which shows signs of having
grown beyond the consent of the governed.

It is my intention to curb the size and influence of the Federal establishment
and to demand recognition of the distinction between the powers granted to the
Federal Government and those reserved to the states or to the people.

All of us - all of us need to be reminded that the Federal Government did not
create the states; the states created the Federal Government.

Now, so there will be no misunderstanding, it's not my intention to do away with
government.  It is rather to make it work - work with us, not over us; to stand
by our side, not ride on our back. Government can and must provide opportunity,
not smother it; foster productivity, not stifle it.

Unleashing Energy and Genius

If we look to the answer as to why for so many years we achieved so much,
prospered as no other people on earth, it was because here in this land we
unleashed the energy and individual genius of man to a greater extent than has
ever been done before.

Freedom and the dignity of the individual have been more available and assured
here than in any other place on earth. The price for this freedom at times has
been high, but we have never been unwilling to pay that price.

It is no coincidence that our present troubles parallel and are proportionate to
the intervention and intrusion in our lives that result from unnecessary and
excessive growth of Government.

It is time for us to realize that we are too great a nation to limit ourselves
to small dreams. We're not, as some would have us believe, doomed to an
inevitable decline. I do not believe in a fate that will fall on us no matter
what we do. I do believe in a fate that will fall on us if we do nothing.

So, with all the creative energy at our command let us begin an era of national
renewal. Let us renew our determination, our courage and our strength. And let
us renew our faith and our hope. We have every right to dream heroic dreams.

Heroes at Factory Gates

Those who say that we're in a time when there are no heroes - they just don't
know where to look. You can see heroes every day going in and out of factory
gates. Others, a handful in number, produce enough food to feed all of us and
then the world beyond.

You meet heroes across a counter - and they're on both sides of that counter.
There are entrepreneurs with faith in themselves and faith in an idea who create
new jobs, new wealth and opportunity.

There are individuals and families whose taxes support the Government and whose
voluntary gifts support church, charity, culture, art and education. Their
patriotism is quiet but deep. Their values sustain our national life.

Now, I have used the words ''they'' and ''their'' in speaking of these heroes. I
could say ''you'' and ''your'' because I'm addressing the heroes of whom I speak
- you, the citizens of this blessed land.

Your dreams, your hopes, your goals are going to be the dreams, the hopes and
the goals of this Administration, so help me God.  We shall reflect the
compassion that is so much a part of your makeup.

Loving Our Countrymen

How can we love our country and not love our countrymen? And loving them reach
out a hand when they fall, heal them when they're sick and provide opportunity
to make them self-sufficient so they will be equal in fact and not just in
theory?

Can we solve the problems confronting us? Well the answer is a unequivocal and
emphatic yes.  To paraphrase Winston Churchill, I did not take the oath I've
just taken with the intention of presiding over the dissolution of the world's
strongest economy.

In the days ahead I will propose removing the roadblocks that have slowed our
economy and reduced productivity.  Steps will be taken aimed at restoring the
balance between the various levels of government. Progress may be slow -
measured in inches and feet, not miles - but we will progress.

It is time to reawaken this industrial giant, to get government back within its
means and to lighten our punitive tax burden.  And these will be our first
priorities, and on these principles there will be no compromise.

The Fight for Independence

On the eve of our struggle for independence a man who might've been one of the
greatest among the Founding Fathers, Dr. Joseph Warren, president of the
Massachusetts Congress, said to his fellow Americans, ''Our country is in
danger, but not to be despaired of. On you depend the fortunes of America. You
are to decide the important question upon which rest the happiness and the
liberty of millions yet unborn. Act worthy of yourselves.''

Well I believe we the Americans of today are ready to act worthy of ourselves,
ready to do what must be done to insure happiness and liberty for ourselves, our
children and our children's children.

And as we renew ourselves here in our own land we will be seen as having greater
strength throughout the world. We will again be the exemplar of freedom and a
beacon of hope for those who do not now have freedom.

To those neighbors and allies who share our freedom, we will strengthen our
historic ties and assure them of our support and firm commitment.

We will match loyalty with loyalty. We will strive for mutually beneficial
relations. We will not use our friendship to impose on their sovereignty, for
our own sovereignty is not for sale.

Peace the Highest Goal

As for the enemies of freedom, those who are potential adversaries, they will be
reminded that peace is the highest aspiration of the American people. We will
negotiate for it, sacrifice for it; we will not surrender for it -now or ever.

Our forbearance should never be misunderstood. Our reluctance for conflict
should not be misjudged as a failure of will.  When action is required to
preserve our national security, we will act. We will maintain sufficient
strength to prevail if need be, knowing that if we do so we have the best chance
of never having to use that strength.

Above all we must realize that no arsenal or no weapon in the arsenals of the
world is so formidable as the will and moral courage of free men and women.

It is a weapon our adversaries in today's world do not have.  It is a weapon
that we as Americans do have.  Let that be understood by those who practice
terrorism and prey upon their neighbors.

Prayer on Inaugural Day

I am told that tens of thousands of prayer meetings are being held on this day;
for that I am deeply grateful. We are a nation under God, and I believe God
intended for us to be free. It would be fitting and good, I think, if on each
inaugural day in future years it should be declared a day of prayer.

This is the first time in our history that this ceremony has been held, as
you've been told, on this West Front of the Capitol.  Standing here, one faces a
magnificent vista, opening up on this city's special beauty and history.  At the
end of this open mall are those shrines to the giants on whose shoulders we
stand.  Directly in front of me, the monument to a monumental man. George
Washington, father of our country. A man of humility who came to greatness
reluctantly. He led America out of revolutionary victory into infant nationhood.

Off to one side, the stately memorial to Thomas Jefferson. The Declaration of
Independence flames with his eloquence.  And then beyond the Reflecting Pool,
the dignified columns of the Lincoln Memorial. Whoever would understand in his
heart the meaning of America will find it in the life of Abraham Lincoln.

Monuments to Heroes

Beyond those moments, monuments to heroism is the Potomac River, and on the far
shore the sloping hills of Arlington National Cemetery with its row upon row of
simple white markers bearing crosses or Stars of David. They add up to only a
tiny fraction of the price that has been paid for our freedom.

Each one of those markers is a monument to the kind of hero I spoke of earlier.
Their lives ended in places called Belleau Wood, the Argonne, Omaha Beach,
Salerno and halfway around the world on Guadalcanal, Tarawa, Pork Chop Hill, the
Chosin Reservoir, and in a hundred rice paddies and jungles of a place called
Vietnam.

Under such a marker lies a young man, Martin Treptow, who left his job in a
small town barber shop in 1917 to go to France with the famed Rainbow Division.

There, on the Western front, he was killed trying to carry a message between
battalions under heavy artillery fire.  We are told that on his body was found a
diary.  On the flyleaf under the heading, ''My Pledge,'' he had written these
words: ''America must win this war. Therefore I will work, I will save, I will
sacrifice, I will endure, I will fight cheerfully and do my utmost, as if the
issue of the whole struggle depended on me alone.''

The crisis we are facing today does not require of us the kind of sacrifice that
Martin Treptow and so many thousands of others were called upon to make.

It does require, however, our best effort, and our willingness to believe in
ourselves and to believe in our capacity to perform great deeds; to believe that
together with God's help we can and will resolve the problems which now confront
us.

And after all, why shouldn't we believe that? We are Americans.  God bless you
and thank you. Thank you very much.  Transcript of President Reagan's Inaugural
Address, as recorded by The New York Times.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ronald Wilson Reagan giving his inaugural
address

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REFORMER WHO WOULD REVERSE THE NEW DEAL'S LEGACY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2191 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


The nation today arrived at a fascinating and quite remarkable moment in its
political history: A 69-year-old citizen politician who spent most of his
working life in another profession has entered the White House and won the
opportunity to lead what he hopes will become a political revolution.

Or more precisely, to lead a conservative political reformation that seeks to
redirect the role of government in American life and perhaps to reshape the
national political landscape for the rest of the century.

For Ronald Wilson Reagan, inaugurated today as the nation's 40th President, is a
crusader, the first missionary conservative to gain the White House with the aim
of reversing the liberal New Deal revolution of governmental activism and
Democratic Party dominance established by Franklin D. Roosevelt nearly half a
century ago.

He comes as a reformer preaching the gospel that ''government is not the
solution, government is the problem,'' promising an era of national renewal
based on less government not more, and projecting that same jaunty, smiling
self-confidence of Mr. Roosevelt in the teeth of public cynicism and economic
despair.

Would Reverse New Deal Legacy

In philosophical terms, Mr. Reagan has proclaimed his opposition to the
principal legacy of the New Deal -that the private sector, left to itself,
cannot be trusted to produce progress and social justice and that government
must intervene to protect the citizenry and to promote their welfare in
virtually every walk of life.

His domestic agenda calls for reducing taxes, curbing Federal spending, rolling
back regulations, holding the line on hiring, dismantling at least one Cabinet
department, moving to turn back to the states some functions of the sprawling
Federal establishment.

His faith is that, by releasing the shackled potential of private enterprise,
America can embark on a new era of economic growth, regain its once-vaunted
technological supremacy and international competitiveness, and ultimately work
itself out of crippling and demoralizing inflation.

His foreign policy agenda calls above all for a restoration of ''the margin of
safety'' in the strategic nuclear competition with the Soviet Union, reversing
what he has described as the perilous vulnerability of the nation's strategic
deterrent forces, and reversing what conservatives have decried as the policy of
American vacillation and retreat around the globe. Only after that process has
begun and the new Administration has moved to bolster the Atlantic Alliance, Mr.
Reagan has said, will he be ready to take up serious negotiations for arms
control.

Monumental Challenge

The challenge is monumental. For this son of Hollywood has captured the
Presidency at a time when the wellsprings of national confidence had nearly run
dry and the yearning for America to regain control of its destiny is palpable
across the land.

A decade ago, the seemingly endless agony of the Vietnam War sapped the nation's
strength and morale and left the stinging sensation that something had gone
profoundly wrong. The seizure of the American hostages in Iran sharpened the
pain of national humiliation. For 14 long months those hostages, pawns in
internal Iranian feuding, were a metaphor for America's sense of impotence.

Their release on the day of Mr. Reagan's inauguration has brought a surge of
good feeling, a national sigh of relief that the torment of the hostage ordeal
is now over. But the long deadlock has left a residue of bitterness as well as
uncertainty here and abroad about whether America has the strength and resolve
to protect its public servants from terrorism in other lands. The new
Administration enters office knowing it may barely have time to catch its breath
before having to confront another hostage crisis in El Salvador or some other
turbulent nation.

At home, the nation's economic afflictions seem to have baffled economic
thinkers and foiled policy-makers. Three Presidents have ventured forth to do
battle with the twin-headed monster of inflation and unemployment and, though
sometimes temporarily successful, they have ultimately been devoured.

National Problems

America's aging industry loses out increasingly to foreign competitors. Growing
dependence on imported oil has been an insistent reminder of the limits of
America's once seemingly inexhaustible resources and of its new vulnerability to
the leverage of alien powers. Americans may laugh about watching Japanese
television sets, driving German cars, or seeing wealthy Arabs buying up choice
real estate, but theirs is brittle laughter.

In the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, the powers of the Presidency have been at
ebb tide. The Watergate scandal undermined public confidence in politics and
politicians. Congressional assertiveness matched foreign assertiveness. For
eight of the last 12 years, the Government stood stalmated by Democratic control
of Congress and Republican control of the White House.

Yet even with both branches of Government in Democratic hands under Jimmy
Carter, power was so fragmented that special interests perpetuated many
stalemates with their single-minded legislative obstructionism. Mr. Carter had
ambitions for an energentic Presidency, but proved unable to generated a
cohesive, purposeful governing coalition.

Now, with the characteristic optimism of the newly elected, the Reagan
Adminstration proclaims its power to overcome national disarray and to set a
positive new course. Bolstered by the first Republican majority in the Senate in
26 years plus 33 new seats and a conservative, though not Republican, majority
in the House of Representatives, the new Republican leadership contends that the
Reagan electoral landslide gave them a mandate for a bold experiment n
conservatism.

Hopes for Republican Era

Party leaders like Bill Brock, the former National Chairman, think at long last
they discern the end of the Democratic era and perceive the potential for a
fundamental political realignment that will make the Republicans, with their
base in the West and South, the dominant party in America for the rest of the
century.

Yet doubts linger. Once before when Dwight D. Eisenhower won the Presidency in
1952 after 20 years of Democratic rule, the Republicans thought they had
overturned the powerful New Deal coalition. Later, in 1968, Richard M. Nixon
thought his ascendancy signaled a turning point. But in neither case was a
political watershed crossed.

Now, some Republicans believe an irresistable conservative tide has swept the
nation. With the defeat of such Democratic liberal champions in the Senate as
George McGovern of South Dakota, Frank Church of Idaho, and John C. Culver of
Iowa, they say, the mood of the country and Congress has shifted irreversibly to
the right.

But they overlook the fact that moderates and liberals were also winning in such
diverse states as California, Vermont, Maryland, Colorado, Georgia and
Washington, and that the 1980 vote may have been primarily a mass protest againt
the ''ins.''

The test of the political trends and of the Republican performance will come in
the 1982 and 1984 elections. ''We have brought together the elements of a new
coalition,'' observed Mr. Brock. ''The cementing of that coalition depends on
our performance in office.  We've got to act with some urgency to deal with the
problems of which people voted.''

An Unusual Odyssey

For Ronald Reagan personally, this moment, this challenge represents the
culmination of an unusual political odyssey. It began with his televised speech
in 1964 on behalf of Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, a stirring address that
catapulted him into the conservative vanguard, led to two successful runs for
governor of California and three tries for the Presidency.

By quoting or evoking Franklin Delano Roosevelt so often this past year, Mr.
Reagan has escalated expectations and invited exalted comparisons for his
Presidency. His supporters relish the notion that he could become a conservative
Republican version of Mr. Roosevelt.

''I divide American Presidents into journeymen Presidents who run the machine
and make it go, and symbolic Presidents who make radical changes,'' said Howard
H. Baker Jr., the new Senate majority leader.  ''Ford and Carter, and even
Truman and Johnson, were journeymen Presidents. Roosevelt and Nixon were
symbolic Presidents. Nixon made drastic changes in foreign policy. I think
Reagan will be a symbolic President.''

Some Presidential scholars like James David Barber of Duke University discount
Mr. Reagan's upbeat speeches as simplistic and unrealistic cheerleading without
clear purpose and vision. They expect him to be a fairly passive President, a
throwback to the conservative, pro-business quietism of Warren G. Harding or
William Howard Taft.

Touch of Kennedy Magic Seen

Other scholars such as Tom Cronin of Colorado College detect a touch of the
Kennedy magic and glamour in Mr. Reagan's rhetoric and his political presence.
''John F. Kennedy had a way with words, a way of talking about issues in simple
terms that made them interesting and got people to listen,'' said Dr. Cronin.
''Reagan has that knack, too. And, like Kennedy, there is a contagious optmism
about him. He realizes there's a morale problem in this country and he addresses
it.''

Still others compare the Californian with Dwight Eisenhower, another
citizen-politican with roots in the Middle West who brought to the President the
uncomplicated outlook of small-town America, a faith in free enterprise, a
penchant for delegating authority to powerful subordinates, a corporate style of
leadership and the infectious charm and gee-whiz grin of the boy next door.

But Mr. Reagan has already foreshadowed a more activist Presidency than Mr.
Eisenhower's. He has encouraged extravagant expectations and his advisers know
that, if he is to succeed, he will need time - time to revive the economy, to
revitalize defense, to revamp the Government and to reverse inflation.

The time imperative presses him to produce an immediate sense of forward motion,
to produce the feeling that he has taken charge and begun to halt the drift and
uncertainty that caused such an explosive burst of voter frustration against the
Democrats. And he has signaled that he intends his first days in office to
convey a sense of urgency.

The most natural political asset of this son of a shoe salesman from Tampico,
Ill., whose highest boyhod ambition was to be a playby-play announcer for the
Chicago Cubs is his capacity for communication. For he has won a reputation as
the most effective media politician of the television era, a man who can project
his vision to the people and periodically replenish his political power by
ralling popular support.

Real Political Test

However, it will take more than stage presence for him to succeed.  The real
test will be whether President Reagan can forge an effective coalition with
Congress to carry out his conservative agenda. His advisers sense the need to
discipline Congressional Republicans to shed the disorderly habits of
opposition. They say in advance that the new President must avoid being lured
away from his central priorities into the byways of controversy over such pet
conservative issues as abortion, school prayer or gun control. They recognize
the need to win over moderates.

Eager to broaden his political support, Mr. Reagan has risked irking his
hard-right loyalists by assembling a Cabinet and a group of top-level White
House advisers that is decidedly mainstream Republican. Pragmatic establishment
Republicans outnumber conservative ideologues; Easterners hold more than half of
the top 15 positions. On his preinaugural trips to Washington, Mr. Reagan has
begun wooing Democrats as well as fellow Republicans. The challenge now is to
marshal that support for his own objectives and to know when to make the vital
compromises that insure his political momentum.

''We have the opportunity to do what Konrad Adenauer did in Germany, to become
the party of peace and prosperity and to stay in power for two generations,''
said Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York, an enthusiastic Reaganite.
''But so far, what we've done is make campaign promises. We'll be the majority
party once we show we can implement policies that bring about the prosperity and
full employment without inflation that we have promised. If we fail, then 1980
will turn out not to have been a signifiant election after all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of the presidential party

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PLANNING TO PROVIDE WIDE RANGE OF BENEFITS

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The State Department today issued formal regulations providing educational and
medical benefits and other forms of relief to the former hostages in Iran and
their families.

The regulations were needed to carry out portions of the Hostage Relief Act,
which was approved by Congress and signed by President Carter last fall.

The act also exempts the former hostages from paying income taxes on earnings in
the period of their captivity and hospitalization afterward.

Similar legislation has been enacted in the past for members of the Armed
Forces, such as prisoners of war in Vietnam, but this is the first such
legislation to apply to civilians.

Last Monday, Mr. Carter signed an executive order that established a commission
to make recommendations within 90 days on whether the United States should
provide special financial compensation to the hostages.

He named four members, Senator Henry L. Bellmon, Republican of Oklahoma, former
Rep. Robert N. Giaimo, Democrat of Connecticut, former Secretary of Health and
Human Services, Patricia Roberts Harris, and former Secretary of State Cyrus R.
Vance. It will be up to President Reagan to appoint the other five members.

Another executive order signed at the same time prevents the former hostages
from suing the Government of Iran or Iranian nationals for damages resulting
from their captivity.

Under the legislation and State Department regulations, the Government will pay
all the uninsured medical expenses incurred by the former hostages for injuries
or illnesses that resulted from, or were aggravated, by their captivity. The
Government will also pay the medical bills of their spouses and dependents if
the State Department determines that the families' afflictions were related to
the hostage situation.

The Government will also pay education and training expenses for former hostages
who wish to change jobs or careers and will cover such expenses for their
spouses and dependents that were incurred during the hostages' captivity or
incapacitation afterward.

The regulations also grant courts wide discretion in allowing families of former
hostages time to repay debts that were incurred before or in the period of
captivity.

In the 444 days of captivity, the paychecks of hostages who were Government
employees were forwarded to their dependents. The wages of those without
dependents were placed in interest-bearing accounts.

Representative Frank Annunzio, Democrat of Illinois, said he would propose
legislation authorizing the minting of gold medals for each former hostage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 PSYCHIATRISTS SUSPECT GARWOOD OF FAKING INSANITY

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 319 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 21


Two court-appointed psychiatrists testified today that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood
gave such bizarre responses on a personality test that they believed he might
have been faking mental illness.

The two Navy doctors, both testifying for the prosecution in Private Garwood's
court-martial by the Marine Corps on charges of desertion and collaboration with
the enemy, said they believed that Private Garwood was capable of fabricating
the account of his 14 years behind enemy lines in Vietnam. They also disputed
assertions by the defense that the 34-year-old Marine was highly suicidal.

Private Garwood has been accused of carrying weapons, wearing the uniform of the
enemy, making propaganda statements and helping to guard American prisoners. The
defense contends that Private Garwood was driven insane by Vietcong torture and
should not be held responsible for his actions.

Capt. Michael A. Harris and Capt. Patrick F. O'Connell of the Naval Aerospace
Medical Institute at Pensacola, Fla., were members of a review board that
examined Private Garwood last October and ruled he was mentally competent while
in Vietnam and understood the criminality of his conduct.

Captain O'Connell said the results of Private Garwood's personality test, which
consisted of 400 questions, suggested that he was feigning mental illness.
Captain Harris said he had reached the same conclusion after examining the
results.

John C. Lowe, the chief defense attorney, attempted in his crossexamination to
show that Captain O'Connell was biased against Private Garwood before he
examined him. Captain O'Connell denied any such bias.

Defense psychiatrists, who testified that Private Garwood had been driven insane
by torture and deprivation, compared the marine to a hypnotized person who is
unaware of his actions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE MILITARY AS A LIFE-BUILDING SERVICE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 468 words


To the Editor:

As a fellow member of America's Vietnam generation, I would like to respond to
Michael Blumenthal's Jan. 11 Op-Ed Article, ''Of Arms and Men.''

I agree with Mr. Blumenthal that American youths tend to grow up sheltered and
undisciplined, and that they often emerge selfcentered, with few goals or ideals
which transcend their personal problems. To struggle against powers much larger
than oneself, to be willing to risk one's life for ideals, to work together with
others to achieve a goal that no individual working alone could hope to achieve
- yes, these are the things that build character and manhood (personhood).

But to offer military service and war as the way to achieve these experiences
and mold these ideals is certainly shortsighted and narrow.

In 1969, while Mr. Blumenthal was sniffing canvas dust to revive his asthma to
keep himself out of Vietnam, I applied for and received conscientious-objector
status and then volunteered to work for the Mennonite Central Committee in a
literacy project in a small village in central Vietnam. For three years I
underwent the kind of life-building experiences for which it was suggested that
one should join the armed forces. But my experiences had several important
advantages.

The discipline I was under was self-imposed and thoughtful, not mindless
obedience to superiors; the camaraderie I experienced included persons of both
sexes, several different religions and nationalities and various races and
political ideologies, rather than a nationalist union of men of one ideology
against people of another race and ideology. The self-transcendence and
encounter with my own mortality (numerous colleagues, both Vietnamese civilians
and American pacifists, lost their lives in the en-deavor) was with the
knowledge that the goals for which I was living and willing to die were
life-giving and universal, rather than death-dealing and nationalistic.

War is not the only place where men (and women) can struggle against
overwhelming odds for transcendent goals which can be achieved only through
cooperation and perhaps the giving of one's life. Community organizing in the
South Bronx, struggling to eliminate drug traffic and working for human rights
in Central America are only a few of the ''man-sized'' projects whose ultimate
goal is a more just, happy and healthy humanity.

The world is full of problems which will help to develop character (manhood) if
they are contended with seriously. However, the problems which you choose, the
organization with which you join in this struggle and the ultimate goals for
which you ''give'' your life should be carefully selected.
DOUGLAS HOSTETTER, Cambridge, Mass., Jan. 12, 1981

The writer is executive secretary of the American Friends Service Committee's
New England Region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of medal

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE MILITARY AS A LIFE-BUILDING SERVICE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 368 words


To the Editor:

Michael Blumenthal's article is an excellent articulation on a subject on which
many Americans are slowly reaching a consensus: that a military service
obligation for all qualified citizens may not be undesirable after all and, in
fact, might very well be necessary for a number of reasons.

Aside from the obvious benefits of a better-manned, better-prepared and
generally higher-caliber military, a draft provides some unique experiences and
training that are important for the individual and for society as a whole.

The draft clearly had a leavening effect on society and the military, which came
from the mingling of all types and classes of individuals in a common
experience. It provided the still-immature 18-year-old with an educational and
growing-up experience which, if nothing else, made him street-wise but which
more often afforded him the basic concepts of responsibility, self-discipline
and plain old common sense.

Additionally, it alleviated much of the chronic unemployment problem in that age
bracket. Consequently, society and industry gained a steady stream of young
people who in two or three years of service had already been trained to be both
good citizens and good employees. That function is now left to employers, who
are both illequipped and reluctant to perform.

A college graduate in 1966, I was faced with the same dilemma that Mr.
Blumenthal describes. It just never occurred to me to pull off a scam to avoid
military service, which he cleverly did by reviving his bronchial asthma. (When
I try finagling like that, I outsmart no one but myself, as I did by enlisting
in the Navy to avoid Vietnam: I ended up as an officer assigned to a river
patrol boat on the Mekong.)

To lead, one must first learn to follow. This is a basic precept in military
training and in one's military experience. A better person, a better, more
productive employee, a better citizen - all are outgrowths of obligatory
service. No one loses by having served: not our military, surely not society,
not the future employers and, most important, not the individual. How much
longer can we afford not to have conscription?
GEORGE K. SARGENT 3D, Pittsburgh, Jan. 12, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE MILITARY AS A LIFE-BUILDING SERVICE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


To the Editor:

Undoubtedly many American veterans have experienced the ''camaraderie,''
''shared purpose'' and ''self-transcendence'' which Michael Blumenthal described
in his article.

Accounts of the Vietnam War written by participants such as Philip Caputo, Tim
O'Brien and the journalist Michael Herr testify amply to the validity of
Blumenthal's comments. Indeed, even some of the most bitter antiwar tracts, such
as Erich Maria Remarque's ''All Quiet on the Western Front,'' emphasize
persuasively that the common experience of war created an almost mystical
brotherhood among the combatants.

Now, 12 years after he suc-cessfully evaded military service, Blumenthal
concludes that perhaps he did miss something that might have enriched his life.
Not the Vietnam War, of course, but the military service.

Blumenthal, however, seems to have forgotten that separating military service
from war is impossible, that every aspect of military training, routine,
drudgery and standing in line is linked ultimately to enabling human beings to
kill other human beings. While time has tempered Blumenthal's view of service in
the armed forces, it has also dimmed his per-ceptions of the military in action,
the destruction, the anguish, the pain, the mud, the muck, and the dead.

Yet Blumenthal's insight persists, because it is the very proximity of death
which nourishes that camaraderie between soldiers.  Blumenthal has in fact
reminded us of what seems to be a tragic truism of the human condition: War and
peace are inextricably related, and as human beings we may never be able to
experience the one without the other.
PHILIP J. AVILLO JR., York, Pa., Jan. 12, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Said to Have Told Of Prisoners Still in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 22


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood reported that ''a couple hundred other Americans'' were
still in captivity in Vietnam when he left the country two years ago, a Navy
psychiatrist testified today.

Col. R.E. Switzer, who is presiding over Private Garwood's courtmartial on
charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy, ruled that the statements
by the psychiatrist, Capt. Benjamin R. Ogburn, were irrelevant and should be
stricken from the record.

Captain Ogburn said Private Garwood was upset that the authorities did not
question him about the matter. ''He said he did not know exactly who the
Americans were,'' Captain Ogburn said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
America The Greatest

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


President Reagan may be the best Fourth of July orator to reach the White House
since William Jennings Bryan was invited to dinner. What's more, in this
television age, he surely knows how to reach more millions, more effectively,
than any other golden-throated American in history. That's good, to a point.

As is only proper for an inaugural address, it would be hard to find partisan
fault with Mr. Reagan's. He firmly restated the conservative themes of his
campaign, but made the necessary bows to those of differing views -particularly
to minorities who fear short shrift from his Administration.

Still, the inaugural address did seem rather flat when compared to, say, his
acceptance speech in Detroit - and in contrast to the excruciating drama of the
hostages' release being played out simultaneously. (Here was a classic example
of an event at which those viewing it live saw and knew far less than those
watching by television, which distinguished itself with its coverage of what one
commentator called ''a tale of four cities.'')

Mr. Reagan's address, in fact, was most effective when he played upon the
hackneyed theme of the nation's greatness - that traditional exceptionalism to
which most Presidents have turned when they want a sure-fire response. Mr.
Reagan got right to it in the third paragraph when he declared ''how unique we
really are.''

In the next breath, he labeled the peaceful transfer of authority as ''nothing
less than a miracle'' to much of the world. That was not, of course, a reference
to Western Europe, where such transfers are routine, or to Canada, which
recently pulled off the same ''miracle'' twice within a year - and with less
effort and fuss than the Carter-Reagan transition produced.

But the sincerity that Mr. Reagan brings to this kind of thing, and the response
he evokes from audiences obviously hungry for it, rescue his efforts from the
usual hollow echoes. When he declares America ''special among the nations of the
earth,'' for example, it's easy to overlook the dubious reason he gives - that
''we are a nation that has a Government, not the other way around.'' Even if
that's true - and some of those diamond-studded Sun

Belters seem ready to throw out the old Northeast - there's nothing ''special''
about it.  In the same vein, the President included one of his most familiar
statements of exceptionalism: ''We are a nation under God, and I believe God
intended for us to be free.'' Passing over the fact that ''an establishment of
religion'' is expressly forbidden in the First Amendment, is there a suggestion
in the second clause that God did not intend all people to be free? If not, the
passage loses much of its emotional content; if so, the Declaration of
Independence and the most shining American promise are confounded.

Nothing in the inaugural address, however, equaled the claims to American
greatness voiced by Mr. Reagan and others at last summer's Republican
Convention:

* ''There are no words to express the extraordinary strength and character of
this breed of people we call Americans.'' - Mr. Reagan.

* ''The freest, most prosperous and generous society on the face of the earth.''
- Representative Jack Kemp.

* ''The most blessed, the most creative, the freest, the most optimistic people
on ... earth.'' - Gerald Ford.  All this could be dismissed as superpatriotism,
whatever that is, and to some extent it probably does represent an unwillingness
to face or concede certain unpleasant limitations and facts.

But Ronald Reagan does not evoke fervent response to such oratory because his
followers are jingoes or have their heads in the sand.  Many Americans need
reassurance, renewed faith, their confidence restored; and why should they not,
after Vietnam, Watergate, OPEC and the frustration of the hostages, with
American industry being overtaken by foreign competition, and those now taking
power having won it not least by decrying the nation's military strength and its
standing in the world?

The point-counterpoint of the inaugural and the hostages' release nevertheless
suggested the danger in too much exceptionalist fervor.  As stories emerge of
the Iranians' mistreatment of the hostages, as Congressional investigaters sift
and struggle through the nation's and the hostages' 14-month ordeal, rising
anger in this country is almost certain - particularly with the hostages no
longer in danger and if the judgment becomes widespread that the Carter
Administration ''paid ransom.'' And that kind of anger can be dangerous.

Jimmy Carter did not feed such sentiment with big-stick bluster about third-rate
nations, or American might, or the glories of war.  Neither did Ronald Reagan.
But insistence on the notion that we're No. l, the greatest, having the most and
deserving the best, makes it no easier for Americans to understand why,
sometimes, neither the nation's power nor its righteousness can prevail.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

51 OF FREED HOSTAGES FLY HOME TOMORROW

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1298 words

DATELINE: WIESBADEN, West Germany, Jan. 23


The freed American hostages will be flown home Sunday to be reunited with their
families at the United States Military Academy at West Point. Some, according to
the State Department's chief medical officer, will bring with them serious
psychiatric problems growing out of their 444 days of captivity.

After four days of tests and rest, the State Department said, the former
hostages are scheduled to make the last leg of the long journey home from
Teheran when they board an Air Force jet at Frankfurt, 20 miles from here, for a
flight to Stewart Airport at Newburgh, N.Y.

From there, the freed hostages and their relatives will be transferred to the
United States Military Academy for several days of privacy.

One Will Stay in Germany

Only 51 of the 52 who had been held in Teheran will will be making the trip.
Donald R. Hohman, an Army medic, has already been reunited with his German-born
wife, Anna, and has chosen to remain in Frankfurt with her and their two
children.

The State Department's chief medical officer, Dr. Jerome M. Korcak, said today
that some members of the group were so depressed that they refused to leave
their rooms to participate in activities, such as buying clothes and getting
haircuts, or to take part in continuing physical and psychological tests at the
Air Force Hospital here.(The medical officer did not say how many of the 52 he
thought had serious psychiatric problems, but an American diplomat who saw the
former hostages in Wiesbaden said on his return that only a ''handful'' had
displayed such symptoms.)

'Several' Said to Need Care

Dr. Korcak, who heads the 30-member medical team overseeing care of the former
hostages, declined at a news conference to say how many in the group seemed
psychologically disturbed. But an authoritative source indicated that
''several'' were regarded as requiring immediate psychiatric care.

In an official statement on the health of the freed hostages, Dr.  Korcak said:
''A number of those released are exhibiting signs and symptoms of transient
psychiatric illness, including post-traumatic stress syndrome, which are
directly related to their captivity in Iran.''

At the same time, Margaret Blakeley, a cashier at the hospital who described the
depression cases yesterday, said members of the hospital staff had told her some
of the former hostages were shunning others.

Those being ostracized, she said, appeared to be persons who, in the eyes of
fellow captives, might have received favorable treatment from their guards.

One former hostage, reached tonight by telephone, insisted that he knew of no
such tensions.  ''They are bitter towards them,'' the young woman asserted.
''They may give them dirty looks, or when they mention somebody's name, they're
real short and don't say anything else.''

''It's being said that if there were five hostages in a room with some Iranians,
the Iranians would treat two in a very friendly fashion but be harsh to the
other three,'' Miss Blakeley went on.

Dr. Korcak said nothing about this, but he seemed to address the situation
indirectly by saying: ''Some of them feel guilt about some of the statements
they made. We feel the guilt is completely inappropriate.''

He was referring to statements given by some hostages for publication or
broadcast that appeared to present their captors in favorable light. The doctor
maintained the statements were obtained by coercive methods, such as telling a
hostage that his friends would go free if he said something the Iranians
considered satisfactory.

'They Are Treatable'

Dr. Korcak said treatment had already begun for the psychiatric cases. He said a
reported description by a hospital employee of some of the patients as ''basket
cases'' was inaccurate. Rather, he said, ''they are treatable and these people
won't be permanently disabled.''

He defined the post-traumatic stress that some suffer from as ''sleep
disturbances, startle-reactions, and flashback phenomena where ordinary stimuli
such as the slamming of a door may bring back the feelings the patient
experienced during captivity.''

When he was asked why many of the hostages appeared relatively relaxed after
their release, the doctor replied that it was difficult to tell a man's
psychological condition just by looking at him, and he referred to ''depressions
that might be masked by the overlay of the euphoria of the release.''

The doctor said that none of the released Americans showed signs of what has
become known as the ''Stockholm syndrome,'' a condition related to hostages -
such as employees of a Stockholm bank in the mid-70's - becoming sympathetic to
the cause of people holding them prisoner.

''Quite the reverse,'' the doctor said. ''We have seen a universal hostility
toward the Iranians.'' There were many similarities between the hostages'
situation and that of American prisoners of war in Vietnam, Dr. Korcak said, but
he emphasized that the differences were also great. The prisoners of war could
assume they would be held for a long time and attempt to adjust, but in the case
of the diplomats in Teheran, ''the expectation of momentary release made it
psychologically that much more difficult.''

Beaten Where It Wouldn't Show

The examinations disclosed a number of physical ailments, he said, many of which
existed before the 444 days of captivity. The beatings by the Iranian guards,
according to the physician, were administered in a way not to leave marks. A
number of the prisoners were kicked or punched, and one who Dr. Korcak said was
kicked into unconsciousness complained of ringing in his ears.

Everyone lost weight, from 10 to 80 pounds.  In general, he went on, senior
members of the embassy staff were treated more harshly than their subordinates.
They were physically abused during interrogations for attempts to escape or for
talking in an insulting manner to their captors, Dr. Korcak said. But there was
no evidence of mutilation, fractures, or sexual mistreatment, he added.

After the unsuccessful American rescue mission in April, the doctor continued, a
number of hostages were ''bound and trussed and treated like sacks of garbage,''
thrown into trucks for movement to a a new site. One of the vehicles turned
over, he reported, but there were no serious injuries.

Brainwashing Unsuccessful

Attempts at brainwashing various members of the group were ''completely
unsuccessful,'' Dr. Korcak asserted. The indoctrination efforts, he said, were
found amusing by the hostages.

There was no decision as yet on what program would be followed for more severely
affected members of the group after they returned home, but he said that strains
were expected for everyone.

''In some cases,'' Dr. Korcak said, ''it will be difficult to establish normal
relations with their families.'' Each former hostage, he said, has a need to
recount his experience. The doctor advised their relatives to be patient and to
expect to hear the same stories over and over again.

In her remarks yesterday, Miss Blakeley said that both younger members of the
group and older ones as well appeared to be seriously disturbed. One, she said,
refused to give autographs to children or to talk, and another, a younger man,
kept his head down, refusing to look anyone in the eyes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sgt. James M. Lopez photo of Donald R. Hohman
and Anna Hohman photo of Phillip R. Ward and Clair C. Barnes

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESS IS PRIMARY TARGET OF SECURITY AT WIESBADEN

BYLINE: By HENRY TANNER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WIESBADEN, West Germany, Jan. 23


On the surface, security around the United States Military Hospital here where
the 52 freed hostages are being examined looks as if terrorists were loose in
the West German countryside.

Military policemen carrying rifles and pistols guard each of the five entrances
to the hospital grounds, including a small passage next to the garbage dump.
Soldiers with big German shepherds patrol the grounds, which are brightly
illuminated at night. More soldiers in trucks are in reserve nearby. No one
enters the hospital without the security badge reserved to essential staff.

The hospital has received several threatening phone calls. At least one caller
said he would blow up the place. Security officials said they regarded the calls
as pranks and did not take them very seriously.

But the Carter Administration, having been accused of not giving the Teheran
embassy the protection it needed, was determined that there be no incident,
however slight. ''Having gotten this far, we were not going to take any chances
here,'' one of the officials said.

Reporters Are the Target

These officials concede that the main purpose of the security is to build a
barrier between the former hostages and the outside world, including, most of
all, the thousand reporters, photographers and cameramen who have been lying in
ambush outside the hospital and farther afield in Wiesbaden and Frankfurt ready
to pounce if the freed Americans showed themselves.

''Media interest here is greater than in any event in recent history,'' an
official said, making it clear that news organizations were the enemy.

''Ours is a risk-reducing operation,'' another official said. He said American
authorities knew next to nothing about the attitudes and the mental and physical
condition of the people until the moment they stepped from the airliner in
Algiers on Tuesday.

A period in a ''decompression chamber'' was needed for them to find themselves
and to give the American authorities time to find out whether there were members
of the group who would not be able to adjust to a normal family and professional
life and would need psychiatric treatment after they reached home, the official
said.

A Practical Impossibility

He added that most American experts who had worked with prisoners of war from
Vietnam and had studied the cases of hostages taken in the Netherlands, Sweden
and West Germany felt that about six weeks' isolation would be ideal.

But this suggestion was rejected in this case. Even if it had been acceptable on
moral grounds to isolate them for so long, it would have been practically
impossible, if only because they and the press would have devised a way to break
the isolation.

As it turned out, Wednesday morning to Sunday appears to be about as long as the
isolation could be maintained.  The first day the freed hostages had no contact
with the outside world, but later more and more of them came to the gates of the
hospital grounds to chat in front of television cameras or telephoned reporters
who had managed to get messages with their numbers to them.

Use of Coercion Is Denied

American officials here have strenuously denied that any coercion has been used
to try to keep the freed hostages under wraps. Former Secretary of State Cyrus
R. Vance told them that if one of them wanted to fly home, it was his right to
do so, officials said. When asked whether this was also valid for the marines
and other members of the armed forces, the spokesman said, ''I assure you that
if one of them left, he would not be considered AWOL.''

It has become clear in the last three days, however, that the barriers between
the freed hostages and the rest of the world are such that only the most
determined could get across them.

The former hostages are free to make telephone calls but not to receive them. A
caller may give his name and number to the official answering the phone in the
control center and ask that his call be returned, but the requests are carefully
screened and only those from family members and close friends are handed on, an
official said.

Yesterday the spokesman said that the freed hostages had unanimously decided at
a meeting not to talk to the press. But two members of the group said they were
not aware of such a meeting or decision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of part of security force at U.S. Military
Hospital, at Wiesbaden

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TESTIMONY ENDS IN GARWOOD CASE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 24


Testimony in the court-martial of Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps
concluded today.  As the 10-week-old trial neared its end, psychiatric experts
testified for the Government and defense. Private Garwood is accused of having
deserted to the North Vietnamese communists.

A five-man jury of Marine officers was ordered to return Feb. 2 to hear closing
arguments. Private Garwood's lawyers have described him as a young soldier who
was coerced by the Vietnamese to obey their will. He was in Vietnam for 14 years
before returning to the United States in March 1979.

The Government charges that Garwood deserted his unit in 1965, willingly carried
a weapon of the communists and wore their uniform, interrogated American
prisoners and solicited others to desert.

The charges could result in a sentence of life imprisonment if he is convicted.
Private Garwoods's lawyers have conceded the facts of some of his actions in
captivity as related by other prisoners.

Basis of Insanity Plea

The defense case, as articulated by an Air Force psychiatrist, Col. James F.T.
Corcoran, rested on the contention that torture and coercion drove Private
Garwood into a form of insanity.

The Government presented witnesses this week to buttress the view that the
Marine knew exactly what he was doing in Vietnam and was not suffering from a
mental disease serious enough to impair his thinking.

Defense lawyers concentrated on undermining the credibility of the Government's
witnesses.  The credentials of several of the witnesses were questioned,
including those of Navy Capt. Patrick F. O'Connell of Pensacola, Fla., who
admitted that he had failed two examinations for his forensic psychiatric
credentials.

Another Government witness, Lieut. Cmdr. James B. Creed of Portsmouth, Va., was
ruled ineligible to testify.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


A new President always makes everybody feel so good that it's a pity we can't
have one every two weeks.  There are several reasons for the flush of delight.
For one, you are usually so glad to be rid of the old President that you'd feel
good even if the new man was your brother-in-law.

For another, the transition period between his election and his inauguration is
so long that people who voted against him forget they once called him a hopeless
and incompetent mug. In the euphoria of seeing the Government come to life
again, everybody is willing to believe maybe he spent the transition studying
hard at President's School and will turn out to be a new George Washington.

The process is abetted by the press and television people, who do so much to
elevate or depress the national psyche. After ten or eleven weeks of fretful
idleness, during which they are reduced to conjuring news out of weightless air,
they become so giddy at the prospect of returning to honest work that they
slaver communicable affection all over the new man as well as his wife,
children, parents, ancestors, high-school teachers and favorite authors.

I recall the eagerness with which they told an inert nation that President-elect
John F. Kennedy loved to lap up the James Bond potboilers, and the huge sale of
Bond paperbacks that immediately ensued.

Simultaneously, intellectuals were fetched by news bulletins that Kennedy's
favorite reading was Cecil's biography of Lord Melbourne, and presto! yearners
for a long-headed Presidency were immersed in the history of the English Whigs.

Scarcely an American now alive is too young to recall the delight with which
press and television suffused the continent at the disclosure that the new
President, Gerald Ford, rose each morning, went down to the kitchen and - yes,
ladies and gentlemen - made his own breakfast!

This sweet period when everybody loves the new President is still referred to by
old-timers as the honeymoon, but the more appropriate term in contemporary
politics might be ''the buildup.''

During the buildup the new fellow's talents, tastes and proclivities, even if
they are considerable, refined and decent, are inflated to proportions that a
genuine hero of statesmanship would be hard pressed to live up to. As a result
he usually turns into a sad disappointment before the first flowers bloom in the
Rose Garden.

People who see the ''media'' as the all-purpose villain of American life
sometimes accuse press and television of subjecting new Presidents to the
buildup in order to profit from the inevitable follow-up work of the tearing
down.

There is certainly no doubt that the buildup victimizes new Presidents in the
long run. The higher the expectations for men of average human ability, the
sadder the letdown when they are revealed as such.

It seems to me unduly cynical, however, to accuse media folk of deliberately
building them up in order to knock them down. The fact, I suspect, is quite the
opposite. Media people thrive on telling Americans what they want to hear. The
two celebrated exceptions to this rule - press coverage of the Vietnam War and
Watergate -earned them deep national suspicion and hostility, which is still
reflected in the courts' recently acquired habit of clapping the occasional
insolent reporter into jail as a threat to the Republic.

I suspect, rather, that media folks have the same tendency to dream as most
other Americans. When they afflict poor new Presidents with the buildup, they
are simply letting their own prejudices influence their stories.

Cunning enough to know that the country wants to feel wonderful about its new
Presidents, they have no qualms about providing the wherewithal of good feeling
since they feel themselves that this time maybe God really will be on our side
and something wonderful really may ensue.

I have known this feeling myself -for about two weeks in every case -after the
ascensions of Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter. It is nearly impossible
to resist it in the case of President Reagan this week, though I am fighting
hard to.

It would be unfair to the poor devil to burden him with public celebration of
the many excellences I now perceive, since the euphoria is bound to turn to sour
rancor if events prove him merely human. It is possible, of course, that he may
turn out to be more than human, though catastrophe is also conceivable.
Inflating him with gas before he finds his way to the Oval Office can't help
him.  The Presidency is not the Thanksgiving Day parade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET AT SEA: NEW SHIPS FOR DISTANT BASES;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va., Jan. 22


The Soviet Union has embarked on the building of major surface ships that appear
to be designed for service in the third world, outside the ''choke points'' that
NATO analysts believe would constrain Soviet naval strategy in the event of war.

Authoritative naval sources at the headquarters of the Western alliance's naval
command disclosed that one new heavy cruiser, the Sovremenny, is already at sea,
although it has not yet been armed with its guns - described as heavier than
anything installed on any other Soviet surface ship.

The Sovremenny, a 7,600-ton vessel, will carry, in addition to the guns, an
array of advanced surface-to-surface missiles.  The Sovremenny and other ships
of its class were described as follow-ups to the Kirov battle cruiser deployed
last year.  There is no definite information at present on how many other ships
of this class are planned.  However, four ships of a new class built for
antisubmarine warfare are reported to be under construction at the Kommuna
Shipyards at Nikolayev, near Odessa on the Black Sea. These vessels, of 8,500
tons, are to be powered by gas-turbine engines. Designed for antisubmarine
duties, the ships will carry helicopters and a variety of antisubmarine weapons.


New Missile Cruiser Being Built

A 12,500-ton missile cruiser, the lead ship of a class of three, is also under
construction at Nikolayev, according to sources with access to the most recent
intelligence reports. This ship, as yet unnamed, was described as ''a miniature
Kirov,'' with a speed estimated at 34 knots.

The emphasis in new Soviet construction on heavy guns and the most advanced
surface-to-air missiles are two pieces in the thus far incomplete mosaic of
Soviet naval intentions. But indications have multiplied that the naval high
command intends to use the new ships for operations far from Soviet home ports.

The military advantage of this, according to Adm. Harry D. Train, who commands
both the Atlantic Fleet and North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in the
Atlantic, is that the ships would be able to operate beyond the choke points.

The four major Soviet fleets could operate effectively in war only after they
had moved through these points. This, NATO naval strategists emphasize, is one
of the major obstacles facing the expanded Soviet Navy in the event of
hostilities.

The Northern Fleet, based around Murmansk and the largest of the four, would
have to move around Norway's North Cape and down into the Norwegian Sea toward
the Greenland-Iceland-Britain gap before it reached the North Atlantic and
eastbound convoys.

The Baltic Fleet, although it could support army landings on the West German and
Danish coasts, would have to pass through the straits around the Danish island
of Zealand before it could reach the North Sea.

The Black Sea Fleet, if called upon to support the Soviet squadron in the
Mediterranean, would have the hazardous task of passing through the Dardanelles.

Finally, the recently reinforced Pacific Fleet would have the option of moving
east through La Perouse Strait between Sakhalin and Hokkaido, Japan's
northernmost island, or south through the Korea Strait west of the island of
Tsushima, a name of ill-omen for Russian sailors.

It was at Tsushima that the czar's battle fleet was destroyed in 1905 during
Russia's war with Japan.

Reaching Beyond 'Choke Points'

Intelligence analysts assume that the Russians intend to build up a powerful
squadron that will not be constrained by the necessity of moving through any of
these choke points and will have ample logistical supply from fleet
replenishment ships of the Berezina class.

The squadron would be a self-contained battle group capable of missile attack
against an American carrier battle group. It would not have the protection of
planes flying from a Soviet carrier. But, as one authoritative source said, the
Kirov carries new surface-to-air missiles with a speed close to six times the
speed of sound.

''With that sort of protection,'' one source commented, ''they won't have to
worry much about fighter cover.'' The ultimate location of a Soviet battle group
of this kind is the subject of extensive intelligence study.  One view is that
the force would be stationed on the west coast of Africa, possibly at Luanda, in
Angola, where it would be reasonably close to the path of transports and
merchant ships moving from the United States to Europe, and almost on top of
tankers moving out of the Persian Gulf, around South Africa and on to Europe and
North America.

That, of course, is assuming that there is any tanker traffic once a war is
under way or that there is a major confrontation in the Persian Gulf.

U.S. Carriers in Indian Ocean

The major new United States naval development is the deployment of two carrier
battle groups in the Indian Ocean. In Navy eyes, their deployment has been the
only effective military response to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan late
in 1979.

The Soviet squadron, some argue, might be deployed to support the Soviet naval
forces already in the Indian Ocean. But to do so, these sources emphasize, bases
larger and better equipped than the existing anchorages at Dahlak, in the Red
Sea off Ethiopia, or Socotra Island in the Gulf of Aden would be required.

Another possible Soviet option is to deploy the squadron at Cam Ranh Bay, the
huge base that the United States built in Vietnam.  This, too, would provide the
Russians with a strategic advantage.  Ships based there would be able to thwart
tankers moving from the Middle East to Japan and would also be in a position to
threaten an inferior Chinese fleet based north of Vietnam.

The deployment of the new Soviet ships, sources here agree, will seriously
complicate NATO's naval situation, whatever base is chosen.  As one remarked:
''It's not a problem that will go away if we ignore it. In fact if we do that,
the next time we take a look it will be twice as serious.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Says Soviet Won't Be Granted Bases

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: MUNICH, West Germany, Jan. 23


Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam said in an interview published today
that his country did not plan to allow the Soviet Union to establish bases on
its territory.

The Foreign Minister, in an interview with the newspaper Suddeutsche Zeitung,
was asked whether Vietnam planned to cede Cam Ranh Bay and Da Nang to the Soviet
Union.

''In a war, the visits of ships of allied nations are normal,'' he replied. ''It
is something else when one allows the construction of out-and-out bases, as the
Philippines ceded to the Americans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILIES BECAME THE 'OTHER HOSTAGES' IN THE LONG WAIT FOR THEIR LOVED ONES

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


The 52 Americans held 444 days in Iran were not the only hostages involved in
that crisis.  Their wives, children, parents and other relatives also found
themselves held captive by the incident, trapped on what one called ''an
emotional roller coaster of hope and despair,'' never knowing when or how the
terrifying ride might end.

Today, finally, their ordeal will end, and all those yellow ribbons tied around
trees from coast to coast will come down in a burst of euphoria. But scars and
bitter memories will surely remain after the families and their loved ones are
reunited around midday in an airport hangar near Newburgh, N.Y. For most
relatives of the former hostages, the past 15 months add up to the worst
experience of their lives.

''I think the families will have as long a healing and recovery process as the
hostages themselves in some cases,'' said Helen McLellan, the sister of Joseph
M. Hall, a military attache, as relatives began packing for the trip to West
Point.

The hostage crisis, with its seemingly endless rise and fall of rumors about
trials, executions and resolution, so disturbed some families that they sought
psychiatric care. Others began taking tranquilizers, drinking or smoking too
much.

Effects of Ordeal

At least one suffered a heart attack. A number reported serious weight loss, up
to 30 pounds, from lack of appetite, loss of sleep and worry over children who
sobbed at night.

''It aged me l0 years,'' Eugene Lauterbach, father of Steven Lauterbach, an
embassy administrative officer, said of his own ordeal. ''It took the joy out of
life. I kept on going to work and paying the bills, but there was no joy.''

As might be expected, the crisis has also left many of the relatives deeply
bitter toward Iran and Iranians.  Dorothea Morefield, the wife of Richard H.
Morefield, the Consul General, recently called her husband's captors ''trash''
and ''a screaming mob of terrorists,'' adding: ''They've lowered themselves.
They've shamed themselves by their behavior. I think it will be a long time
before the world has any respect for them.''

The crisis has also left some relatives bitter toward the United States
Government and former President Jimmy Carter, and, in some cases, bitter at
other relatives who have unstintingly supported Mr.  Carter and the State and
Defense Departments.

Intense Media Coverage

Ernest Cooke, the father of Donald Cooke, the vice consul, abruptly hung up the
phone last week when President Carter attempted to talk to the family about the
hostage situation. ''My wife, Susan, got mad when she got stuck making small
talk with the President,'' Mr. Cooke said later, explaining that the call took
place last week while Mr.  Carter was visiting the freed Americans in West
Germany.

Since the very first hours of the seizure of the embassy in Teheran, the
hostages' relatives have been subjected to intense, sometimes almost unbearable,
coverage by the news media. Most relatives have tolerated the coverage
good-naturedly, apparently concluding that it involved not only a good story but
also a story that needed to be told, again and again, if pressure was to be kept
on the Iranian captors.

In a few instances, however, relatives totally avoided reporters, retreating
behind closed doors and telephone answering machines. And, at the other extreme,
a few relatives have seemed to revel in the media limelight, as though finding
relief there from their worries.

While there are exceptions, hostage relatives have been tightly and personally
bound to one another by their common misery, probably for life.

''We've all been thrown into this thing together, for better or for worse,''
Mary Lopez, the mother of Sgt. James M. Lopez of the Marines, said recently
after returning from a meeting of hostage families. ''I'm now on the absolutely
closest terms with a lot of people I wouldn't otherwise ever have had anything
in common with.  But because of our common problem, I've gotten so I feel I can
share my innermost secrets with them.''

A Painful Secret

In the aftermath of the hostages' release, it has been learned that some of
those secrets made life all but unbearable for some hostage relatives.

In the first letter that Louisa Kennedy received from her husband, Moorhead C.
Kennedy Jr., an economist at the embassy, he wrote of a willingness to die for
his country, then added what Mrs. Kennedy took to be ''fond last remarks.'' She
lived with the implications of that letter for most of the crisis, bottling up
her own surging fears to keep the fears of others from growing.

Similarly, one of the first letters sent out by Michael J. Metrinko stated that
he and his fellow hostages were being treated ''like dogs.'' The Metrinko family
turned the letter over to the State Department and remained silent about its
contents until the hostages were released.

Some families have nevertheless been able to find a few bright rays of hope
among all the clouds. ''The country had been divided by Vietnam,'' said Lawrence
Persinger, father of Sgt. Gregory Persinger of the Marines, as he headed for
West Point. ''I really believe the Iran seizure united the country. The whole
country really stood behind us.''

Mitchell Foreman, the brother-in-law of Sgt. Steven W. Kirtley of the Marines,
also took some hope from the ordeal. ''We needed some heroes at this time the
way things are going,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Toni and Virgil Sickmann

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONSERVATION'uf814Harold K. Hochschild, the former head of a large metals
company and an active Adirondacks historian and conservationist, died Friday
night at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center after an eight-month illness. He
was 88 years old and lived in Blue Mountain Lake, N.Y., and New York City.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 32, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 609 words


Mr. Hochschild was for many years the executive head of the American Metal
Company, which merged in 1957 and eventually became AMAX Inc. He retired after
the merger, although he was serving as a director emeritus at the time of his
death.

Mr. Hochschild was chairman of a commission appointed by Gov.  Nelson A.
Rockefeller that recommended major changes in the administration of the
Adirondack State Park in 1971. The report led to the creation of the Adirondack
Park Agency and the adoption of a master plan intended to limit development and
insure conservation.

Active Interest in History

One of his interests was local history, and he was the author of ''Township
34,'' a history of the central Adirondacks.  In his later years, he was active
as president of the Adirondack Historical Association, which operates the
Adirondack Museum of Blue Mountain Lake.

He had been a trustee of the New York State Historical Association and a member
of the Advisory Council on Historical Sites of the State of New York.

He was a former trustee of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton and
supported its director, J. Robert Oppenheimer, in a battle with supporters of
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy in the 1950's.  He also was a former chairman of the
executive committee of the African-American Institute of New York and a former
director of the Valeria Home, the United Hospital Fund and the Correctional
Association of New York.

American Metal, under Mr. Hochschild's leadership and that of his predecessor,
the late Otto Sussman, became a leading custom smelter and refiner of ores and
scrap in the United States.

Trips to Africa

He was elected president of American Metal in 1934 and board chairman in 1947,
serving in both posts until 1950, when his brother, Walter, was elected
president.

Mr. Hochschild was the son of the late Berthold and Mathilde Blumenthal
Hochschild. He was born in New York on May 20, 1892. He graduated from Yale
University, joining American Metal in 1913.

In 1941, Mr. Hochschild married the former Mary Marquand, daughter of Eleanor
Marquand and Prof. Allan Marquand, founder of the art department at Princeton
University. Mrs. Hochschild died in 1974.

Mr. Hochschild made frequent trips to company copper mines in Africa and Mrs.
Hochschild accompanied him, assembling African art.  One collection, art works
by Bantu mission schoolchildren in Southern Rhodesia who had never seen a
painting before, was exhibited in the Junior Museum of the Metropolitan Museum
of Art. Mrs. Hochschild's grandfather, Henry G. Marquand, was the museum's
second president.

Opposed Policy on China

He served in the Army in World War II and spent two years in Europe as
commanding officer of the Field Interrogation Detachment, retiring as lieutenant
colonel.

An occasional writer of letters to the editor of The New York Times, he was a
critic of United States policy on China in the 1960's and an early opponent of
the war in Vietnam. He opposed support to the regime of Chiang Kai-shek, whom he
considered ''discredited.'' In 1953 he announced that two affiliated mining
companies in Rhodesia had asked its miners' union to lift its color bar and to
admit blacks.

Besides his brother, Walter, of New York, he is survived by a son, Adam, of San
Francisco, an editor at Mother Jones magazine, and two grandchildren.

There will be a private burial service. A memorial service will be held in the
spring.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Harold K. Hochschild, 88, IS DEAD; INDUSTRIALIST ACTIVE
IN

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Eleanor Hodenpyl Sets June 6 Bridal

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 50, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


Mr. and Mrs. Eugene Hodenpyl of Sag Harbor, L.I., have announced the engagement
of their daughter, Eleanor Payne Hodenpyl, to Robert Brendan Kirby, son of Mr.
and Mrs. Joseph B. Kirby of Roosevelt, L.I.

A June 6 wedding is planned.  Miss Hodenpyl, a personnel representative with the
Chemical Bank in New York, was graduated from the Hewitt School and Skidmore
College and received a master's degree in education from the State University of
New York at Albany. She was presented to society at a ball given by the Society
of Mayflower Descendants and is a provisional member of the Junior League of New
York. Her father is a retired stockbroker.

Mr. Kirby, who is a senior analyst in the treasury department of the Amerada
Hess Corporation in New York, was graduated from the University of Maryland and
received a master's degree in business administration from Columbia University.
He served as a lieutenant in the Navy during the Vietnam War. His father is a
sales representative in the New York office of the Johnstown (N.Y.) Knitting
Mill Company, a clothing manufacturer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE OTHER HILTON COMES HOME

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section 3; Page 8, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1706 words


I N the beginning there was Conrad N.  Hilton. And he came out of Texas after
World War II to create the hotel empire that bears his name. In 1964 the empire
was divided. The hotels overseas were grouped into a separate company, and that
company, Hilton International, was sold to Trans World Airlines in 1967.

Now Hilton International, after having triumphantly covered the world with 81
hotels from Abu Dhabi to Zurich, is coming home. The hotel market has shifted
and potential for growth lies in the United States,

The man in charge of this homecoming is Curt R. Strand, a career Hilton man who
has been president of Hilton International since 1968. Mr. Strand, who appears
as reserved and businesslike as Mr. Hilton was flamboyant, has the task of
introducing Hilton International to this country without being able to use the
Hilton name, which is the property of the entirely separate Hilton Hotels
Corporation, based in Beverly Hills, Calif.

Mr. Strand faces some other formidable problems. The first of the United States
hotels, which will go under the name Vista International, is being built at the
World Trade Center in lower Manhattan, an area that hasn't supported a major
hotel since the last century. The New York hotel has run into severe
construction delays, which has put off its opening, originally scheduled last
year. In addition, the company is attempting its United States expansion in a
weak economy and at a time of high interest rates.

Another unknown is the plans of Hilton International's parent, the Trans World
Corporation, a holding company that must nurse T.W.A.  through a period of
erratic results while it operates its other businesses - Spartan Foods Systems
Inc., the Century 21 Real Estate Corporation and the Canteen Corporation.

Mr. Strand brushes aside these problems, especially speculation that T.W.A.'s
difficulties could affect Hilton International. ''We're totally on our own,'' he
says. ''We've always financed ourselves. We never needed capital from the
parent. We answer to the board of the holding company, but there is no joint
management. And we're very profitable.''

Hilton last week reported its 1980 financial results, the best in its 32-year
history, to Trans World: a pretax profit of $65.8 million, which was $10.4
million, or almost 19 percent, better than 1979, and revenues of $961.6 million,
a gain of approximately 15 percent.

Hilton International is essentially in the business of hotel management. Of all
its far-flung hotels, it owns only a handful.  ''We're not a real-estate
company,'' Mr. Strand says. ''The hotels are locally owned. We don't have
franchises. We control the standard of operation. We not only manage them but
design them. We provide the architects, the engineers, the interior designers,
the kitchen planners.''

In the United States, Hilton International has already signed a 25-year lease to
operate the Drake Hotel in Chicago and has announced plans for Vista hotels in
Kansas City, Washington, Philadelphia and Houston.

''The frontier in the past seemed to be all abroad,'' Mr. Strand said. ''The
main focus of travel was from the United States to somewhere else. Then with the
recovery of Europe and when the dollar no longer played the great role that it
had, the scene shifted.  Today, Germany is the No. 1 travel originator.
Together, Europe and Japan became the sources of travel.''

Mr. Strand says that opportunities still exit abroad and that Hilton
International currently has 12 hotels outside the United States under
construction and more going into construction. ''Travel is still there,'' he
says, ''but not in the abundance it once was.''

New York's dozens of established hotels, with many more opening in a hotel
building boom, would seem to offer stiff competition. But Mr. Strand says the
city is disadvantaged as far as first-class hotel rooms go, with less than half
the 40,000 that London has. ''We're just catching up,'' he says, ''A lot of
people are staying in hotel rooms far below the quality that they'd like.''

But why set up far from the glitter of midtown in lower Manhattan where, as in
small towns, they roll up the sidewalks at night?  ''It was strictly by
accident,'' Mr. Strand says. ''Every hotel in the U.S. has turned down the idea.
It was the conventional wisdom that it wouldn't go.''

But Mr. Strand had a serendipitous advantage. Hilton International manages
restaurants at the World Trade Center, including the highly rated Windows on the
World. ''We expected to be full for lunch, but who was going to eat dinner
downtown?'' he says. ''When we opened we were swamped with reservations. We had
to hire 21 telephone operators just to take them. We had to rush in seven chefs
from England and Canada. It's been successful ever since. If we can seat 600 or
700 people every night certainly we can fill a hotel.''

The construction delays on the 825-room, 22-story hotel are attributed by Mr.
Strand to ''one of the subcontractors who hasn't been able to meet his
schedule,'' but he declined to name the subcontractor. ''Now we have a floating
target,'' he says. ''It's a matter of weeks before we set a definitive opening
date.''

The vagaries of the economy, Mr. Strand says, are not a prime concern because
''in the hotel business you're in for the long haul.  The hotel is going to be
around for 50 years or so. It is difficult to launch projects in this money
market, but we don't slow our prepatory work. Some projects are awaiting
interest rates to come down.''

As for name problems, Mr. Strand said, ''The public is unaware of the fact that
there are two completely separate companies with the same name. It's unique. But
historically it was perfectly logical at the time. We'll have to establish the
Vista name. It's meaningless unless it's associated with the product.''

M UCH of Mr. Strand's life is spent on jet planes and in Hilton hotels
throughout the world. At age 60, he logs 300,000 miles a year -''there are a few
airline pilots who don't fly that much,'' he says.

''If it stimulates you, it's fabulous,'' he says, ''but you have to have the
kind of stomach to take the changes in cuisine. And if you don't suffer jet lag,
then it's great. I get off the plane with no jet lag and my stomach eager to
enjoy all the varieties of food. I don't know what jet lag feels like. I only
need four or five hours of sleep.''

On his last trip, he spent a few days in Venezuela, opened a new hotel in
Cabimas, saw construction begin on another in Maracaibo, and ''looked at
opportunities'' in other cities. He usually meets with landlord companies and
other executives, gives pep talks to the staff, inspects hotels and generally
puts in an appearance.

''I've been on roads not safe to travel in Vietnam before the war.  We had our
share of problems in Havana. That's the first hotel we lost. I remember several
riots in Istanbul. The employees marched out with Turkish flags and persuaded
the crowds that the hotel was Turkish-owned.''

The second hotel Hilton International lost was in Iran. ''We enjoyed being in
Iran,'' Mr. Strand said. ''It was one of the most profitable hotels. Just before
the Shah left they told us to get the foreigners on the staff out. They're just
running the hotel without us. I don't even know what they call it.''

Of the overseas hotels, Mr. Strand says, ''They're foreignexchange factories,
and they're a source of training for local people. They're extremely important
to the countries.''

Mr. Strand prides himself on the mobility of the staff, what he calls an
international cadre of 3,000 people. ''We can transfer key people within the
company for a year or possibly two without having to go through the immigration
process,'' he says. ''It makes it possible for us to have an instant group of
professional experts of all nationalities. People who don't want to move are
left alone, or they don't go into this kind of business in the first place.''

Mr. Strand, who was born in Vienna and who moved with his family to Minnesota,
was graduated from Cornell University's School of Hotel Administration. His
first job was superintendent of services at the Plaza in New York, which was
then owned by Mr. Hilton. He joined Hilton International and became a vice
president in 1953.

His wife has a career of her own. She is chairman of the biology department at
New York University. They have a grown daughter.  ''I knew I wanted to do this
when I was 12 years old,'' he said.  ''I wanted to be in this business.'' As for
the hotel chain's founder (''I was introduced to him three times before he
remembered me''), Mr. Strand says that Mr. Hilton, who died in 1979 at the age
of 91, wasn't a hotel man at all in one sense of the term. ''He had tremendous
intuition for what the public wanted and he was a deal maker par excellence. But
he had no comprehension of hotel management. He surrounded himself with people
who could do that.''

Mr. Hilton's one big mistake, Mr. Strand maintains, was to sell Hilton
International. Mr. Hilton, he says, felt that the market didn't sufficiently
show the value of the Hilton company, and that's why he split off Hilton
International as a separate company with its own stock. The Hilton family held
25 percent of that stock after the spin-off, and in the deal with T.W.A.
exchanged it for $86 million of T.W.A. stock, which has since nosedived. ''It
turned out to be a better deal for T.W.A. than the Hilton family,'' Mr. Strand
said.

Mr. Hilton's second-biggest mistake, in Mr. Strand's view (and he added that Mr.
Hilton acknowledged these mistakes), was to sell the Plaza. ''The Plaza, that's
irreplacable,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Curt R. Strand

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
MAKE PEACE WITH IRAN?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


The hostages have dominated the politics of the United States for 14 months, and
they are now getting the loving reception they deserve for their patience and
sacrifice. But there is a feeling in the new Administration that one day fairly
soon we will have to turn our minds to the problems of the future.

Many things have been changed by this struggle over our prisoners in Iran, but
they have not changed geography. Iran remains a critical strategic area between
the southern border of the Soviet Union and the oil fields of the Middle East.
Our hostages were pawns in the Ayatollah Khomeini's religious battle for control
of his country, but he is presumably not immortal.

Meanwhile, the more important economic and strategic conflicts of the world go
on, and on this continuing battleground, the United States and Iran are not
enemies but natural allies. They have a common interest in defending the
independence of Iran, which is a bridge between East and West, and a barrier to
Moscow's ancient dreams of extending its empire to the warm-water oil routes in
the Persian Gulf.

Nobody could object to the anger of the American people about the treatment of
the hostages by the Ayatollah, nor to the dramatic presentation of their plight
by our press and television. But the Ayatollah, while he no doubt symbolizes
Iranians' grievances against the Shah and the materialistic threats of the
capitalist world to his religion, does not represent the Iran of the future.

He is an old man holding up his hand against the avalanche of history. One can
even understand his protest against the moral squalor of the West, but he is a
passing shadow and should not be confused with the history and geography of his
country. They will endure long after the Ayatollah and even Ronald Reagan are
gone from the world scene.

There are many well-intentioned people here and elsewhere who are determined to
dwell on the past. They are convinced, even now, that there was a conspiracy in
the murder of President Kennedy, that Nixon and Agnew were hounded out of
Washington by a hostile press, and that it is their duty to expose the crimes of
the past. There are, of course, lessons to be learned from careful investigation
of the tragedies of our history, of Vietnam, Watergate, of Iran, but there are
also some dangers.

Some members of Congress now want President Reagan to reject the deal that
liberated the hostages, to investigate why they were taken prisoner, why the
raid in the desert was such a failure - all interesting questions about the
past, provided they don't get in the way of the future.

The new Reagan Administration has been very canny in its reaction.  It has
rejected the notion that it should repudiate the deal that liberated the
hostages, on the ground that it should not follow the Ayatollah's example of
violating an international agreement.

But also, being relieved of the hostage problem, the Reagan Administration knows
that it must deal with the larger political and strategic considerations of the
Middle East for the next four years.  It will give the hostages the reception
they deserve in Washington, and listen sympathetically to their recountings of
the horrors of their treatment in captivity. It will not rush in to re-establish
diplomatic relations in Teheran. But the guess here is that, after a period of
judicious leaving-alone, it will remember the importance of that country to the
strategic and economic interests of the United States.

For the moment, Iran is no longer concerned with the issue of the hostages. It
is at war with Iraq, whose troops are occupying part of its country and shutting
off its flow of oil to the industrial world. It is in the midst of an economic
crisis, invaded from the south, threatened by the Soviets in the north and
engaged in a civil war between its modern and religious leaders.

There is a popular tendency in the Congress to rejoice in the Iranians'
predicament after the humiliation they imposed on the United States, but the new
Secretary of State, Al Haig, undoubtedly has a different strategic view of the
problem.

Iran is no threat to American security interests, but if she should be divided
and crippled, the Soviet Union, with 85,000 troops already in Afghanistan on
Iran's eastern border, might be tempted to intervene, and that would be a major
challenge and threat to the peace of the world.

So the new Administration, angry as it is about the treatment of the hostages,
doesn't want their homecoming to get out of hand and lead to a jingoistic
hostility here toward Iran. They want, as soon as possible, to cool things down
and not allow present differences to deteriorate into permanent hostilities.

No doubt it will take a long time, on both sides, to heal the wounds of this
crisis between the United States and Iran, but after a period of separation and
reflection they may finally come to their senses and recognize their common
interests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT BECAME OF CHILDHOOD INNOCENCE?

BYLINE: By Marie Winn; Marie Winn's new book,''Children Without Childhood,''
will be published by Pantheon Books.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6512 words


Once upon a time, in the Golden Age of Innocence, an imaginary 12-year-old girl
from New England named Lolita slept with a middle-aged European intellectual
named Humbert Humbert and shocked American sensibilities; the daily reviewer of
The New York Times called Vladimir Nabokov's novel ''repulsive'' and
''disgusting.''

Twenty-five years after ''Lolita's'' publication, as Edward Albee's dramatic
adaptation prepares to open on Broadway, Nabokov's vision of American childhood
seems nothing if not prescient. The public of 1956 was outraged not only by the
thought of early sex but also by the image of a child so knowing, jaded and
unchildlike. How much more familiar Lolita is today. There is no doubt that 9-,
10-, 11- and 12-year-olds of the 1980's have more in common with Lolita, at
least in what they know, than with those guileless and innocent creatures in
their shiny Mary Janes and pigtails, their scraped knees and trusting ways that
were called children not so long ago.

But if parents are no longer surprised, many are still distressed and genuinely
con-fused about whether their children are being inevitably cheated out of
childhood or whether some good may come from this early worldliness. What
happened to blur the boundaries between childhood and adulthood? What became of
childhood innocence?  Without a doubt, the upheavals of the 1960's - from
divorce and the breakdown of the family, to women's liberation and increased
employment - weakened the protective membrane that once sheltered children from
precocious experience and knowledge of the adult world. The aging babies of the
post-World War II baby boom gave children greater power in their greater
numbers. Above all, television, virtually uncontrolled in all but a minority of
homes, has caused children to gorge on the fruit of knowledge, not only about
sex but also about the complexities of life in general - Vietnam, Watergate, the
energy crisis, famine. As adult culture sloughs off layer after layer of
vestigial Victorianism - in books, in rock music, in all aspects of daily life
-children are absorbing new information, and that touching trust once synonymous
with childhood fades into premature skepticism and uncertainty. Preteen-agers
were singing, ''We're off to see the Wizard'' not so long ago; today their
childish voices pipe the Beatles' ''Why don't we do it in the road?'' ''I
watched this special on TV called 'Gay Power,' '' a seventh grader relates,
''and they showed all this stuff about sadism and how one homosexual takes
another as a slave. The scary thing was that it was real, not actors dressing
up. And then in school, when some girls had a sleep-over, everybody called them
lesbians. It just makes us all nervous about being touched, and some kids are
worried that they might turn out to be homosexual.''

''I debrief with the kids when I get home from work the way I used to with my
husband, while we were still talk-ing,'' a divorced New York mother says. ''I
guess I tell them more than I ought to about my worries but they might as well
find out sooner or later that life can be complicated and unfair and
infuriating.''

''I know sex isn't shameful,'' explains a 12-year-old with dignity, ''But when
my friend Louise and I looked at this magazine, Hustler, that her brother had!
You can't imagine how perverted it was! At least Playboy has a touch of class.
Hustler was even worse than 'Wifey' by Judy Blume, which was only about sex,
sex, sex.''

A single parent of two preteen-agers reports, ''Once when I was out late, the
kids stayed up and watched ''Midnight Blue,'' (a sexually explicit late-night
show on cable television). The next day they made a big point of describing to
me everything they saw on the show. The thought of me telling my mother about
some product used to masturbate with - my mother would have died! Well, I told
the kids, 'For God's sake, don't watch that awful program anymore,' and my older
one said, 'If you're going to stay out so late, we're going to watch whatever we
want!' ''

''When we were 12 it was very exciting to smoke marijuana,'' a high-school
junior reminisces, ''Now the thrill is entirely gone. It would be considered
childish to make a big deal about smoking dope nowadays.''

Something has changed in the general timetable of childhood, and the
accompanying parental anxiety is almost palpable. As Joseph Heller wrote in
''Something Happened,'' ''More and more of us don't really care what happens to
our children ... as long as it doesn't happen too soon.'' The change has
occurred so rapidly that it is hard to attribute it to a trend toward earlier
physiological maturation.  Though puberty sets in at least three years earlier
today than it did in the mid-19th century (a result, most experts believe, of
improved nutrition), the shift has been gradual, a decrease of one year every
quarter-century. Yet even 20 years ago, our idea of childhood was probably
closer to that of our great-grandparents than to the prevailing concept today.

Evidence of a society-wide change of attitude is everywhere. On television
commercials 10-year-olds undulate to disco music and the teen-age actress Brooke
Shields recites sexual double-entendres: ''What comes between me and my Calvins?
Nothing!'' A sales pitch for a competing brand of jeans features a young girl
mounted in a sexually suggestive posture on an apple-cheeked boy's back. A
full-page advertisement in a show-business trade newspaper flaunts a sultry
female wearing dark lipstick, much eye shadow and possibly nothing else. It
bears the legend: ''Would you believe I'm only 10?''

We believe it. Beyond the extravagances of show business looms a population of
normal children, once clearly distinguishable as little boys and girls, who now
look and act like little grown-ups. Lolita arrived in 1956 with a shocking
impact precisely because she was only 12, and still in need of special
protection. It is ironic that today, as we face a new era when innocence seems
an atavistic relic, the playwright Edward Albee has cast a 24-year-old, Blanche
Baker, as Lolita. Though he auditioned hundreds of children and teen-agers in
cities throughout America, Albee explains: ''I was appalled by the kids I saw
auditioning for the part. I could see they were being pushed by their ambitious
parents. And I was worried about the psychic damage playing such a role might
cause to a child.'' And yet a 13-year-old who did audition seemed hardly a
vulnerable innocent when she said: ''I wouldn't mind the sex scenes. The book's
about this young girl who has this thing for an older man - but I'm not sure
whether it's the girl who seduces the man or the other way around.'' Nabokov did
not invent childhood sophistication. As the historian Philippe Aries has pointed
out in his influential study ''Centuries of Childhood,'' the very notion of
innocent childhood as a separate phase of life did not exist until well after
the end of the Middle Ages. During the 13th, 14th or 15th centuries, in fact,
there were no special clothes or books or games for children, and by the ages of
7 or 8 (once children ceased to function as ''cognitive aliens,'' in Jean
Piaget's terminology, and acquired some of the mental patterns that characterize
adult thinking) children of all classes were incorporated completely into the
adult world - to work and play alongside adults without special protection.

While it is hard to conceive of today's 8-year-olds marching off to their
offices with their little attache cases in hand, children's integration into
adult work in the past becomes understandable when one remembers that the work,
in those preindustrial days, often consisted of those very arts and crafts
offered today by Childcraft or Creative Playthings for children's amusement:
spinning, weaving, pottery, basket making. The pastimes that filled adult
leisure in the medieval era were similarly suited for sharing with children: Tag
and blindman's buff were once played outdoors by adults as well as children;
indoors, adults sang songs and told stories like the tales collected by the
brothers Grimm. Adults were undoubtedly more childlike in the simpler society of
the past. As we learn in Emmanuel LeRoy Ladurie's study of 14th-century life,
''Montaillou,'' adults then possessed far simpler concepts of time, space and
history than they do today and seemed to function on a less complicated
emotional level, characterized by a greater readiness to laugh and weep. At the
same time, children in this close-knit world were less childlike.  When everyone
slept in one room it was impossible to hide adult sexuality.

There was still another cause for the close coexistence of young and old: Adult
instincts then were subjected to considerably less control. If ''civilization''
is said to reside in manners and in the public repression of instinctive drives,
then there was simply much less of both in the Western society of the 13th to
15th centuries, when people customarily ate with their fingers, wiped their
noses on their sleeves, urinated in public and, in general, behaved the way
children would naturally behave, if they were not ''taught better.''

After the Middle Ages and well into the Renaissance, one of the most radical
transformations of human relations occurred, though it was largely con-fined to
the middle class. The Age of Innocence began with the thinking of Locke in the
17th century, and found its major inspiration in the writings of Rousseau in the
18th. After centuries of indifference to children and their special needs, now
adults began to take an intense interest in children's physical and
psychological well-being. More sentimental relations and greater intimacy within
the family resulted. Those very aspects of childhood that had once carried a
negative value - innocence, trust, dependence, guilelessness, ignorance of adult
sexuality - became appealing.

Informed by an idealized view of childhood that inspired the Romantic poets in
the l9th century, the era reached its apotheosis in the virtual child worship of
the Victorian period. A more complex and newly industrialized society kept
middle-class children out of the work force and required them to develop new
skills and disciplines.  (Children of the poor, however, were often cruelly
exploited in that ''golden age.'') Now, as children began to spend greater parts
of their time in schools, isolated from the adult world, their behavior
inevitably began to reflect more truly their developmental stages - to seem more
''childlike.'' It was Freud who rang the death knell for that childlike child.
His ideas on child sexuality filtered down to all levels of society; the child
was revealed and gradually understood as a creature of seething passions and
sexual desires not so very different from those of adults.

Today, with children involved at earlier and earlier ages in activities once
reserved for adults - sex, drugs, drinking and even suicide - we see other
curious parallels between our own time and the distant past. Those more
''civilized'' manners that developed over the centuries, creating a new distance
between adults and children, took only a few decades to loosen. Now, we learn
from our therapists to feel more ashamed of our repressions than of ''letting it
all hang out.'' No longer do parents have dinner by candlelight while the kids
eat in the kitchen. Now, the whole family can eat with their fingers at the
Kentucky Fried place down the street. Now, once again, young and old are united
in a single great leisure-time activity: watching television.

Once upon a time, children read books about fairies and animals, about other
children en gaged in the innocent pleasures of childhood. Today, children read
about different subjects:

A beautiful girl of 14 lives in a small town where her father is a barber and
her mother a humble laundress. The girl dreams of romance and fame but is
obliged to spend her days in drudgery, cleaning houses and baby-sitting. At last
she decides to run away from home and seek her fortune in the big city.

(So far the story resembles the familiar tales of the past. But it continues.)
On her first day in the big city, she meets a handsome man who befriends her
when she is lost. She falls in love with him. Alas, he turns out to be a pimp.
He compels her to become one of his prostitutes. At first she is appalled. She
cannot believe that she has to do ''it'' with all sorts of strange men. Soon,
out of love for her protector she becomes one of his most successful hookers,
which arouses the jealousy of her colleagues. One of the other girls puts LSD
into our heroine's soft drink and she has a bad trip.  Finally, after many
adventures, she finds her way into a rehabilitation center for runaway children.
There she gets ''therapy'' and prepares to return to her small-town home -
sadder but wiser.

Books such as this one, ''Steffie Can't Come Out To Play,'' written by Fran
Arrick and published in 1978 by Bradbury Press, are widely distributed and read
by 10-, 11-, 12-year-olds. This new genre deals with subjects heretofore
considered unsuitable for children. George A. Woods, children's book editor of
The New York Times, describes with amazement recent submissions for review:
''It's not just sex that defines the change. I've got books coming in on
children with harelips, epilepsy and insanity as well as the usual alcoholic
parents, drug-addicted children, child beaters, divorce, acne and death.''

It is generally acknowledged that Ursula Nordstrom, editor in chief of Harper &
Row Junior Books from 1941 to 1973, was the primary force behind many
innovations of the last 25 years. The first departure came in the 1960's, when
she published an excellent book called ''Stevie,'' by John Steptoe, which
strayed from the ''nice'' middleclass, white patterns that had long monopolized
children's books by telling, in nonstandard speech patterns, of the life of a
black ghetto child.

But the first real ''breakthrough,'' as these books came to be called in the
trade, was a small volume for young children by John Donovan published by Harper
& Row in 1969, called ''I'll Get There: It Better Be Worth the Trip,'' a story
about a boy, his friend and his dog. The uproar occasioned by this book centered
on a brief scene in which two 13-year-old boys who are having a sleep-over at
one of their houses are suddenly drawn to each other and find, to their
surprise, that they are kissing. A homosexual episode in a children's book,
though so subtly presented that many readers overlooked it, represents far more
than increased openness. Donovan's book, and Steptoe's before it, were signs
that a decision had been made by important cultural forces to end a period of
vestigial Victorianism.  In the years to come, books were to serve a new
function: In addition to entertaining or teaching about the past, they would
also prepare young children for future complexities in an increasingly troubled
society.

Charlotte Zolotow, who took over at Harper Junior Books three years after Ursula
Nordstrom left and who is herself an author in the new style (''William's Doll''
caused a stir in 1972 by telling of a little boy who wanted to play with a
doll), continued to publish increasingly daring and controversial books. ''We
can't protect our children anymore from all we would like to spare them,'' she
says.  ''We can't protect them from the war and violent death they see on
television every night. ... All we can do is to help children see it all, to
form their own judgments and defenses, and to be honest in the books we write
for them about alcohol or drugs or immorality.''

Even those editors who first resisted the change finally came into line. There
is no clearer indication that the new direction in children's publishing is not
a fad than the fact that not a single one of the major children's book
publishers has continued to limit its lists to noncontroversial material.

Ann Durell, publisher of children's books at E.P.Dutton, once thought that
children's books would always remain the same. ''When I started in publishing in
1952, books were exactly like those I had grown up with and practically
interchangeable with books published in 1900. Then, in the 60's, everything
suddenly changed. Everything was a cause - women, blacks, every-one was part of
a crusade for freedom. I think children became part of that. Children were no
longer considered a race apart - innocent and protected and terribly English in
a curious way. Until then, all the manners, behavior and language of children in
children's books were very Nanny-in-the Nursery sort of English. The trouble is
that many adults today still think, 'If only my children could be so happy!' ''

The popularity among children of books by Judy Blume, Norma Klein, Paul Zindel
and others attests to the receptivity of many children to books dealing with
mature subjects. Yet as John Donovan, currently head of the Children's Book
Council, points out, ''Judy Blume is hard for many adults to handle because she
has accepted the diminishing time of childhood. A lot of things happen to kids
at a much earlier time these days than in the last generation.''

A scholar studying trends in children's literature might observe that it is not
exactly a new departure to tell children stories about death and disaster, rape
and prostitution. For while children's books of the last two centuries may have
dwelt on Lambs Frolicking and Our Friend the Policeman, publications for
children in early Colonial days did not shelter young readers from the realities
of life. A popular 17th-century children's book, ''Youth's Divine Pastime,''
included a poem about Sodom and Gomorrah that did not mince words: Yet when his
daughters tempted him To drink wine to excess He fell into that odious vice And
crime of drunkenness Which caused him likewise to commit That great and heinous
sin Of incest with his daughters who Were both with child by him.  A woodcut
illustrating this verse depicts Lot reclining lecherously on a couch while his
naked daughters ply him with wine. Today, three centuries later, grim reality
has returned to children's books.  Once upon a time, in the Age of Innocence,
children really believed that all adults were good, that all Presidents were as
honest as Abe Lincoln, that the adult world was in every way bigger and better
than their own world, one which children knew well was full of savagery and
danger. Children were expected to give up their seats in public conveyances to
adults, to reserve strong language for the company of their peers and in every
way to treat adults with respect. No single cultural force of the past 25 years
better illustrates the changes that have occurred since those old days than Mad
Magazine.

Mad began as an offshoot of comic books. But while the comics of earlier years
ran the gamut from cute Disney to the gruesomely violent ''Tales from the
Crypt'' that aroused parental ire and even Congressional investigations, they
all nevertheless fell into the category of fantasy, long an accepted adjunct of
childhood. Mad was the first satirical magazine for children, a sort of an
easy-to-read Junior Swift, the first to deal with children's reality -their
parents, schools and the general adult culture around them - in a mocking way.
As Al Feldstein, editor of Mad for the past 25 years, says, ''What we did was to
take the absurdities of the adult world that youngsters were facing and show
kids that the adult world is not omnipotent, that their parents were telling the
kids to be honest, not to lie, and yet they were cheating on their income tax.
We told them there's a lot of garbage out in the world and you've got to be
aware of it. Everything you read in the papers is not necessarily true. What you
see on television is mostly lies. You're going to have to learn to think for
yourself.''

While the early issues of Mad chose child-centered material to satirize, the
focus turned in the 1960's to more and more difficult concerns - adult
hypocrisy, sexuality, women's liberation, divorce, the drug and alcohol scene.
One feature, entitled ''If Babies Could Take Parent Pictures,'' contained
illustrations with this caption: ''Here's my idiot father trying to drive and
take pictures at the same time. I was lucky to get home alive.'' The phrase ''my
idiot father'' does not have a jarring sound in 1981; children today are
cheerfully irreverent toward their elders. But the words were shocking then,
coming from a child. A convention was coming to an end - one that compelled
children to repress their natural (Freud would say Oedipal) hostilities, forced
them to mutter under their breaths perhaps, but rarely to be openly abusive. Mad
Magazine was clearly influential in the move toward free expression among
children; its relentless exposure of parental hypocricies during the 1960's
caused shock waves of admiration and reaction among its young readers, who were
not unaware of their older siblings' angry accusations of hypocrisy against The
Great Society's war in Vietnam.

By 1974 the cultural climate would allow ''A Mad History of Sex.'' In 1975,
there appeared the Broken Homes and Gardens Magazine parody; 1976 saw
''Unweddings of the Future'' with invitations issued by the parents of the
soon-to-be-ex-bride. ''Mom and I are proud of you,'' says a parent to a teen-age
daughter in a typical comic feature of the 1970's. ''We heard that you and Steve
were the only students in the history of your college who didn't go to bed
together on your first date.'' The daughter answers, ''That's true, Dad. But we
did make out on a couch, on the floor, etc.''

Much of the material Mad satirized in its pages was first available to children
in other media, especially television and the films. As these began to show
increasingly adult material, Mad's pages also began to become more
sophisticated. The magazine grew racier, but its readership grew younger. ''In
the late 50's our readers seemed to be about 15, l6, late high school, early
college. Today the mean age is probably about 13,'' Al Feldstein says. He
attributes the change unequivocally to increased television viewing.

By the issue of December 1980, a parody of ''Little Darlings'' (a film about two
young girls at summer camp racing to see who loses her virginity first) includes
an outdoor salesman hawking, ''Get your training diaphragms here,'' and a little
girl spying on a teen-age couple and reporting, ''She's starting foreplay now.''

It is hard to imagine 10- and 11-year-olds in 1955 reading about diaphragms and
foreplay. But that was still the Golden Age of Innocence, and one of the reasons
it was far easier to maintain that special state for children 25 years ago, and
why it is impossible to bring it back today, is precisely that movies like
''Little Darlings'' did not exist in those days.  When children went to a movie,
not so long ago, their parents never gave a moment's thought to whether it might
contain scenes of nudity, gang rape, homosexuality or sadistic violence. It was
not because parents were more casual in the good old days, but rather, because
virtually all American films made before the 1960's were suitable for child
consumption. Until then, there had never been a serious need for parents to
exercise any cultural repressiveness in regard to their children: With all
movies as pure as Ivory Snow, children were free to see any movie they wished.
Indeed, the swashbuckling costume dramas, the musicals with June Allyson, the
Martin and Lewis comedies of the 1940's and 50's, remain to this day the most
suitable movies available for children.

Once innocence was imposed on young and old alike: A rigid, prudish, Motion
Picture Production Code, in effect until the early 1960's, kept all aspects of
adult sexuality, all strong or blasphemous language, and all excessive violence
out of films altogether. But with the establishment of more liberal sexual
standards, the film world quickly sloughed off its rigid rules. The floodgates
were opened and sex was everywhere.

Parents were appalled to find that their ''innocent'' children were losing their
innocence rapidly. Nevertheless, parents were hard put to seriously censor the
movies their children went to see. Such restrictiveness would have gone counter
to a long strain of parental libertarianism that traces back, in fact, to
child-rearing customs of America's earliest days.

Groups of parents, educators and religious leaders began to protest the
inclusion of sexual material and violence in films children were viewing.
Suddenly, the film industry was faced with the alternatives of a reinstated
censorship system that would remove, once again, controversial material from all
films, or some sort of classification system that would differentiate between
films containing adult material and those suitable for children.
Unsurprisingly, the industry exercised the latter option. A rating system
evolved that bars children under 17 from films rated X, and requires children
under 17 to be accompanied by an adult to films rated R. Films rated G and PG
allow free entry to all children, although parents are warned to exercise
guidance.

But the rating system did not carry the protective clout it promised when it was
introduced. It became clear that unescorted children were easily gaining access
to R-rated movies, either by latching onto unrelated adults or, in many cases,
through the complete disregard of restrictions by theater owners unwilling to
lose additional revenues. Many parents, for a variety of reasons, took their
children themselves to R movies. In 1974 when ''The Exorcist'' opened in
Washington, with an R rating, a newspaper critic commented on the number of
children, many as young as 6 and 8, who had been brought by their parents or who
had managed to get an adult in line to ''take me in.'' Even the X rating is far
from inviolable.  The critic Nora Sayre reports seeing a large number of young
teenagers at a performance she attended of ''Snuff,'' an unprecedently violent
X-rated film that purported to feature a real murder on screen. And recently a
number of 14- and 15-year-olds known to this writer said that they had little
trouble gaining admission to the pornographic movie ''Caligula,'' which is being
shown without any rating at all.

The Rating Board, regardless of its effectiveness, was never intended to be a
protective agency for the preservation of childhood innocence. Its function, as
described by its present chairman, Richard Heffner, is to ''reflect standards,
not set them,'' thus putting them somewhat in the category of Mad Magazine,
which also purports to reflect rather than establish moral codes. The mandate of
the Rating Board is, rather, to try to feel the parental pulse throughout the
nation, and rate each movie according to how the board perceives the average
parent might judge the film.

The parental pulse, however, seems to have quickened in recent years. By
reflecting adult standards in an era of relaxed sexual prohibitions, the board
has found itself becoming increasingly lenient about the inclusion of sexual
material in films it dubs PG.  ''A nipple won't automatically make a film an R
as it used to,'' says Heffner. Similarly, the inclusion in film dialogue of some
longforbidden expletives no longer serves as an automatic reason for an R
rating.

In a brief period of 15 years we have seen a precipitate cultural change. Now,
as children began to be influenced by their regular viewing of ''adult movies,''
society was forced to confront the implications of the change: Some of the lines
of demarcation between childhood and adulthood were being permanently removed
and children were beginning to look, talk and behave in ways that no longer
seemed very childlike. For during the years when movies contained innocent
material, adults continued to know those things that the movies were not allowed
to mention, continued to behave in those ways that movies were not allowed to
portray. But children did not know those things.  Now everybody knows. Countless
children over 12 today have seen ''Fame,'' which deals openly with teen-age
homosexual and heterosexual behavior, or ''Kramer vs. Kramer,'' which painfully
reveals modern patterns of parental abandonment, or ''All That Jazz'' or scores
of other movies dealing with complex adult matters. Short of a radical change in
current child-rearing practices, American children will continue to be exposed
by the movies to increasingly mature materials.  Long after children stopped
believing in fairies and Santa Claus, adults continued to believe in the
enduring myth of the Golden Age of Innocence. Nonetheless, children learn the
ways of the adult world today not only through books, magazines, movies and
television but also in their own families and homes. The formerly closed door
between childhood and adulthood has been pushed ajar, and sometimes entirely
removed from its hinges.  ''As a little girl I had very little idea of what went
on in the adult world or how grown-ups felt; they were just these remote
people,'' recalls a woman who is raising two daughters in a singleparent home.
''Now my kids know huge amounts about every aspect of my life - emotional,
physical, even sexual. How can I keep it from them? The first time a man slept
over, after the divorce, I was nervous about the children's reactions. I got up
early, closed the bedroom door and went into the kitchen to make breakfast. My
8-year-old came in as I was busy making pancakes. 'Mom, did you know there's a
man in your bed?' she asked in a very adult voice, turned on her heel and left
the room.''

For many children today, childhood is a difficult and dangerous time. As a
15-year-old girl who looks back on a past that included a parental divorce,
experimentation with marijuana from the sixth grade on and a troubling
experience with sex in the eighth grade remarked: ''All the kids I see are in a
rush to grow up and I don't blame them. I don't think childhood is a Golden Age
at all. I wouldn't want to be a child again.''

The rapidly increasing divorce rate and the increasing number of working mothers
have hastened the entry of children into the adult world by reducing the kind of
close, personalized and highly protective attention that a child can rely on in
a mother-at-home-allday household. The child of a working mother may derive
certain strengths from his greater exposure to other adults and increased
opportunities for socialization in group-care situations. But it is a fact that,
without day-long supervision by a parent, the child will develop ways of coping
with the vicissitudes of life that resemble similar strategies adults develop in
the course of their experiences in a harsh world. The situation is not unlike
that of the preliberation wife and mother who stayed in the protected confines
of the home all day and seemed to retain a somewhat more childlike and innocent
image, while her husband, in comparison, seemed manifestly more worldly,
sophisticated and, ultimately, adult as a result of his experiences in the
unprotected world.

With the diminishing influence of parents in children's lives, a new and
powerful family member stepped in to take their place: the television set. In
frequently unsupervised homes, children today fill in their free hours watching
television. Occasionally they watch programs designed especially for them, but
far more often they tune into soap operas treating of rape and abortion,
documentaries revealing misery, suffering and death, news programs
sensationalizing turmoil and crime and comedies mocking and trivializing men and
women much like their parents. Not only do these subjects make children more
cynical and sophisticated, but the very act of watching for so many hours
prevents them from engaging in those imaginative play activities that once
formed the essence of childhood.

Some parents, fearful of the dangers facing their children in today's society,
try to prolong the time of innocence by opting for a religious rather than a
public or private school. Daniele Lassner, director of admissions of the Ramaz
School, a New York preparatory school that combines an academic schedule with a
rigorous Jewish curriculum, says an increasing number of nonreligious parents
are choosing Ramaz these days: ''Parents are afraid of their kids' facing drugs
and early sexuality. They feel it's a dangerous world and they hope that somehow
we might protect their children from what's out there. Not to isolate them, but
at least to insulate against the dangers.''

Others, feeling increasingly out of control, deliberately hasten the fall from
innocence, in the hope that the frightening knowledge they proffer may cause
their children to exercise that most adult of virtues - self-control. A mother
whose 12-year-old son was suspended from school after being caught smoking
marijuana in the lavatory, describes her desperate tactics to persuade him to
stay away from illegal drugs: ''I told Phillip graphically what might happen if
he were arrested and had to spend the night at Spofford (a juvenile detention
facility). I told him he might have his eyes gouged out.  And I told him he'd
certainly be raped by the other boys, because he's young and pretty and white. I
could see he was shocked, and I think it may have done some good.''

Children's increasing knowledge may have unfavorable consequences for their
development, some experts believe. Annie Hermann, an early-childhood expert, is
distressed by current trends that advocate sharing information about adult
inadequacies with children. ''We want our children to know very soon that adults
are not as wonderful as they think,'' she says. ''We feel it is unfair,
undemocratic somehow, to let children have false illusions about adult
omnipotence. So, instead of the child believing that parents can do everything,
that adults will always come to the rescue in time of need, we tell our
children: 'Oh, we're just like you. We have faults and weaknesses.' But the
child has his own timetable and is often not developed enough to absorb the
realities of adult life when they are foisted on him prematurely. The child
needs to feel dependent on the adult, has a right to this feeling. If the adult
is just like the child, after all, then the child can't really depend on him.
And yet that stage of childhood when children believe in parental omnipotence
helps develop a basic, life-giving trust in children, a trust that carries with
it half of life's enjoyment.''

An eminent child psychoanalyst, Dr. Peter B. Neubauer, director of the Child
Development Center in New York, sounds another warning that reverberates with
particular resonance in a time of increasing narcissism: ''Children who are
pushed into adult experience do not become precociously mature. On the contrary,
they cling to childhood longer, perhaps all their lives.'' Nevertheless, Dr.
Neubauer is sanguine about the present state of childhood, especially when
compared with other eras of the past. ''We cannot reverse the processes that
have begun, the changes in the family, or woman's liberation. And we mustn't
idealize children's happiness in the past. Remember the struggle for existence,
the high infant mortality, child labor. Remember that a real understanding of
how children behave didn't exist before the 20th century. For all our problems
today, we understand more about children and care more about their needs than we
did in the past.''

Another optimistic observer of contemporary children is Michael I.  Cohen,
chairman of the department of pediatrics at Montefiore Hospital and Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, who says, '' Today's kids may turn out to be
better parents than their own were because they are getting better information
than their parents had.  When parents complain about their kids, I tell them:
'Look at your own successes first. You've blown your marriage. You haven't
raised a kid so well. What makes you think things were better in the past?' ''

Dr. Paulina F. Kernberg, director of child and adolescent psychiatry at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, Westchester division, brings the discussion
full circle when she suggests that the new, more adult-centered conception of
children today may once again allow children to become important contributors to
the society they live in, not, as in the Middle Ages, because of their economic
value, but because they can serve an increasingly valuable psychological
function. ''I think the potential of children has been greatly underrated,'' Dr.
Kernberg asserts. ''Children can participate in family matters to a far greater
extent than people believed in the past. To share problems with children does
not necessarily mean to unload. I feel that children can understand that parents
have problems of their own, even serious ones such as mental illness. If the
child is told things in language he can understand, by an empathetic adult, he
can share many problems that were once hidden from children. A child needs to
know that he can do something, at least to listen to a parent's problem. People
forget that children are very resilient, and that they're potentially good
pals.'' It has become fashionable to idealize the distant past, to suppose that
since children were once integrated into adult society they were therefore
better off somehow. Yet critics of the current medieval nostalgia point out
evidence of widespread sexual exploitation of children, child neglect and
psychological damage to children in the medieval period. Similarly, as we make
the transition from an era of separation and protection of children to one in
which children are once again incorporated early into a less-differentiated
society, we cannot fail to observe that child abuse, child neglect, child
exploitation are again on the rise, and that the lives of great numbers of
children have become more difficult. Today, parents often forget that, despite
the end of the Age of Innocence, some children remain vulnerable longer than
others. In avoiding the past excesses of secrecy and overprotectiveness, adults
in our society often abdicate their responsibilities for dealing with children's
special needs.

It may, indeed, prove that children have become increasingly useful to adults in
modern society, as their roles have changed from innocent, dependent,
''special'' creatures, to secret and not-sosecret sharers of adult life's
inevitable burdens. But from the viewpoint of children themselves, whether the
strengths they may acquire from their greater and earlier preparation for
adulthood will compensate for the loss of that carefree childhood that people
once believed children deserved and required remains to be seen.

Will our changing concepts of childhood prove beneficial or damaging to children
and to society as a whole? The answer to this troubling question will begin to
appear in the not-too-distant future when a generation of children without
childhood begin to raise children of their own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS IN SEARCH OF IDEAS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4810 words


4,747 words
Tom Wicker writes The New York Times's ''In the Nation'' column twice weekly. By
Tom Wicker Campaigning for re-election last year in a South Dakota supermarket,
George S. McGovern met two elderly women who said they would vote against him
because he was too liberal. Then he watched them pay for their groceries with
food stamps - the fruits of a liberal Democratic program that no one had
supported more vigorously than he.

That told him, the former Senator says, that his re-election campaign was lost.
And all too many other voters in 1980 seemed as willing to forget or overlook
years of Democratic programs that have helped people with everything from
medical problems to home mortgages. When the smoke of election cleared, the
party had lost the Presidency, 12 Senate seats - including Mr. McGovern's - 33
House seats, four governorships and 220 state legislative posts.

Now, with Ronald Reagan in the White House, the Republicans controlling the
Senate and the conservative movement having won its chance to reshape the
country, the Democrats are, in the words of Scott Matheson, the Democratic
Governor of Utah, ''a disheveled lot.'' Their basic approach - big and costly
Government programs of benevolent intent but mixed results - has fallen into
disrepute with inflation-conscious voters. Little is agreed upon to replace or
supplement that approach, which goes back to Franklin D. Roosevelt, and the
party's organization is almost nonexistent.

On the last point, the Democrats need a new chairman capable of holding the
party's various factions tenuously together, but favoring none. Fund raising
will be crucial and the party probably will have to shift from an emphasis on
big contributions to a broader base of small but consistent givers - a system
that was one of a number of innovations developed by the Republicans as a
consequence of their 1964 debacle, when Barry Goldwater was defeated by Lyndon
B. Johnson in a landslide.

At party headquarters, concentrating exclusively on winning and holding the
White House will no longer do. Future Presidential victories, to be solid, will
have to be built from the ground up, with intelligent concentration on local,
state and Congressional campaigns.

In the last four years, under chairman Bill Brock of Tennessee, the Republican
National Committee poured more than $5 million into winning state legislative
seats - an imaginative long-term investment that will pay large dividends in
future candidacies for higher office, especially when states begin the
redistricting necessitated by the 1980 census.

Many leading Democrats also believe their party has been coasting on old
victories. Some of them think it needs a new kind of instrument, similar to the
old Democratic Advisory Committee of the 1950's, to help develop and publicize
what has been most lacking - new ideas about governing and new means of pursuing
the traditional Democratic goals of social and economic justice, and economic
opportunity for all, without bankrupting or alienating the middle class.

Such revitalization is overdue for a party that has let itself become the
proponent of political orthodoxy and elephantine bureaucracy. Even a certified
thinker like Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, New York's Democratic senior
Senator, concedes that most of the intellectual ferment in recent American
politics has bubbled up on the Republican side - producing, for example,
advocacy of ''supply-side'' economics. This is an an innovative approach,
emphasizing Government stimulation of production rather than consumption, that
sounds appealing, whether or not it is put into practice by the Reagan
Administration and proves ultimately successful.

One of Bill Brock's favorite dictums while G.O.P. chairman was that politics is
a ''battle of ideas.'' The 1980 election is a clear warning that the current
''battle of ideas'' is being won by the Republicans, with their emphasis on a
return to the free marketplace and diminished Government intervention in the
private lives of Americans. This represents a remarkable turnaround in modern
American politics.

In the waning days of his re-election campaign, for example, Jimmy Carter
reiterated day after day the old, once-successful theme that the Democrats had
conquered the Depression, invented Social Security and Medicare and - against
callous, Hooveresque Republican opposition - created the good life for the
average American. Even the kind of audiences that usually turn out for
Democratic rallies seemed to find this appeal tired, if not tiresome.

The Reagan formula (''Get the Government off the backs of the American people'')
certainly produced more votes - 8.4 million more.  Probably nothing less than
such a jolt could have evoked so much soulsearching in the party of F.D.R.,
J.F.K. and L.B.J.  Organizationally, the Democrats have already begun to meet
their problems. An agreement has been reached, for example, among four important
party figures - Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Speaker of the House Thomas P.
O'Neill, Lane Kirkland of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and Walter F. Mondale, the former
Vice President - that they will try to find a national chairman acceptable to
all segments of the party.  (Jimmy Carter, very nearly discredited politically
by his smashing defeat, apparently intends to take little part in this or any
other party decision.)

The most active candidate for the chairmanship is Charles T.  Manatt, twice the
California state chairman; no real campaigns are visible for others being
mentioned, including former Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former state
chairman Patrick J. Cunningham of New York.

Democratic members of the House and Senate, moreover, have declared that they
expect all candidates for the chairmanship to appear before them prior to the
chairman's election by the Democratic National Committee in late February. So
have the Democratic governors and the conference of state party chairmen. This
is a beginning on the task of moving the national committee away from
concentrating heavily on the Presidency, which it has done at least since the
Johnson Administration.

Numerous Democrats - as diverse as Lieut. Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York and
Representative Henry S. Reuss of Wisconsin - have come forward with blueprints
for a new Democratic Advisory Committee to help reformulate party policies.
Capitol Hill powers like Mr. O'Neill have expressed support for the idea, if not
for any particular plan.

The outgoing Democratic chairman, John C. White of Texas - who has been sharply
criticized for focusing too narrowly on Mr. Carter's reelection - has even
suggested that the Democratic National Committee headquarters be moved from
downtown Washington to a new location on Capitol Hill. Such a move would be
symbolically apt; besides, that's where the Republicans are located, and they
seem to be doing something right.  In the realm of ideas, there is not yet
general agreement among Democrats on what needs to be done; significantly,
however, there is more talk about what to do in the future than about triumphs
in the past. A recurrent theme among Democrats concerned for their party's
rebirth is that there's nothing wrong with its goals - what's needed are new
ways of pursuing them, less bureaucratic, less costly, less intrusive, more
effective ways. Some noteworthy stirrings are visible - particularly among
younger Democrats with no great emotional commitment to the doctrines of the
past, and those with ambitions not likely to be served by a moribund party.

Five months before election day, for example, first-term Senator Paul E. Tsongas
of Massachusetts startled Americans for Democratic Action with a call for a
''new liberalism'' that he thought might include tax credits to business ''to
get the economy going.''

After the campaign, Senator Tsongas, who had not been up for reelection,
explained that he believed the Democrats, and liberals generally, had been
''living off'' a New Deal tradition of priming the pump that ran counter to the
''realities of the 1970's and 1980's,'' when economic growth had noticeably
slowed. New Dealism conflicted with these new realities, the Senator suggested,
because ''if you have an expanding economic pie, there is room for generosity.
There is room for, if you will, liberalism. If you have an economic pie that has
stopped growing, you have a very different emotional climate on your hands.''

Mr. Mondale - a likely Presidential contender in 1984 - agrees. ''I think the
people felt we were getting a little stale,'' he said in a postelection
interview with Terence Smith of The New York Times.  ''One of the reasons we
lost, I'm convinced, is that the economy has ceased to grow, to produce new
wealth and add new jobs without also reigniting inflation. ... The pie is not
growing, maybe shrinking, and we're fighting over the division of existing
resources.''

That the middle class has retreated from liberalism because of a dwindling
''economic pie'' is an idea widespread among Democrats.  Stuart E. Eizenstat,
President Carter's special assistant for domestic policy, said after Mr.
Carter's defeat: ''The taxpayers of America - the great American middle class -
are frustrated at persistent high inflation and its corrosive impact and at
heavy pockets of unemployment in basic industries that are losing their
competitive edge. Many believe the Democratic party lost touch with their
concerns.''

Senator Gary Hart's ability to overcome a popular opponent and the Reagan tide
in conservative Colorado marked him as another probable Presidential contender
in 1984. Even before that victory, he had called for a new Democratic coalition
of ''middle-income people concerned about economic stability and national
security, workers who hope for better opportunities for their children, the
elderly, the unemployed, minorities and the young.''

Mr. Hart believes that by 1980 the Democrats had come to depend too much on
creating new agencies that ''sent people checks''; he thinks his party needs
instead to look for ''market mechanisms, nonbureaucratic, nonprogrammatic
methods'' for achieving the same ends. One of his favorite examples is
''lifeline utility rates'' - avoiding Federal energy subsidies to the
disadvantaged by requiring state regulators to give, say, the elderly an
electricity rate as low as any big industrial consumer can command. ''No Federal
agency, no bureaucratic jobs, no taxpayers' money,'' he points out, but aid to
the elderly all the same.

Senator Hart also proposes innovations such as using state surpluses and
public-employee pension funds to help rebuild cities.  To carry out the
Democrats' commitment to their black supporters, he would rely less on civil
rights and Federal employment programs than on providing tax incentives for
minority job training in the private sector and for minority employment in new
energy and urban projects.  Whether such an untraditional approach would be
welcomed by the black community is an open question.

Senator Hart, a member of the Armed Services Committee, insists Democrats must
also ''reclaim'' a reputation for concern with national defense - a point some
Democrats have been stressing for years. Unlike many of them, the Colorado
Senator emphasizes concentration on improving the fighting qualities and combat
readiness of existing forces, rather than on costly new weapons systems like the
MX mobile missile.

As far back as 1978, another new Democratic face, Senator Carl Levin of
Michigan, warned that his party had slipped into thinking that its traditional
attitudes and programs ''were more important than the revitalization of
society.'' Now he argues that ''what we must do is learn again that a free
people are to be trusted and that Government need not tell them, in endless
detail, how they are to behave in order to achieve common goals.''

Some of his specific recommendations include: more ''sunset'' legislation to
shut down ineffective or unnecessary programs, and fewer permanently authorized
programs; greater ''regulatory flexibility''; a reduction of the number of rules
governing Federal grants and of the ''needless, endless forms that so bedevil
our people.''

Numerous other ideas are readily available, although not always widely accepted.
For example, Representative James R. Jones of Oklahoma, the new chairman of the
House Budget Committee, advocates ''spending-limit'' legislation that would hold
the Federal budget to 20 percent of the gross national product, except when
''the majority of Congress votes to breach that ceiling.'' In recent years,
Federal budgets have tended to run somewhere between 21 and 23 percent of the
G.N.P.

Mr. Jones argues that such a limit would help counter a popular but probably
unworkable constitutional amendment - which Republicans in the new Senate may
sponsor - forcing a balanced budget; that it would make Congress assume greater
control of the permanently authorized ''uncontrollables,'' programs which now
absorb about 75 percent of the Federal budget; and that it might also help the
Democrats shake the ''big spender'' label that has haunted them in every recent
election and contributed heavily to the 1980 defeat.

If a shrinking or nongrowing economic ''pie'' has turned the public sour on
liberalism, then a party that wants to remain liberal should, logically, develop
plausible approaches to achieving stable economic growth at a low rate of
inflation. Mr. Eizenstat, among others, favors supporting TIP - the acronym for
a ''tax-based incomes policy'' by which the Government would grant tax credits
to members of unions that hold down wages and to companies that limit price
increases. This would provide more direct restraint, short of Government
controls, than the ''guidelines'' that proved ineffective for the Carter
Administration.

The Democrats also need ideas for rebuilding American industrial and trade
competitiveness. Welfare reform and relief from mounting Social Security payroll
taxes ought also to be peculiarly their concerns, since the basic programs are
Democratic in origin.

What's to be done, moreover, about a situation in which, by 1990, the
oil-producing regions of the country are likely to rake in about $120 billion in
added revenues - the result of decontrolled oil and gas prices - that, in
effect, will be paid by the already hardpressed consuming regions of the
Northeast and Middle West? This new kind of sectional conflict, discussed in the
1980 campaign only by John Anderson, the independent candidate, sooner or later
will have to concern the Democrats most particularly; their electoral hopes are
concentrated heavily in the consuming regions, while the Republicans seem to
have taken tight hold on the Sun Belt, including its oilproducing states.

Foreign-policy issues, too, demand Democratic self-examination.  Will they
tamely go along with a Republican return to something like cold-war policies? Or
will they find ways to advocate a relaxation of tensions in Soviet-American
relations and nuclear arms control without opening themselves to the charge of
being ''soft'' on national defense? What about the Carter Administration's
human-rights policy, which - for all its flaws - improved the American position
in the third world, notably in Africa and, to some extent, in Latin America?

These difficult foreign-policy issues have the highest potential for creating
bitter divisions among Democrats. Since the McGovern Presidential campaign of
1972, the party has been more or less split along hawk-dove lines, with a
faction led by Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington advocating a tougher
stance against the Russians and some third-world nations. To prevent President
Reagan and the Republicans from pre-empting the hard line, Jackson Democrats
might become even more insistent on their approach. And they may well have a
Presidential candidate - possibly, Senator Moynihan - in 1984.

Sorting out all these issues and arriving at new and appealing positions would
not be easy even as an academic exercise. It will be a lot harder in an
amorphous political party without a recognized leader, with a party structure
that has to be overhauled, and with the effort probably divided between members
of Congress and other party elements - all under the pressure of competing with
a new Republican Administration headed by a President who has shown himself to
be perhaps the most effective political communicator at least since John F.
Kennedy.

Besides, not every Democrat - in office or out - necessarily agrees that the
party needs an intellectual rebirth or would accept such a controversial theme
as Gary Hart's support for increased worker participation in the ownership of
production facilities. Old habits and attitudes die hard. Inevitably, too, the
remaking of the party will be affected by the expected 1984 Presidential contest
between Mr. Mondale and the leader of the traditional liberals, Senator Edward
M. Kennedy - not to mention the maneuverings of perhaps a half dozen or more
other candidates in 1984.

On the other hand, as Fritz Mondale concluded a month after the election: ''One
of the virtues of losing is that it gives you time to think again, to renew and
refresh yourself. ... We, especially those of us who might be thinking about
running for President, have a priceless opportunity now, a chance to use this
time to really focus on ... the central questions. ...'' Some of the current
Democratic agitation is no doubt overwrought.  It seems clear that the state of
the economy - high inflation and unemployment - was the single most important
cause of their 1980 defeat. And while Democrats and the Carter Administration,
of course, bear a sizable share of responsibility for that, many of its causes
were not in their control -OPEC, for one thing - and scarcely call for party
overhaul.

President Reagan's Electoral College landslide, moreover, as well as the
startling turnover in the Senate, have created the impression that the
Republican victory was a greater upheaval than, in fact, it was. Closer analysis
of the 1980 voting discloses, for example: President Reagan polled just under 27
percent of the voting-age population - less, actually, than the 27.2 percent
Jimmy Carter won in 1976. Even the Republican candidate's share of those
actually voting, 50.75 percent, was 10 points less than Richard Nixon's 1972
percentage.  Much of the responsibility for the Democratic debacle must be borne
by Jimmy Carter, on whom the electorate delivered a resounding vote of ''no
confidence''; his share of voting-age citizens declined from that 27.2 percent
in 1976 to less than 22 in 1980.  In contrast, although the Democrats lost
control of the Senate, they actually won 51.8 percent of the popular vote in all
Senate races, against 46.9 percent for the Republicans.  Similarly, in the total
popular vote for the House, Democrats ran a virtual dead heat, 49.15 percent to
49.48 for the Republicans; and, in gubernatorial races, the popular vote in all
states was even closer, 49.83 percent for the Democrats to 49.97 for the
Republicans.  Even after 1980, Democrats hold the governorships of 27 states,
both houses of the legislature in 28 states, and one house in five more.

Those figures suggest a closely divided country, not one under strong Republican
dominance. And a few Democratic candidates scored notable victories - Senator
Alan Cranston, with a margin of better than 1.6 million in Ronald Reagan's home
state; Senator John Glenn, with a similar landslide in conservative Ohio;
Representative Morris K. Udall of Arizona, whose winning percentage rose six
points over 1978; and Senator Hart. Liberal-to-moderate Democrats and
Republicans will be able occasionally to field a working majority in the Senate.

Even the pattern of recent Presidential elections offers some comfort to the
Democrats; it shows that landslides aren't necessarily a death knell for the
losers. Richard Nixon won the Presidency just four years after Lyndon Johnson's
45-state victory in 1964; Jimmy Carter was elected only four years after Mr.
Nixon's own landslide (60.69 percent of the popular vote in 1972). In that
light, Mr.  Reagan's 51 percent and 44 states don't look quite so ominous for
the Democrats.

Perhaps more important, it's now the Republicans who have the responsibility,
hence the necessity, to succeed. L.B.J.'s landslide slipped away in the quagmire
of Vietnam, Mr. Nixon's in the dark places of Watergate. President Reagan need
encounter calamities of no such magnitude to see his mandate go the same way,
perhaps even more quickly.

As Bill Brock put it the day after the election: ''The cementing of (the new
Republican) coalition depends on our performance in office.  We've got to act
with some urgency to deal with the problems on which people voted -unemployment
and inflation.''

Senator Hart put a sharp partisan edge on the same point: ''I give the Reagan
Administration about 18 to 24 months to prove it doesn't have any answers,
either.'' And Senator Tsongas has pointed out, with an air of expectation, that
''for years the Republicans have had the advantage of espousing what I would
consider simplistic notions.  ... The trouble with those ideas is that you may
someday find yourself, God forbid, in power.''

Not only will President Reagan be expected to fulfill his promises; he also
could find himself in messy political trouble if powerful leaders of the new
conservative Senate - his Senate -precipitate a series of fights that the new
President does not need. They're already talking about a constitutional
amendment to ban abortions. A bill to prevent Federal courts from blocking
prayer in the schools is on the front burner; so is a ''voucher plan'' to help
parents pay private school tuition as an alternative to public schools. Chairman
J. Strom Thurmond of the Senate Judiciary Committee is talking of restoring the
death penalty to Federal criminal law, as well as repealing the landmark Voting
Rights Act.

The merit, if any, of these conservative proposals may be debated; but each is
bound to embroil President Reagan in a struggle either with his own right wing
or with the more moderate elements of his winning coalition. Either way, his
political capital could be rapidly expended.

A laundry list of established social programs, in any case, will come before the
97th Congress for renewal or elimination - clean air and water legislation, for
example, Head Start, a variety of regulatory provisions and those food stamps
that failed to carry South Dakota for George McGovern but whose elimination
might not please those two women in the supermarket.

The possibility is not remote, therefore, that without their rethinking
anything, the Democrats (without a Carter Presidency to drag them down) could
look considerably better to the voters, even by 1982, than they did in 1980.
Remembering what happened after 1964 and 1972, that acerbic sage of American
politics, Richard M. Scammon of the Elections Research Center, has cautioned
Democrats not to leap too rapidly into controversial party reform or a
''coordinated European-style 18-point program'' because ''there's no guarantee
the normal operations of politics won't bring you back into power'' more quickly
than anything else.  Nevertheless, it would be a mistake for the Democrats to
conclude that they're still in reasonably good shape and need only show up for
the next election. To cite only the most obvious reason, the Reagan landslide
was different from all others since 1932; in 1980, as then, the voters turned
out the incumbents, while in the landslides of 1936, 1956, 1964 and 1972, the
voters confirmed the party in office.  Even if only symbolically, therefore, the
Republicans' 1980 victory is too similar for comfort to the one that began the
last long era of one party's supremacy.

In 1980, moreover, voters were continuing a trend that was visible in 1976.
During that period, the Republicans picked up 15 Senate and 49 House seats, 11
governorships and 578 state legislative seats, a handsome harvest indeed. That
suggests the possibility that President Nixon's Watergate misfortunes and the
South's support for one of its own in 1976 merely interrupted a period of
Republican resurgence. If so, relying on President Reagan to crash and burn, as
Nixon did, won't necessarily reverse this underlying long-term trend.

Perhaps more alarming were the defections in 1980 of so many elements of the
post-Roosevelt Democratic coalition - particularly the once-solid South. Moving
toward Republicanism for many years before 10 of the 11 Confederate states
supported Mr. Carter in 1976, the South swung around in 1980 to give 10 of the
same states to President Reagan.

All told, the Republicans gained four Senate and nine House seats in the South
last year and grabbed the governorship of Arkansas, too. The region now seems
more nearly a Republican than a Democratic stronghold, and will increase its
Congressional and Electoral College strength after the Congressional
reapportionment based on the 1980 census.

If confirmed, this shift could be fatal to the Democrats' national ambitions for
years to come. Given the now long-established Republican dominance of the
Western states - many of which will also gain strength as a result of
reapportionment - a consistently Republican South would tend to make the
Democrats basically a regional party based in the Northeast and Middle West.

Other Democratic defections included Jewish voters, who moved in substantial
numbers to the Republicans; so did blue-collar workers, particularly white
nonunion members. Blacks held fast for the Democrats but did not turn out
heavily. Liberals, never enthusiastic about Jimmy Carter, gave considerable
support to John Anderson. Over all, the decline in Democrats voting Democratic -
who, instead, voted Republican or for Mr. Anderson or stayed home - defeated Mr.
Carter; and the ''reverse coattail'' effect dragged many another Democrat down,
too.

A final fact for Democrats to ponder is that total voter turnout in 1980 sank
again, to only 53.95 percent of the eligible electorate.  Taken together,
moreover, Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan, the major party nominees, won less than
half of those eligible to vote.

That means that more than half the electorate is out there waiting to be seduced
into voting for one party or the other (or perhaps, if they continue to default,
a new one). Declining turnout also seems to mean that only an ever-shrinking
pool of Americans cares enough about what either party is offering - in terms of
either programs or personalities - to support one of them. Republican failure
will not change this grim fact for the Democrats.

But by revitalizing their party and their message, Democrats might enable
themselves to compete again, not just with the Republicans, but for that
turned-off half of the electorate. In so doing, they might also reverse the long
decline of American politics - the period of frustration and futility which,
since the mid-1960's, has seen neither party able to govern effectively or to
perpetuate power once it was won, while more and more Americans have turned
against politics and government, apparently convinced of their ineffectuality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Paul Tsongas photo of Senator Gary Hart
photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PREVIEW OF SPRING BOOKS

BYLINE: By SUSAN BOLOTIN; Susan Bolotin is on the staff of The New York Times
Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2708 words


THE spring catalogues of many prominent publishers appear thinner this season.
Economic pressures have forced some publishers to trim their lists, but many are
still promising large printings of promising books and high advertising budgets
for them. Some things never change, but publishers seem to be taking fewer risks
with unknown writers and unpopular subjects. Among the books scheduled for
publication are a large number by established, ''brand-name'' authors who, in
some cases, seem to be retreating into the safety of familiar themes.

Philip Roth has brought back a favorite character: Readers of ''My Life as a
Man'' and ''The Ghost Writer'' will recognize Nathan Zuckerman, the
self-tormenting Jewish writer, in Mr. Roth's new novel, ''Zuckerman Unbound.''
In ''Creation,'' Gore Vidal once again uses an early historical setting as he
did in ''Julian'' - this time Persia, India, China and Greece during the fifth
century B.C., and Gunter Grass returns to German history in ''The Meeting at
Telgte,'' which is set in 17th century Westphalia. Jerzy Kosinski has revised
and expanded an old novel, ''The Devil Tree.'' John Knowles returns to the Devon
School in ''Peace Breaks Out,'' a postwar sequel to ''A Separate Peace.'' And
Mary Gordon's ''The Company of Women,'' which concerns six women's devotion to a
priest, evokes memories of her earlier ''Final Payments.'' Lisa Alther, whose
''Kinflicks'' also received unusual attention for a first novel, returns to the
South in her story about a group of friends, ''Original Sins.''

Even in the world of best-selling entertainments one finds a certain
familiarity. Paul Erdman, the author of ''The Crash of '79,'' again predicts
disaster in ''The Last Days of America''; and Robin Cook, of ''Coma,'' returns
to a hospital with ''Brain.'' James Clavell still works on a large Oriental
canvas in ''Noble House,'' set in the Hong Kong of 1963. In ''Bread Upon the
Waters'' Irwin Shaw deals with the conflict between wealth and power and
self-reliance in a story that moves from New York to Europe and back again.
Harold Robbins, perhaps taking a tip from Judith Krantz, sets his new jetset
novel, ''Goodbye, Janette,'' in the glittering world of haute couture. Malachi
Martin invokes a religious theme in ''King of Kings,'' a fictional retelling of
the story of David, while Joseph Wambaugh gets the inspiration for his police
novel, ''The Glittering Dome,'' from the world of Hollywood.

Several famous nonfiction explorers are also back this season.  Carlos Castaneda
revisits his hallucinatory Southwestern landscapes in ''The Eagle's Gift,''
while John McPhee focuses on the geology of the American West in ''Basin and
Range.'' Peter Matthiessen casts his very special eye on the Selous Game Reserve
in southern Tanzania, in ''Sand Rivers.''

Terrorism, espionage and international intrigue surface this season in Len
Deighton's ''XPD,'' Allen Drury's ''The Hill of Summer,'' Martin Cruz Smith's
''Gorky Park'' and Herbert Mitgang's ''The Montauk Fault.'' Crime is as rampant
as ever, and worldwide - settings range from Boston (George V. Higgins's ''The
Rat on Fire''), to England (Dick Francis's ''Reflex''), the Windy City (W.R.
Burnett's ''Good-Bye, Chicago''), Florida (John D. MacDonald's ''Free Fall in
Crimson'') and Washington (Margaret Truman's ''Murder on Capitol Hill'').

From some writers, however, one eagerly expects the unexpected.  There is Toni
Morrison, whose ''Song of Solomon'' won the National Book Critics Circle Award
for 1977. She is back this spring with ''Tar Baby,'' the story of a Caribbean
family. Polish-born Czeslaw Milosz, who was awarded the 1980 Nobel Prize for
Literature, has a new novel, ''The Issa Valley,'' as well as a revised edition
of his ''Selected Poems.'' Helen Yglesias, author of ''Family Feeling,''
explores a different kind of family in ''Sweetsir,'' the story of a marriage
gone bad. In ''July's People,'' Nadine Gordimer describes one family's response
to a fictional revolution in South Africa, while Elie Wiesel's ''The Testament''
is the prison diary of a Jewish poet who faces a death sentence in Stalinist
Russia. Other notable writers include Francine du Plessix Gray (''World Without
End''), Joyce Carol Oates (''Angel of Light''), Doris Grumbach (''The Missing
Person''), Italo Calvino (''If on a Winter's Night a Traveler,''), distinguished
short-story writer Leonard Michaels (''The Men's Club''), English poet and
novelist D.M. Thomas (''The White Hotel'') and Carlos Fuentes (''Distant
Relations''). William Wharton, the author of ''Birdy,'' and Julia Markus, the
author of ''Uncle,'' are both publishing their second novels: Mr. Wharton's is
''Dad,'' and Miss Markus's is ''American Rose.''

Publishing insiders are eager to see how Alfred A. Knopf does with its unusual
spring list, which is heavily weighted toward fiction.  Among its seven first
novels is ''Baby Love,'' by Joyce Maynard, who is best known for her nonfiction
observations about the post-60's generation. It will also be interesting to
follow the fortunes of Gil Ziff's ''Tibet,'' a first novel that Crown, a
hardcover publisher, is issuing in large quantity as a paperback original.

* When Isaac Bashevis Singer was asked by The New York Times what he would like
to see in 1981, he mentioned a revival of the short story. Perhaps his wish has
come true, for this spring's lists contain more than the usual number of story
collections. To be sure, short stories still represent only a small fraction of
the new titles, but considering the genre's longtime status as a literary
stepchild, even this number is significant.

The group is headed by the translation of ''Six Problems for Don Isidro
Parodi,'' a half-dozen murder mysteries written in 1942 by Jorge Luis Borges
with Adolfo Bioy-Casares under the pseudonym of H.  Bustos Domecq. (Mr. Borges
comes up for examination himself in ''Borges and His Fiction,'' by Gene H.
Bell-Villada.) Raymond Carver, whose highly-acclaimed first collection, ''Will
You Please Be Quiet, Please?'' won him a National Book Award nomination in 1977,
is back with ''What We Talk About When We Talk About Love.'' Other collections
include the Israeli novelist Amos Oz's ''Where the Jackels Howl,'' ''The
Collected Stories of Elizabeth Bowen'' and John Gardner's ''The Art of Living.''

* One major difference between this and previous seasons is suggested by the
title of Maxine Schnall's ''Limits: A Search for New Values.'' Gone are the days
of the how-to-be-happy-and-not-feel-guilty books.  Also missing are predictions
of the future (Princeton physicist Gerard K. O'Neill's ''2081'' is a notable
exception). In their place are a large number of books that deal with individual
and collective responsibility. The message is clear: It is time to take stock,
rethink values and recognize the limits of our environment and our selves. In
fact, one of the books that advance readers are talking about the most is
Colette Dow-ling's reassessment of feminism, ''The Cinderella Complex: Women's
Hidden Fear of Independence.''

The familiar crops up again, however, when one previews the spring books on the
Presidential election. These include ''What Happened?  The Story of Election
1980,'' by Robert Scheer, and ''The Future Under President Reagan,'' edited by
Wayne Vallis, featuring contributions from Mr. Reagan's close associates.
''Reaganomics: Economic Policies for the Eighties and Beyond,'' by Bruce R.
Bartlett, includes a fore-word by U.S. Representative Jack Kemp and an
introduction by Arthur Laffer, both of them Reagan advisers and proponents of
tax-cutting. U.C.L.A. economist Thomas Sowell's forthcoming ''Ethnic America''
is also likely to generate interest because of Professor Sowell's prominence as
a leading black Reagan supporter. ''The New Right: We're Ready to Lead,'' is by
New Right fund raiser Richard A. Viguerie, with an introduction by Jerry
Falwell, the founder of the Moral Majority. Daniel Yankelovich's ''New Rules:
Searching for Self-Fulfillment in a World Turned Upside Down'' provides
contrast, however, for in it, the noted pollster claims that the expansiveness
of the 70's will prevail over the current wave of conservatism.

Economics and energy were important themes during last year's campaign. In ''The
Ultimate Resource'' - a nontechnical and muchexpanded version of an earlier
book, ''The Economics of Population Growth'' - economist Julian L. Simon
suggests that, though all resources are limited, the only ultimate resource is
our creativity. Other economics books include a collection of essays by Peter F.
Drucker, ''Toward the Next Economics,'' George Gilder's ''Wealth and Poverty,''
P.T. Bauer's ''Equality, the Third World, and Economic Delusion,'' and two by
Nobel Prize winners - Theodore Schultz's ''Investing in People: The Economics of
Population Quality'' and Jonas Salk's ''World Population and Human Values,''
written with Jonathan Salk. The energy problem is explored in such books as
''World Energy,'' edited by Martin Hillenbrand and Daniel Yergin; ''Oil,'' by
Jack Anderson with James Boyd; ''The World Challenge: OPEC and the New Global
Order,'' by Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber; and ''The Greatest Power on Earth,''
by Ronald W.  Clark.

Several important works of history will appear. ''Mary Chestnut's Civil War,''
the diaries of a Southern abolitionist, were brought to readers' attention in
Edmund Wilson's classic study ''Patriotic Gore''; now they are available in a
volume edited by the distinguished Southern historian C. Vann Woodward. Also of
interest are ''Russia in the Age of Catherine the Great,'' by Isabel de
Madariaga, and ''The Nation Comes of Age,'' Page Smith's continuation of his
series of ''people's histories'' into the antebellum years.  One of the most
surprising examples of scholarly dedication this spring is the completion of
Muriel St. Clare Byrne's edition of ''The Lisle Letters'' -the correspondence of
Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, during the critical early years of Tudor
England - which Miss Byrne first began in 1941.

More recent historical events are dealt with in ''The Auschwitz Album,'' a
collection of rare photographs edited by Peter Hellman, Serge Klarsfeld and
Lilly Meier, and in ''Hiroshima-Nagasaki,'' the report of The Committee for the
Compilation of Materials on the Damage of the Atomic Bombs. Also noteworthy are
Albert Speer's story of the SS involvement with German industry,
''Infiltration,'' Gareth Porter's anthology ''Vietnam: A History in Documents,''
and Joseph A. Califano Jr.'s look inside the Carter and Johnson Administrations,
''Crossfire.''

Former Presidents receive a lot of attention this spring. These include Theodore
Roosevelt (''Mornings on Horseback,'' by David McCullough), Warren G. Harding
(''The Ohio Gang,'' by Charles L. Mee Jr.), Dwight D. Eisenhower (''Eisenhower
and the Cold War,'' by Robert A. Divine, and ''The Eisenhower Diaries,'' edited
by Robert H. Ferrell), Thomas Jefferson (''The Sage of Monticello'' by Dumas
Malone and ''The Jefferson Scandals,'' by Virginius Dabney) - and Truman (''The
Autobiography of Harry S. Truman,'' edited by Robert H. Ferrell, and ''Harry S.
Truman in Family: The Truman Family's Personal Correspondence,'' edited by the
very busy Margaret Truman.)

Last spring our previewer commented that it was too soon to expect books about
Afghanistan; this spring it's too soon for books about Poland. But there are at
least one about Abscam (Robert Greene's ''The Sting Man'') and several about
Afghanistan: ''The Struggle for Afghanistan,'' by Nancy Peabody Newell and
Richard S. Newell, and ''A Journey Through Afghanistan,'' by David Chaffetz.
Many books deal with other timely matters: ''National Defense,'' by James
Fallows, former Carter speechwriter, and ''Debacle,'' by Michael Ledeen and
William Lewis, an examination of what the authors regard as the American failure
in Iran. Adam Ulam's ''Russia's Failed Revolutions'' explores the failure of
liberal reform movements in the U.S.S.R., and former Israeli Defense Minister
Ezer Weizman offers ''The Battle for Peace.''

Not everything is so portentous, however. This spring's lists show a lively
interest in physical fitness, health, sexuality, pregnancy and childbirth.
Auspicious entries include Russell Scott's ''The Body as Property,'' Shere
Hite's ''The Hite Report on Male Sexuality,'' and ''The Harvard Medical School
Health Letter Book,'' edited by Dr. G. Timothy Johnson and Dr. Stephen E.
Goldfinger. Two books that suggest that a fetus develops as both a sentient and
emotional being are sure to fuel both sides of the right-to-life debate: ''The
Secret Life of the Unborn Child,'' by Thomas Verny, M.D., with John Kelly, and
psychologist Leni Schwartz's ''The World of the Unborn.''

There is, of course, always more than enough trouble to go around.  ''The Terror
Network'' is Clare Sterling's analysis of international terrorism. Jim Jones and
the Jonestown massacre are examined by James Reston Jr. (''Our Father, Who Art
in Hell'') and by Min S. Yee and Thomas Layton (''In My Father's House'').
Richard Rashke writes of industrial contamination in ''The Killing of Karen
Silkwood.'' And with ''Love, Here Is My Heart,'' Diana Trilling appears to be
winning the publication-date race against Shana Alexander and Lally Weymouth,
who have also announced plans to write about Jean Harris and the death of
Scarsdale diet doctor, Herman Tarnower.

* Scholars and literary enthusiasts will be interested in several new titles.
Matthew J. Bruccoli has produced the first biography of F.  Scott Fitzgerald in
20 years, ''Some Sort of Grandeur.'' Bernard Crick's ''George Orwell,'' unlike
the two-volume biography by Peter Stansky and William Abrahams, was authorized
by Orwell's late widow.  ''Early Auden,'' by the late poet's literary executor,
Edward Mendelson, combines biography and literary criticism. Carlos Baker has
edited ''Ernest Hemingway: Selected Letters, 1917-1961,'' and Noel Polk has
edited William Faulkner's ''Sanctuary: The Original Text.'' Denis Donoghue has
written ''Ferocious Alphabets,'' a book that ''concerns itself with how, why and
what the reader responds to in literature.'' The three volumes of ''Shaw's
Music,'' edited by Dan H. Laurence, include everything that the playwright wrote
on the subject. Stephen King shifts gears with a work of literary criticism,
''Danse Macabre,'' in which he describes the ''scare tactics'' that have driven
so many of his horror novels to the tops of bestseller lists. Essays by Pablo
Neruda, ''Passions and Impressions,'' and ''A Susan Sontag Reader'' are also on
the way.

The new season abounds with memoirs and autobiographies. John Kenneth Galbraith
promises an intimate look at his experiences in ''A Life in Our Times.'' Kurt
Vonnegut serves up an ''autobiographical collage'' in ''Palm Sunday,'' while
Norman Cousins presents an ''autobiographical notebook'' in ''The Human
Option.'' Wright Morris re-creates his early years in the Midwest in ''Will's
Boy.''

There are several books about journalism. Ted Morgan's ''Rowing Toward Eden''
draws heavily upon his wide-ranging career as a reporter and correspondent.
Stephen Hess's ''Newswork: The Washington Reporters'' focuses on the influence
of the Capitol press corps. In ''Gone Crazy and Back Again,'' a long-awaited
history of Rolling Stone magazine, Robert Sam Anson writes about the generation
that made that magazine a success. ''No Name, No Number,'' by Jacobo Timerman,
recounts the former Argentinean newspaper publisher's imprisonment and torture;
Donald Woods's ''Asking for Trouble'' is the autobiography of the anti-apartheid
editor who fled South Africa in 1977. In ''Covering Islam,'' Edward W. Said, the
author of the controversial ''Orientalism'' and ''The Question of Palestine,''
criticizes the Western media and opinion-makers for what he believes is their
tendency to misinterpret the diversity of Islamic culture.

As in any season, the sheer number of available books can daunt even the most
avid reader. But don't dismay: You can always start your spring reading with
''The Evelyn Wood Way to Reading Faster and Learning Better,'' by Franklin J.
Agardy, the director of Evelyn Wood Reading Dynamics, Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESCAPE BY COPTER FOILED AT U.S. JAIL IN MANHATTAN

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2171 words


An armed man and woman hijacked a sightseeing helicopter and flew to the Federal
detention center in lower Manhattan yesterday morning in an unsuccessful attempt
to pluck an inmate from a rooftop recreation area.

The apparent target of the scheme, a convicted narcotics dealer, was among a
score of inmates who had seized a guard as hostage and were waiting on the roof
of the 12-story Metropolitan Correctional Center at 150 Park Row, a modern stone
structure set amid the complex of civic buildings near City Hall and Foley
Square.

But the daring, intricately timed escape plot failed, authorities said, because
the hijackers were unable to cut through a heavy wire screen covering the roof.

After several unsuccessful attempts to cut through the quarter-inch steel screen
with wire cutters, the hijackers had the pilot bounce his two-ton, 35-foot
five-passenger helicopter up and down on the mesh, but that also failed to break
it.

Finally accepting defeat after about 10 minutes on the scene, the hijackers
dropped a nine-millimeter pistol through the screen to the inmates. The
helicopter then whirled away to a heliport on Manhattan's West Side, where the
hijackers sped away in a waiting car.

Meantime the inmates on the roof -who included Michele Sindona, the Italian
financier, and Robert Wyler, a 43-year-old recently convicted narcotics dealer,
who is believed to have been the target of the raid - barricaded themselves in
the recreation area and began what was to become a three-hour siege.

About 20 minutes after the helicopter's departure, the inmates released their
hostage and threw their gun onto an adjoining landing, out of reach. But
authorities were still unsure whether they had other weapons and made no
immediate effort to retake the roof.

In the ensuing standoff, more than 100 flak-jacketed police officers and prison
guards with shotguns surrounded the jail, and scores of other Federal guards and
United States marshals sealed off all exits from the roof. Two police
helicopters wheeled overhead and made repeated attempts with magnets and ropes
to retrieve the pistol. As hundreds of residents of nearby apartment towers
watched from windows, terraces and rooftops, the inmates played basketball,
lounged on handball courts and sunned themselves under bright blue skies in
scenes that belied the day's tensions.

No shots were fired, and no one was injured. Federal officials, who talked to
inmate leaders over a telephone on the roof, negotiated a surrender shortly
after 1 P.M., and the inmates were removed one at a time to be searched and
returned to their cells.

The last successful escape from the five-year-old Metropolitan Correctional
Center was in 1978, when three prisoners sawed through the bars on a ninth-floor
window and dropped to a nearby roof.

Not a Harsh Jail

The $14.5 million jail was designed for 450 inmates, and Warden Dale H. Thomas
said that it housed 470 at the time of the escape attempt yesterday. The
building has no barred cells or dank, colorless corridors. Inmates live in
clusters of dormitory-like rooms, and color television sets, pool tables and
exercise rooms are available in what many call a relaxed atmosphere. Among
Federal prisoners, it is known as ''the Holiday Inn.''

It is sandwiched between New York's Police Headquarters at 1 Police Plaza, the
United States Courthouse on Foley Square and the Municipal Building, across from
City Hall amid the oddly angled streets of the city's civic complex of Federal,
state and city office buildings.

Though the jail houses primarily defendants awaiting Federal trials, it also
keeps some convicted prisoners awaiting sentencing or tranfer to Federal
prisons. All of the inmates on the roof yesterday were being housed in a
high-security wing on the ninth floor, some because they had already been
convicted and others because they were being held in high bail.

While Mr. Sindona, the Italian financier convicted last year in a multimillion
dollar international banking fraud case, was among them, the police and Federal
officials said that they believed the actual target of the escape raid was Mr.
Wyler of Manhattan, who was sentenced recently to 20 years in prison.

Dangerous Prisoner on Roof

Authorities called Mr. Wyler's penalty severe for the narcotcs charge against
him, but they noted that he was regarded as dangerous. He was arrested in 1967
on drug smuggling charges and was convicted in 1969 of the 1968 murder of a pimp
in a dispute over the affections of a 14-year-old prostitute. At his trial he
was accused by a prosecutor of being a member of the Mafia.

The police said yesterday that Mr. Wyler was a former associate of Albert
Victory, who was convicted of the 1968 murder of a New York City policeman and
who, while serving 25 years to life at the Green Haven Correctional Facility
upstate, escaped in 1978 when two correction officials allowed him to go to a
motel to see a woman.

Yesterday's events recalled successful escape attempts using helicopters in
Michigan and Mexico City in 1971 and in Dublin in 1973. A more recent attempt
-in Marion, Ill., outside Chicago, in 1978 -failed.

According to the police and Federal authorities, yesterday's escape attempt
began at Teterboro Airport in New Jersey, where a woman identified only as
''Miss Sanchez'' arrived at 7:30 A.M. to board a chartered helicopter owned by
the Island Helcopter Corporation, which operates a fleet of 35 helicopters in
the metropolitan area.

Copter Rented by Woman

The woman, who had rented helicopters from the company last Friday and Saturday
as well, said that she was doing aerial survey work, according to the company's
senior vice president, Reed Phillips. He said that Miss Sanchez, about 35 years
old and clad in a maroon jogging suit, paid $1,600 in cash, the daily rate, for
the charter yesterday.

The white helicopter, with red and black trim and the company's name on its
side, was piloted by Tom Nietsche, a Vietnam veteran in his late 20's who lives
with his wife and children in New Jersey. The woman, the police said, was
carrying a briefcase and two airline carry-on bags.

At her direction, Mr. Nietsche first flew directly to the East River Heliport at
34th Street. After landing, they went together to a restaurant at 36th Street
and Second Avenue, where they met a second woman and had breakfast. The second
woman, described as being in her 30's and wearing blue jeans, then took the bags
brought by Miss Sanchez and left.

Miss Sanchez and the pilot then returned to the helicopter, flew back to
Teterboro Airport and picked up another passenger, a black man about 45 years
old who was wearing a blue jogging suit and a biege coat. He was carrying
several wrapped packages, which apparently contained guns, wire-cutters and a
folding ladder.

Following new instructions, Mr. Nietsche flew to Manhattan, circled the World
Trade Center and then circled Governors Island.

Money Offered to Pilot

According to Mr. Phillips, it was during these circling maneuvers that the two
passengers offered the pilot ''a large sum of money'' to land on the roof of the
Metropolitan Correctional Center. Various reports indicated that the sum offered
was $50,000, but the police, who interviewed Mr. Nietsche extensively, declined
to confirm this.

When Mr. Nietsche refused to accept any money, Mr. Phillips said, the male
passenger drew an automatic pistol with a silencer from one of his packages and
forced him to fly to the jail and land on the roof at 10:15 A.M. The police said
that Mr. Nietsche had been coerced into cooperatating with the hijackers and was
not a suspect in the case.

Meanwhile 20 inmates were already on the roof, having been escorted by a guard,
Luis German, from their high-security ninth-floor wing via an elevator at about
9:45 A.M. for their daily exercise. The recreation area occupies a large section
of the roof, which is shaped like a swept-back pair of wings and is covered
entirely with heavy wire screening.

Officer German, who was unarmed but carried keys and a walkietalkie, was
overpowered just as the helicopter descended onto the screening.

A guard on the 11th floor of the jail, as well as tenants in nearby apartment
buildings saw the helicopter landing. Some tenants called the center, but
efforts to contact Officer German over his walkietalkie were futile. He had been
locked in a washroom on the roof.

Unable to Cut Mesh

Atop the screening, meantime, the male passenger in the helicopter kept the gun
at the pilot's back and the woman took the wire-cutters, jumped out and began
trying to cut through the mesh. Failing, she returned to the helicopter and took
the gun while her companion jumped out and also tried unsuccessfully to cut the
screen.

Before returning to the helicopter, the man dropped a pistol through the screen
to the inmates below.  Warden Thomas described the wire mesh as 20-gauge steel
set about 15 feet above the floor of the recreation room. The folding ladder
brought by the hijackers apparently had been intended to span this gap. It was
left on the screen when the helicopter took off.

Before departing, however, the hijackers forced Mr. Nietsche to bounce the
helicopter on the mesh in a last-ditch effort to break through. When that
failed, they ordered the pilot to take off. Lieut. Stanley Carris of the city
police said that the helicopter at this point almost crashed.

''Apparently, the ladder had not been retrieved into the helicopter and got
hooked onto the grating,'' he said. ''And when they tried to lift off, they
actually had to break the ladder to lift off from the roof.''

Wobbling and gyrating, the helicopter whirled off to the West Side Heliport, at
30th Street and the Hudson River. After landing, the man and woman jumped out
with their packages and, by one account, ran to a waiting gray Cadillic Seville,
which took them away with a woman behind the wheel.

Speaking for the Police Department, Alice McGillion, said that investigators
late yesterday were unsure how the hijackers had made their getaway.

One report said the hijackers had abandoned their first getaway car on West 29th
Street and escaped in a second car, but the police said they could not confirm
this.

Captured Guard Released

Back at the Federal detention center, Officer German, who was never tied up or
held at gunpoint, was released from the washroom at 10:35 A.M. and was allowed
to retrieve his keys and walkie-talkie.  According to Claude Gibson, a duty
officer at the jail: ''Once he was out, he was walking around the area, because
he couldn't get out either. So we opened a door and we pulled him in.''

Shortly after Officer German's departure, it became apparent to the inmates that
escape was hopeless and one of them threw the pistol onto an adjoining roof on
the north facade, separated from them by a wall. A steel door in the wall was
locked, the only key being held by guards downstairs, and two rectangular
windows in the wall were barred.

Several attempts by the inmates to reach through the bars to get the gun back
were unsuccessful. It lay near a pile of dirty snow, just beyond reach. It was
not clear to authorities, however, that the inmates were no longer armed.

And as two police helicopters circled overhead, their crews using ropes and a
magnet in unsuccessful attempts to retrieve the gun, more than 100 police
officers and Federal agents threw a cordon of firepower around the jail. Other
Federal officers and marshals armed with handguns and shotguns took control of
stairways leading to the roof.

A Federal negotiating team led by Associate Warden Patrick Keohane then began
telephone talks with the inmates, some of whom were seen lounging with apparent
unconcern in the brilliant sunlight, while others stayed out of sight behind
pillars and posts on the roof.  Still others played basketball while the
surrender talks were under way.

They took about one hour. Warden Thomas, who called the talks
''straightforward,'' said ''there were no demands'' by the inmates.  They gave
up shortly after 1 P.M. One by one, they were taken off the roof, searched and
returned to the ninth floor, where they were placed in a ''lock down
situation.'' No other weapons were found.

It was unclear last night whether any charges were to be lodged against any of
the inmates. Federal officials said all would be interrogated extensively before
any decision was made.

''Thank God no one was hurt,'' said Warden Thomas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Route of Hijacked Helicopter Photo of a Police
Sharpshooter Photo of Tom Nietsch, Pilot of Hijacked helicopter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PERCY SAYS IT WOULD BE 'DISHONORABLE'FOR REAGANTO RENEGE ON IRAN ACCORD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


Senator Charles H. Percy, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, lent strong support today to the agreement for releasing the 52
hostages that was negotiated by the Carter Administration. He said it would be
''dishonorable'' for the Reagan Administration not to carry out its provisions.

This endorsement from the Republican chairman of a key committee followed
several days of intensive efforts by former President Jimmy Carter and his aides
to justify the agreement and to rebut those advocating that the United States
renege on promises to Iran because of the way the American hostages were treated
in captivity.

The Reagan Administration has been circumspect in its comments about the
arrangements that produced the hostage release. A spokesman said last Thursday,
after Mr. Reagan had been President for only two days, that the Administration
intended to carry out its legal obligations but was reserving judgment on the
merits of the accord until completion of a study being undertaken by Secretary
of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.

Hearings Planned for February

Senator Percy also said, in an appearance on the NBC News program ''Meet the
Press,'' that the Foreign Relations Committee would hold hearings on the hostage
situation but not until late February. He said the purpose of the inquiry would
be ''essentially to look forward, to prevent it from ever happening again.''

He also said that Iran should have to face ''an element of punishment'' for its
treatment of the hostages, but he indicated a preference for international
condemnation. He noted that Iran had already suffered from the economic
sanctions imposed by several nations.

The delay in holding hearings was consistent with the remarks of Senator Howard
H. Baker Jr., the majority leader, who asked last week that hearings be delayed
until the emotional climate has cooled. There was a series of speeches and
resolutions in Congress when the hostages were released and the first reports of
their maltreatment were disclosed. The legislators called on the United States
to renounce the accord as having been signed under duress.

No 'Favors' for 'Hoodlums'

Former President Carter, who flew to Wiesbaden, West Germany, last Wednesday to
greet the hostages as Mr. Reagan's special envoy, urged his successor to live up
to the agreement while at the same time saying that the United States should
never ''do any favors'' for the Iranian ''hoodlums.''

Former Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie, the former White House counsel Lloyd
N. Cutler, and former Deputy Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher appeared
on television interview programs today to defend the terms of the agreement. Mr.
Christopher was the chief American negotiator of the pact.

Mr. Muskie and Mr. Cutler, in particular, have been active in recent days in
privately and publicly stressing these advantages in the agreement for the
United States:

- It did not violate President Carter's mandate to free the hostages while
protecting the nation's honor and interests. ''We did not make an apology, we
paid no ransom,'' Mr. Christopher said on the CBS News program ''Face the
Nation.''

- It provides that, of $11 billion to $12 billion in frozen Iranian assets, $8
billion was put into an Algerian escrow account, and of that amount, only $2.9
billion was returned to Iran when the hostages were freed. About $3.7 billion
was used to pay off American and other bank loans, and about $1.4 billion was
left in escrow until disputed claims are settled.

- Of the other frozen assets - more than $3 billion - the American claims will
be submitted to an international claims commission and Iran will have to keep an
escrow account at a level of at least $500 million to handle claims.

War Is Ultimate 'Immorality'

Mr. Muskie, when he has been asked why the United States agreed to negotiate
with ''terrorists,'' has asserted several times in recent days - and on the ABC
News program ''Issues and Answers'' today - that the the ultimate ''immorality
is war'' and that the United States negotiated the end of the Vietnam War and
even World War II, even though the Germans and the Japanese had agreed to
unconditional surrender.

Mr. Christopher and Mr. Muskie also stressed that a reneging by the Reagan
Administration on any terms of the agreement would have international
repercussions.

It would be ''a very serious slap in the face'' to Algeria, which brought about
the agreement ''through its active mediation,'' Mr.  Christopher said, and
''other countries around the world that helped us through this excruciating
444-day period would be very surprised if the United States, having negotiated
an agreement in good faith, did not carry it out.''

This included Western European countries, he said, as well as nonaligned nations
other than Algeria.

Trouble Rounding Up Hostages

Mr. Christopher, when asked whether he thought the Iranians had deliberately
delayed the release of the hostages to annoy Mr. Carter by having the aircraft
depart a half hour into Mr. Reagan's Administration, said he thought the Iranian
Governent had simply had trouble rounding up all the hostages, who were in
different locations in Teheran.

He also suggested that the militants might have raised some lastminute
objections to the release.  As to what might be done in the future, Mr. Percy
said that a policy should be enunciated so that a repetition of such an action
could lead to a total break in diplomatic and economic relations, to be followed
by military action if necessary.

Mr. Cutler, appearing on ''Issues and Answers'' with Mr. Muskie, said there
should be an international covenant obligating nations to sever diplomatic
relations with any government that endorsed the kidnapping of diplomats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


EX-HOSTAGE SAY MILITANTS RAN '3-RING MENTAL CIRCUS'

NORFOLK, Va., Jan. 25 (AP) - Iranian militants would hold surprise birthday
parties for some of their American hostages, then counter the kindness with
cruelty in what sometimes struck one of those hostages, Navy Comdr. Donald A.
Sharer, as a ''mental three-ring circus.''

In an hourlong telephone interview early today with The Norfolk Virginian-Pilot,
Commander Sharer told of his defiance throughout his 444-day ordeal as one of
the Americans held hostage in Iran.

As he waited in Wiesbaden, West Germany, for the flight that would take him
home, Commander Sharer, a Chesapeake resident, recalled the faith that saw the
captives through ''mental torture'' by the militants.  He said he countered the
attacks on his will by calling his captors names.

Articles of Faith

There were times when imprisonment ''was fairly rough - not rough physically; it
was a mental three-ring circus at times,'' he said.  Despite persistent Iranian
attempts to break the hostages' will and destroy their hope, they held to their
faith in themselves and their country, Commander Sharer said.

''They tried to convince us that the U.S. didn't really care that much about us
to really negotiate in earnest,'' he said. ''But as I told the psychiatrists
here and some of the other debriefers, I went on the faith of three things.

''I went on the faith of my family - my wife, my children. I knew they were as
strong as nails, so I didn't really have to worry about them.

''I went on the faith of the American people and the American Government -I knew
that they would support us forever if they had to.  ''The other thing I had
faith in was the Navy, and I knew that they would take care of my family.''

A Veteran of Vietnam

Commander Sharer said he was fine physically and mentally.  An F-14 pilot who
flew combat missions in the Vietnam War, Commander Sharer was on a temporary
assignment at the United States Embassy in Teheran when it was seized by
militants on Nov. 4, 1979.

While he was in captivity, he said, he was moved 17 times and lost weight, and
he verbally assaulted his captors and took turns with fellow hostages in keeping
spirits up.

The hostages made it through their ordeal ''almost to the man by wanting to be
the winners,'' he said, ''And we feel that we were the winners.''

Good Will Was Limited

The captors ''worked on our minds in true terrorist fashion,'' he said.  Yet,
the Iranians sometimes surprised the hostages with cake and ice cream on their
birthdays, he recalled. ''It's Persian nature to treat your guests very well.''

But the good will was limited.  ''After they brought the ice cream and stuff,
then they wouldn't give you the mail,'' he said. ''It's a weird culture.''
Commander Sharer's birthday passed without a cake.  ''I wasn't one of their
favorite people,'' he said. ''I was always calling them dirty names. That was
the way I coped.''

----

Another Describes His Fear

DAYTON, Ohio, Jan. 25 (UPI) -Steven M. Lauterbach said by telephone from
Wiesbaden, West Germany, before flying to the United States today, that during
his captivity in Iran, his fear at times was so overwhelming it ''vibrated in
the air.''

''I knew there was a chance we would be killed,'' he said in a phone call to The
Dayton Daily News. ''I always recognized that as a possibility. But I knew
everything possible was being done to get us out.''

The 29-year-old Mr. Lauterbach, who was an administrative officer at the United
States Embassy in Teheran at the time of the takeover and who is the son of
Eugene and Margaret Lauterbach of Dayton, told how he survived the terror,
threats and uncertainty of his 444-day ordeal, the newspaper said today in a
copyrighted story.

There were times, he said, when ''we had people threatening us.'' He continued,
''They pointed guns at us and on occasion we were slapped around pretty good.''

''It's hard to put into words, but there was fear so strong you could feel it
vibrating in the air,'' he added. ''There was a hollow feeling in your soul that
you were going to die, that you were a nothing. Like maybe you are a shadow on
the wall and you keep getting smaller as the sun goes down and you pray that the
sun never really goes away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Clair Cortland Barnes

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
TOO OLD TO CRY. By Paul Hemphill. 249 pages. Viking. $11.95.

''TOO OLD TO CRY'' is a collection of some 50 pieces, few of them more than a
thousand words long, that Paul Hemphill wrote as a columnist for The Atlanta
Journal and The San Francisco Examiner, and as a freelance reporter when the
grind of writing a thousand words a day had left his brain in need of a walk
around the block.

The pieces tell of a singer, Merle Haggard, who has improved with success
because ''he remained true to his roots,'' of a thriving shoplifter named
Boosting Betty, whose son is good at epileptic fits to create distraction, a
soldier's wife receiving word of her husband's death in Vietnam, the sense of
''violation'' you feel when your home is burgled, an incompetent bank robber, a
husband who abandons his wife and six children for the bottle, the good coffee
they serve at truck stops, and a prostitute who found Jesus and gave up her
wayward life. Yes, you might argue that Mr. Hemphill writes about inevitable
subjects. But I would prefer to overlook that point.

Good Old Boyism

You might also make a case that Mr. Hemphill, whose other books include a novel,
''Long Gone,'' and two nonfiction works, ''The Nashville Sound'' and ''The Good
Old Boys,'' suffers a bit from Good Old Boyism. Good Old Boyism is not for
Northerners to define. But as I dimly understand, it has something to do with
pride in one's humble Southern roots, fierce loyalty to fellow Southerners with
humble roots, and an attraction to whisky.

Mr. Hemphill, the son of a truck driver and a graduate of Auburn University,
limns Good Old Boyism when he describes in his foreword how he spent his years
before the age of 40 rushing to embrace his dream of life, and the years after
40 feeling sad that he embraced it so avidly, although in that respect we are
all Good Old Boys to a degree. Good Old Boys are proud of the way they've
squandered themselves. They write sentences such as Mr. Hemphill's observation
that ''You must hurt and you must laugh and you must cry before you can write,''
which, strictly speaking, means that any 2-year-old can take up the pen, though
I do suppose we know what he means. Mr.  Hemphill seems to be an archetypal Good
Old Boy.

But again, I hadn't intend to push that point. The real problem with ''Too Old
to Cry,'' if it has one, is that Mr. Hemphill does very well what a lot of
reporters, both Southern and Northern, learned to do in the 1960's. That, of
course, was to go to out-ofthe-way places for an offbeat angle on a story, as
Mr. Hemphill does when he catches up with Roger Maris in Gainesville, Fla., 10
years after the reluctant slugger's retirement from baseball, or when he
approaches weary arrivals from points East at a bus station in San Francisco and
asks them how they feel about the novel ''The Grapes of Wrath.''

The technique was to look for the odd and revealing moment (a stripper talking
just before her act to friends about her vacation plans, or the way a trucker
leans over the counter to catch a glimpse of a waitress's calves when her back
is turned) and work it into a story as if it were fiction. In a way, these
reporters did for journalism what James Joyce had done for fiction when he
fashioned his secular notion of the epiphany, ''a sudden spiritual
manifestation, whether in the vulgarity of speech or of gesture,'' as one of
Joyce's artist-characters puts it. The trouble is, we've gotten so used to this
sort of journalism that we take for granted the skill that goes into it.

Starting Over at 35

But there's an even more obvious reason why Mr. Hemphill's pieces were worth
collecting and arranging in the order they have been. That is the way they serve
as autobiography. Without ever seeming to take up the subject of himself, Mr.
Hemphill tells you where he came from, how he grew up, how he found himself at
the age of 35, with three children and two mortgages and two broken cars and a
dog and $25,000 in debts and a drinking problem, and how he crawled out from
under this mess and eventually ended up getting married again, fathering yet
another child and shouting out in the delivery room, with his arms raised like
Rocky, ''That's just about the goddamnedest thing I'll ever see in my life.''

Of course, you also read ''Too Old to Cry'' for little high spots like Mr.
Hemphill's account of a cynical traveling companion who kept exclaiming things
like, ''My God, isn't that an amber wave of grain?'' and ''Look, a purple
mountain's majesty,'' or his searing account of the suicide of a newspaperman
who stayed at his column too long. But it's the unobtrusive autobiographical
dimension that holds this collection together and lends it enough compulsion to
make a reader overlook its obvious flaws.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Paul Hemphill

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

What the Cheers Are For

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


Watching the hostages return, a line from ''Hair,'' the rock musical, kept
coming to mind: ''Crazy for the red, white, blue - and yellow ... fringe.'' In
the late 60's, the fourth color signified bitter division over the draft and
Vietnam. Now, the countryside is abloom in red, white, blue - and yellow
ribbons; the air is filled with prayers and cheers, bells and bands. The
festivities are as welcome as the occasion. The hostages are not all that has
returned to the United States.

Other Americans who suffered abroad in the country's service have also come home
in recent years: the crew of the Pueblo; Vietnam prisoners of war; and, for that
matter, Vietnam veterans. None experienced anything like the current outpouring
of feeling. War had divided the country and made patriotism suspect.

Now, the pride and patriotism that many people tried to unfurl during the
Bicentennial have erupted without embarrassment. It's not as though there are no
more divisions in the country. Different people are obviously cheering different
things; some are relieved that the hostages returned without more bloodshed,
some are cheering the end of unbearable humiliation. But on every side, there
has suddenly appeared a need to express national unity, to demonstrate an
unashamed patriotism.

The hostages say they never expected such a welcome. How could they? They have
returned to a different country than the one they knew only 14 months ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words


Iraqis say Iranian Kurds harass Iranian troops A3
Polish students' sit-in is spreading A4
Around the World A5
Malaysia futilely fights the flow of illegal Indonesian immigrants A9
Iranian Prime Minister defends accord on release of hostages B10

Government/Politics
Minority groups welcome wider eligibility for charity funds A12
Supreme Court Roundup A14
Reporter's Notebook: For Rea- gan, East is East A16
Analysis of costs may complicate Westway negotiations B2
Albany Assembly votes tax cuts for small business B2
Many members of minorities in- cluded as 885 join police force B3
Black-Hispanic coalition seeks two borough presidencies B4

Energy
Jersey utility to truck damaged nuclear fuel rods to Ohio B3

General
Around the Nation A12
Oakland, the ''city of champions,'' has number of problems A12
Reaction of public a pleasant sur- prise for freed hostages B8
'Ticker tape' parade planned Friday for hostages B8
Sickman family as 'overwhelmed' as the hostages B9
Iranian captors used the U.S. role in Vietnam to taunt hostages B9
Clergymen who visited hostages surprised by mistreatment B10
New York doctor sues magazine over article on Shah's care B10

Religion
Christian Evangelicals debate their proper political role A12

Obituaries
H. I. Feldman, architect who de- signed 2,500 apartment houses B19

Science Times
A Voyage in Space - with the Shuttle Simulator C1
A Poll Reports Addiction of Half the Respondents C1
Education: Jesse Jackson's Ef- fort to Produce Motivation C1
Scientists on Television: Not a Good Image C2
Science Watch C2
Finding Ancient Man With a Magnetometer C3
Science Q&A C3
About Education C4

Arts/Entertainment
Robert Kovich puts his choreogra- phy on display C6
''Van Gogh and the Birth of Cloiso- nism'' opens in Toronto C7
Symposium on new music at Y raises some hackles C7
Faye Levine's novel ''Solomon & Sheba'' is reviewed C9
Robert Manning to edit 14-volume series on Vietnam War C9
''The Bunker,'' about Hitler's last days, on CBS-TV tonight C19
''Victory Over the Sun'' ''opera'' is staged in Washington C20
''Waiting for the Parade,'' Cana- dian play at the Hudson Guild C20
Jimmy Carter names Marvin Jo- sephson his literary agent C20

Style
A new emphasis on grandeur livens Paris couture opening B13
Fashion Notes B13

Sports
Suns beat Knicks, 99-94 B15
Sabres down Islanders, 5-3 B15
Raider coach hints at opposition to moving team B15
2,000 football fans in London see a super premiere B15
Raiders' line play was decisive factor in domination of Eagles B16
Dave Anderson on Raiders' un- likely season B16
Yanks and Winfield agree on new contract terms B17
Nehemiah polishes his form and looks to new record B18
B4
Bennie Briscoe: The boxer who won't quit B18
Attorneys disagree on punch as Kush trial opens B18

Features/Notes
Notes on People B7
Going Out Guide C6

News Analysis
John Darnton on Poland's battle over a five-day workweek A4

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

What the cheers are for The play for time in Poland On camera, not in Doctors
and first aid Letters A18
Tom Wicker: What kind of tax cut will Reagan produce?  A19
Walter Laqueur: Europe, in the woods A19
L. Bruce Laingen: a confidential cable to Vance on Iran A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


AMERICA'S VIETNAM ROLE USED TO TAUNT HOSTAGES

WEST POINT, N.Y., Jan. 26 (AP) - Moorhead C. Kennedy Jr., one of the freed
American hostages, said today that his Iranian captors had told him repeatedly
that he was being punished for America's role in Vietnam.

''As they led us out of the embassy on Nov. 4, they whispered in my ear, '
Vietnam, Vietnam,' '' said Mr. Kennedy, an economic specialist in the State
Department and the third-ranking diplomat in the United States Embassy in
Teheran when it fell in November 1979.

In an interview at the United States Military Academy, where the hostages were
relaxing with their families today, Mr. Kennedy said that the militants had
lined the hostages' cells with posters of crippled Vietnamese children and
repeated frequently, ''We're paying you back for Vietnam.''

Mr. Kennedy, 50 years old, is a native of New York, where his parents now live.
He also criticized the aborted rescue attempt by the United States last April,
calling it ''America's only mistake'' in the long ordeal.

Deaths Might Have Resulted

''Even if it succeeded, a lot of us would have been killed,'' he said. ''Even if
they had gotten the planes in, we would have been shot up on the way out.''

Mr. Kennedy praised former President Carter for his overall handling of the
crisis. ''I think President Carter's way of handling it, not panicking, was the
right one,'' he said. ''Our restrained posture gave us credit.''

America has improved its standing in the world because of the way it conducted
itself while the hostages were held, Mr. Kennedy said.  ''We overcame all the
damage that Vietnam had done to us.''

Mr. Kennedy said that he was considering quitting the State Department, not
because he felt bitter about his experience, but because he wanted to open a new
chapter in his life.

But he added that he did not think the State Department was prepared for the
embassy takeover and that he hoped the Government learned from the experience.

''I hope there's a serious examination of how to handle it,'' he said. ''We
guessed all wrong.''

---

Suicide Attempt Reported

By United Press International

Morehead C. Kennedy Jr. said today that one of his colleagues tried to commit
suicide while held captive in Teheran. He did not identify the hostage.

Almost off-handedly, Mr. Kennedy said in an interview with Barbara Walters of
ABC News that one of the hostages had attempted suicide and their captors were
''shaking us down for anything which might be used to help somebody commit
suicide,'' such as belts, razor blades and neckties.

Miss Walters asked, ''One of the hostages tried to commit suicide?'' KENNEDY:
Right.  WALTERS: Do you know which one?  KENNEDY: Yes.  WALTERS: It's nothing
you would...  KENNEDY: Nothing I'd ever want to talk about.  The State
Department declined to comment on Mr. Kennedy's remarks.

---

Black Hostage Reports Abuse

WEST POINT, N.Y., Jan. 26 (AP) -The lone black held hostage in Iran said today
that he was treated ''just like an animal in the zoo,'' but Charles A. Jones Jr.
added that he never lost hope that the United States Government would get him
and 51 other Americans out.

''We were looking for them every day,'' said Mr. Jones, the only black detained
when the Iranians released 13 women and black men at Thanksgiving in 1979. He
did not explain why he had been singled out for continued captivity.

''I was interrogated five times,'' he said, adding that he was ''kicked in the
ribs, had my hands stepped on, had my head bumped up against the wall, a few
other little odds and ends, had a gun put up against my head, was threatened
with having my eyes put out - which they didn't do, thank God.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mr. and Mrs. Moorhead Kennedy

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTS OF HOSTAGE ABUSE SURPRISE CLERICS

BYLINE: By B.DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Some of the American ministers and professors who visited the 52 American
hostages in Teheran last year and returned saying that the hostages seemed
reasonably well-treated have been surprised and disturbed by recent reports to
the contrary.

But the ministers and professorss insist that their original assessments were as
accurate as could be made at the time. The discrepancies now showing up, they
say, probably can be attributed to the limited scope of their early visits, to
possible deception by the Iranian captors and to the fact that some of the
alleged mistreatment occurred after their visits.

''I am quite surprised,'' the Rev. Darrell Rupiper, a Roman Catholic from Omaha,
said on learning of the charges of maltreatment. Father Rupiper, who made two
trips to Teheran last spring, added that he had been so convinced that the
hostages were being well-treated that he had offered to become a hostage himself
in return for the release of a diplomat.

Several ministers said that when they returned to the United States they were
pressed by some of the hostages' relatives to paint a particularly gloomy
picture of things in Teheran.

'People Were Upset With Us'

''They wanted us to be more volatile, more negative,'' the Rev.  Nelson
Thompson, a Methodist from Kansas City, Mo., said over the weekend, recalling
his return from Iran last Easter. ''I felt they were saying that people were
upset with us because we were presenting a view that wasn't as negative as they
wanted.''

A spokesman for the Family Action Liaison Group, the official organization of
the hostages' relatives, said in response to Mr.  Thompson that it was ''just
not conceivable'' that such pressure could have been exerted.

At least one former hostage has already criticized one of the clergymen who
visited Teheran. ''If you see that Reverened Rupiper, spit in his face for me,''
Sgt. James M. Lopez, a marine from Globe, Ariz., told his family in one of his
first phone calls from West Germany. ''Didn't he say everything was peaches and
cream?'' the sergeant asked rhetorically in the call, which was taped and later
replayed for reporters.

A former prisoner of war in North Vietnam, Vice Adm. James B.  Stockdale, has
also spoken out strongly against ministers and others who visited Americans held
prisoner in Hanoi and the hostages in Teheran. Writing over the weekend in The
Washington Post, the retired Navy officer and Medal of Honor recipient called
the visitors ''American finks'' and ''so-called friends on the make.''

Visitors Termed 'Apologists'

Admiral Stockdale also said the visits damaged the prisoners' morale and
self-respect because the visitors were ''necessarily admitted as supplicants, as
apologists.''

While some of those who visited the hostages in Iran have been surprised by
reports of maltreatment, others say they have been more shocked than surprised
because they had always sensed that they might not have been given the full
picture in Teheran.

''We went to conduct religious services, and so what we were able to observe was
obviously limited, and we knew it,'' said the Rev. Dr. William Sloane Coffin Jr.
of the Riverside Church in New York City.

Dr. Sloane, a Presbyterian who visited the hostages with several other clergymen
at Christmastime 1979, added: ''We could only report what we heard and saw at
the time, and when we returned we were careful to say that the hostages 'seemed'
to be in good physical shape. I was very shocked to learn they were abused. But
our visit was limited.''

'Told They Had Been Bound'

Norman Forer, an associate professor of social welfare at the University of
Kansas in Lawrence, said he was both surprised and shocked by the reports of
abuse because he saw ''no signs'' of maltreatment when he visited the hostages
last February.

''There was just no indication, and the Red Cross came out with a similar
report,'' he continued. ''We were told they had been bound earlier. But while we
were there we had no negative indications, although we knew we hadn't seen
everything and everybody. And later, there were those pictures shown in Teheran
of Iranian students being beaten in the streets of Washington.''

Rabbi Hirshel Jaffee of Newburgh, N.Y., who visited the hostages last spring,
said that he was not surprised to hear that the hostages had been abused, adding
that he ''felt'' there was mistreatment during his visit even if he did not
personally observe it or hear of it.

''It was obvious they couldn't speak freely, and so you couldn't say they were
O.K. and I didn't,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Dr. W.F. Caveness, 72, Expert on Head Injuries

SECTION: Section B; Page 19, Column Z; National Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


Dr. William F. Caveness, a neurologist and expert in head injuries, died
Saturday at the U.S. Naval Hospital in Bethesda, Md.  He was 72 years old and
lived in Bethesda.

Dr. Caveness was chief of the Laboratory of Experimental Neurology of the
National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, one
of the National Institutes of Health.

He was also serving as project officer of a recently begun study on head
injuries suffered by military personnel in Vietnam. Dr. Caveness was a retired
captain in the Naval Reserve, having served from 1951 to 1953 in Japan and
aboard American hospital ships in the war in Korea.

From 1948 to 1965, except for his work in the Far East, Dr.  Caveness served as
a staff member of the Neurological Institute at the Columbia-Presbyterian
Medical Center in New York and as an associate professor of clinical neurology
at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University. He left that
post to join the National Institutes of Health in 1965.

Dr. Caveness was born in Zebulon, N.C. He graduated from the University of North
Carolina in 1929. After graduate study at Harvard University, he entered McGill
University's medical school and received his medical degree in 1943.

He is survived by his wife, the former Angela Stampone, and his mother, Corinna
J. Caveness, of Raleigh, N.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Editor Named for Vietnam Series

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


Robert Manning, former editor in chief of The Atlantic Monthly and Assistant
Secretary of State for public affairs under Presidents John F. Kennedy and
Lyndon B. Johnson, will be editor of a 14-volume series on the Vietnam War for
the Boston Publishing Company, a new independent house.

Mr. Manning will head a staff of historians, writers and editors who are already
at work on ''The Vietnam Experience,'' the general title for the series. The
first volume, ''Setting the Stage,'' covering early Vietnam history, will be
published late next spring.

A longtime journalist, Mr. Manning joined The Atlantic Monthly in 1964 and
remained with the magazine until last year. He was also editor in chief of the
company's book division, The Atlantic Monthly Press. Mr. Manning will assume
full-time duties at Boston Publishing on June 1, after completing a term as a
fellow at the Institute for Politics of the John F. Kennedy School of Government
at Harvard University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY JUDGE DISMISSES 3 CHARGES IN GARWOOD TRIAL

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 27


A military judge today dismissed desertion charges against Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood of the Marines but will let a court-martial jury decide the Government's
key charge of collaboration with the enemy.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, the only Vietnam era serviceman to be charged for
his actions as a prisoner of war, had asked for a directed verdict of acquittal,
contending that the experiences of the American hostages in Iran added
credibility to his assertions that he had been driven insane by torture.

In a ruling that appeared to surprise defense and prosecution attorneys alike,
Col. R.E. Switzer dropped charges that accused Private Garwood of desertion in
time of war, soliciting American troops to throw down their arms, and
maltreatment of a fellow prisoner of war by verbally abusing him.

He let stand the collaboration charge and a charge that Private Garwood had
struck an American prisoner of war.

Life Sentence Still Possible

A military jury of five Marine officers will begin deliberating those charges
next week. If convicted, Private Garwood could still be sentenced to life
imprisonment, despite the dropping of the other charges.

Colonel Switzer said in an interview that the jurors ''could not have found the
accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt'' on the dropped charges, even if all
the evidence was considered ''in a light most favorable to the Government.''

Private Garwood, who has maintained a stoic demeanor in the course of the 28-day
trial, also appeared surprised by the ruling. He stood up, smiled and turned to
embrace Donna Long, an activist in behalf of prisoners of war who has been his
constant companion since he arrived at Camp Lejeune last year.

Private Garwood's attorneys shielded him from reporters, but one of them said
that his reaction to the judge's ruling ''was one of relief.''

Judge Expresses 'Sympathy'

Colonel Switzer prefaced his ruling by saying that he had a ''great deal of
sympathy for the accused,'' but he said that he could not take that into
consideration in making his ruling.

Private Garwood disappeared near Danang in 1965 and reappeared in Hanoi in 1979,
saying that he wanted to return to the United States.  Other former prisoners of
war accused him of joining forces with the enemy, wearing their uniform and
carrying Vietcong weapons.

The defense has maintained throughout the court-martial that Private Garwood, a
native of Adams, Ind., was driven insane by Vietcong torture and is not
responsible for his actions in Vietnam.

John C. Lowe, the chief defense attorney, asked Colonel Switzer earlier in the
day to dismiss all charges against the marine. He maintained that reports of
mental problems of some former Iranian hostages supported defense contentions
that Private Garwood had been driven insane.

''The symptoms they have described could very well be Bobby Garwood talking,''
Mr. Lowe said.  ''There will be no ticker-tape parades for Bobby Garwood, there
will be no medals from the president,'' Mr. Lowe said. ''There will just be a
long road back to humanity through years of psychotherapy.  Let there be no
doubt about that.''

Mr. Lowe also said that the marine's acquittal would improve rather than harm
military discipline. ''It will show that the Marine Corps is not insensitive to
the fact that a marine who is driven insane by torture at the hands of the enemy
is not going to be left by the wayside in the name of order and discipline,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF REMARKS BY PRESIDENT AND LAINGEN AT WHITE HOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


Following is a transcript of remarks yesterday by President Reagan and L. Bruce
Laingen, former charge d'affaires at the United States Embassy in Teheran, at
ceremonies at the White House, as recorded by The New York Times:

Remarks by Reagan

Thank you. Thank you again. Cardinal Cooke, thank you, I think, for delivering
this weather. We had been promised showers; we're most grateful. Welcome to the
ambassadors of our friends and neighboring countries who are here today.

And I can think of no better way to let you know how Nancy and I feel about your
presence here today than to say on behalf of us, of the Vice President and
Barbara, the senators, the members of Congress, the members of the Cabinet and
all of our fellow citizens, these simple words: Welcome home.

You'll be seated, please. You are home. And believe me, you're welcome.  If my
remarks were a sermon, my text would be lines from the 126th Psalm: ''We were
like those who dream. Now our mouth is filled with laughter and our tongue with
shouts of joy. The Lord has done great things for us. We are glad.''

Nation Shared in Ordeal

You've come home to a people who for 444 days suffered the pain of your
imprisonment, prayed for your safety and, most importantly, shared your
determination that the spirit of free men and women is not a fit subject for
barter.

You've represented under great stress the highest traditions of public service.
Your conduct is symbolic of the millions of professional diplomats, military
personnel and others who have rendered service to their country.

We're now aware of the conditions under which you were imprisoned.  Though now
is not the time to review every abhorrent detail of your cruel confinement,
believe me, we know what happened. Truth may be a rare commodity today in Iran;
it's alive and well in America.

By no choice of your own, you've entered the ranks of those who throughout our
history have undergone the ordeal of imprisonment - the crew of the Pueblo, the
prisoners in two World Wars, and in Korea and Vietnam. And like those others,
you are special to us.

You fulfilled your duty as you saw it. And now, like the others, thank God,
you're home, and our hearts are full of gratitude.

Praise for Sergeant Lopez

I'm told that Sergeant Lopez here put up a sign in his cell, a sign that
normally would have been torn down by those guards. But this one was written in
Spanish, and his guards didn't know that ''Viva la roja, blanca y azul'' means
''Long live the red, white and blue.''

They may not understand what that means in Iran, but we do, Sergeant Lopez. And
you've filled our hearts with pride. Muchas gracias.

Two days ago Nancy and I met with your families here at the White House. We know
that you were lonely during that dreadful period of captivity, but you were
never alone. Your wives and children, your mothers and dads, your brothers and
sisters were so full of prayers and love for you that whether you were conscious
of it or not, it must have sustained you during some of the worst times. No
power on earth could prevent them from doing that.

Their courage, endurance and strength were of heroic measure, and they're
admired by all of us.  But to get down now to more mundane things - in case you
have a question about your personal futures, you'll probably have less time to
rest than you'd like. While you were on your way to Germany, I signed a hiring
freeze in the Federal Government. In other words, we need you, your country
needs you, and your bosses are panting to have you back on the job.

Now, I'll not be so foolish as to say forget what you've been through; you never
will. But turn the page and look ahead. And do so knowing that for all who serve
their country, whether in the Foreign Service, the military or as private
citizens, freedom is indivisible. Your freedom and your individual dignity are
much cherished.

'Let Terrorists Be Aware'

Those henceforth in the representation of this nation will be accorded every
means of protection that America can offer. Let terrorists be aware that when
the rules of international behavior are violated, our policy will be one of
swift and effective retribution.

We hear it said that we live in an era of limit to our powers.  Well, let it
also be understood, there are limits to our patience.  Now I'm sure that you'll
want to know that with us here today are families of the eight heroic men who
gave their lives in the attempt to effect your rescue. Greater glory hath no man
than that he lay down his life for another.

And with us also are Colonel Beckwith and some of the men who did return from
that mission. We ask God's special healing for those who suffered wounds and
discomfort, to those who lost loved ones. To them, to you and to your families,
again, welcome from all America.  And thank you for making us proud to be
Americans.

And now, ladies and gentlemen, I call on, to speak for this wonderful group of
returnees, Bruce Laingen, deputy chief of mission in Teheran. Mr. Laingen.

Remarks by Laingen

Mr. President, Mrs. Reagan, members of the Cabinet, Vice President and Mrs. Bush
- I think I've got that out of order of priority in protocol terms -members of
the diplomatic corps who are here, and all you beautiful people out there, I'm
not sure I'm capable of this, after that emotionally draining but beautiful
experience that all of us have just had on the streets of this magnificent city.

Mr. President, I hope you were watching TV because I don't think any of us
Americans have ever seen anything quite like it, quite so spontaneous, quite so
beautiful, in terms of the best qualities of our people. And we are deeply
grateful for it.

Mr. President, our flight to freedom is now complete, thanks to the prayers and
good will of countless millions of people, not just in this country but all
around the world; and the assistance of those many countries and governments who
understood the values and principles that were at stake in this crisis; and the
love and affection of our countrymen from all those tens of thousands out there
on the streets today, to that lady that we saw standing on a hillside as we came
in from Andrews, all alone with no sign, no one around her, holding her hand to
her heart; the enveloping love and affection of small-town America of the kind
we witnessed in that wonderful two-day stop in New York State - West Point and
its environs; and last but not least on this flight to freedom, the United
States Air Force on Freedom One.

Families Are 'the Real Heroes'

Mr. President, I give you now 52 Americans, supplemented by a 53d today -
Richard Queen sitting over here - overjoyed in reunion with our families: the
real heroes in this crisis.

Fifty-three Americans proud to rejoin their professional colleagues who had made
this flight to freedom earlier: our six colleagues who came here with the great
cooperation and friendship of our Canadian friends, and our 13 who came earlier.

I give you now 53 Americans proud, as I said earlier today, to record their
undying respect and affection for the families of those brave eight men who gave
their lives so that we might be free. The 53 of us proud today, this afternoon,
also to see and to meet with some of those families, and Colonel Beckwith and
some of those that came back; 53 Americans who will always have a love affair
with this country, and who join with you in a prayer of thanksgiving for the way
in which this crisis has strengthened the spirit and resilience and strength
that is the mark of a true, truly free, society.

Mr. President, we've seen a lot of signs along the road, here and up in New
York. They are marvelous signs, as is the spirit and enthusiasm that accompanies
this, what we call, what we have been calling a celebration of freedom. They are
signs that have not been ordered; they are spontaneous, sincere signs that
reflect the true feelings of the hearts of those that hold them -even those, I
suppose, like ''I.R.S. Welcomes You,'' which we saw today as we came into town,
and another one that said, ''The Government Workers Welcome You Back to Work'' -
well, we're ready.

'Best Things in Life Are Free'

There was another sign that said -and I think that says it as well as any -the
best, as far as we're concerned, ''The Best Things in Life Are Free.'' But even
better than that was a sign that we saw as we left West Point today, along a
superhighway up there that someone had hastily put up, ''And the World Will Be
Better for This.'' And we pray, Mr. President, that this will be so.

Mr. President, in very simple words that come from the hearts of all of us, it
is good to be back. Thank you, America, and God bless all of you. Thank you very
much.

REAGAN: Thank you. This is a flag, in this case bearing your name, and it is a
symbol I will give to you now because all the others - you will each receive one
when we get inside the building and each one of you will have a flag symbolic of
the 53 that are here, in your honor.

And now - Nancy, come on up here. I think now a fit ending for all of this would
be for all of us to participate in singing ''God Bless America.''

REAGAN: Good night. Thank you. God bless you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 28, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


International
Indonesia's worst ship disaster was reported by officials who said that more
than 500 people were missing after a passenger vessel caught fire in a storm and
sank. The officials said that more than 500 people had been saved, but that
rescue efforts were hampered by heavy seas and rain. (Page A1, Col. 1.)
Strikes erupted throughout Poland amid signs that the leadership of the
independent labor movement no longer controlled local union chapters. The most
serious stoppage occurred at Bielsko-Biala, near the Czechoslovak border, where
a general strike affecting 110 factories was called to force the ouster of local
officials. (A1:2.)
A Soviet-U.S. clash over human rights took place at the Madrid conference on
human rights and cooperation in Europe. Washington accused Moscow of new
repression against dissidents, and the Soviet delegate hinted that the 1975
Helsinki accords might be imperiled if the conference was not followed by one on
disarmament. (A2:3-6.)
U.S. policy at the U.N. was denounced by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. In an
article in Commentary magazine, the New York Democrat asserted that United
States votes at the United Nations had contributed to making Israel ''an outlaw
state'' and had undermined the Camp David accords. One man criticized in the
article termed the charges ''nonsense.'' (A3:1-3.)
National
''Swift and effective retribution'' for attacks on American Government employees
overseas was vowed by President Reagan as he welcomed home the freed hostages in
an emotional ceremony on the South Lawn of the White House. Earlier, thousands
of citizens cheered the 52 Americans in a motorcade through Washington. (A1:6.)
The ex-hostages spoke with reporters at their first formal news conference since
their release a week earlier. Forty-one of the 52 Americans took part in the
meeting at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y. They gave some
new insights into their 14 months of captivity in Iran but avoided substantial
discussion of some aspects of their ordeal. They made it clear they did not wish
to discuss their treatment at length. (A1:5.)
Contradictory medical reports about the freed hostages have created confusion
about the state of their mental health. The confusion left the impression that
the 11 former captives who did not attend the news conference at West Point were
among those described by the White House as suffering from ''severe'' mental
problems. (A16:3-4.)
Iran's eagerness to resolve the crisis over the hostages was revealed last
September when Teheran alerted Washington in advance of Ayatollah Khomeini's
statement outlining for the first time Iran's four conditions for freeing the
Americans. The chief American negotiator disclosed that Iran had acted to insure
that Washington would send a representative to a secret rendezvous in Bonn with
a relative of the Ayatollah. (A1:3-4.)
A Cabinet choice was defended by F.B.I. officials. In testimony before a Senate
committee, they said that an ''exhaustive'' investigation had failed to
corroborate allegations by underworld informers about purported illegal and
improper activities by Raymond J. Donovan, the Secretary of Labor-designate. He
is the only Reagan Cabinet nominee who has not been confirmed. (A1:1-3.)
A unionization effort failed in the rural South. For the third time in seven
months, workers in Athens, Ala., rejected a bid to be represented by the United
Automobile Workers at the nation's largest nonunion plant of the General Motors
Corporation. (A6:1.)
An artificial heart was approved for its first use in a human by the University
of Utah's College of Medicine. The device must also be approved by the Food and
Drug Administration for an attempt to save a human life. (A10:3-5.)
A dismissal of desertion charges against Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines
was granted by a military judge, but he ruled that a court-martial jury should
decide the Government's key charge that the private had collaborated with the
enemy during the Vietnam War.  (A7:1-3.)
Evangelical political gains were hailed by conservative religious leaders, who
exhorted their followers to press their fight for fundamentalist values. The
Rev. Jerry Falwell, head of the Moral Majority, said that his organization had
achieved its most speedy growth since many of the candidates who backed its
moral stands won in the November elections. (A8:3-4.)
Metropolitan
Jean S. Harris took the stand at her trial, describing to a jury in Westchester
County Court the love she said she felt for Dr. Herman Tarnower, whom she is
accused of having murdered. She also told of how her personal life began to
unravel in the year before the fatal shooting. (A1:1-2.)
Employers would receive tax credits for setting up child-care centers at or near
their plants and offices under a plan announced by key legislators in the New
York State Assembly and Senate. The plan was approved unanimously by an Assembly
committee and was given a good chance of approval in the Senate. (B7:1-3.)
New fire-safety legislation will be sought by a panel advising Governor Carey.
The proposal would require operators of public facilities to read an
announcement pointing out exits and emergency procedures at all gatherings of
more than 20 persons. (B1:6.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LESLIE GELB TO REJOIN THE TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 174 words


Leslie H. Gelb, a reporter and former executive with the State and Defense
Departments, has been appointed national security correspondent in the
Washington bureau of The New York Times, A.M.  Rosenthal, the newspaper's
executive editor, announced yesterday.

Mr. Gelb, now a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace in Washington, will assume the position in midApril. He will write about
the whole range of national security affairs.

From 1973 to 1977 Mr. Gelb was a diplomatic correspondent for The Times. Earlier
he had been in the Defense Department, starting in 1967 as deputy director of
the policy planning staff, becoming its director and eventually directing the
Vietnam task force that produced the documents later known as the Pentagon
Papers.

Mr. Gelb served under Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance from January 1977 to
July 1979 as director of the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military
Affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Leslie H. Gelb

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Offers to Withdraw Some Troops in Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 28


Vietnam said today that it was ready to withdraw some troops from Cambodia under
certain conditions and proposed a regional conference involving the countries of
Indochina and the non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia.

The proposals were made in a statement at the end of a two-day meeting of the
foreign ministers of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia in Ho Chi Minh City, the Hanoi
radio reported.

It said Vietnam was prepared to withdraw an unspecified number of its troops
from Cambodia if Thailand stopped making territory available to Cambodian
guerrillas opposed to the Vietnamese-supported Phnom Penh Government, stopped
giving them food and weapons and concentrated them in camps far from the
Thai-Cambodian border.

Thailand says it is neutral toward the conflict in Cambodia and denies giving
any assistance to guerrillas fighting the Vietnamese troops there.

The Hanoi radio said the three Indochinese countries also offered to attend a
regional conference with the members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations -Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood's Defense Rejected In Plea on Certain Charges

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 28


Col. R.E. Switzer of the Marine Corps, presiding over the court-martial of Pfc.
Robert R. Garwood, today refused a defense request to dismiss the remaining
charges, saying a jury of Vietnam veterans should be allowed to consider his
fate.

Colonel Switzer, who yesterday dismissed desertion charges, decided that the
prosecution had presented enough evidence to allow the charge of collaboration
with the enemy and another of striking a fellow American prisoner of war in
Vietnam, to go to the jury.

He rejected defense arguments that Private Garwood had been charged under the
wrong law. The defense said he should have been charged with aiding the enemy,
rather than collaborating.

It was reported in Washington that, after his trial was resolved, Private
Garwood would be called to testify before the House Subcomittee on Southeast
Asian-Pacific affairs about knowledge he says he has about other Americans who
remained in Vietnam after 1973.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'DUBIOUS' REFORM IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 452 words


To the Editor:

I congratulate you on the extensive coverage you gave to the wartorn country of
El Salvador on Jan. 6.  In three news reports, an Op-Ed page article (by
Lawrence R. Simon and James C. Stephens Jr.) and an editorial, The Times
detailed the murder of two American lawyers by ''the extreme right,'' the murder
of ''leftists'' by Government military forces, the ''outrage'' of White House
spokesmen at the loss of American lives (the report of 9,000 Salvadorans killed
so far this year goes by nearly unnoticed) and the vow by Republican members of
the Foreign Relations Committee to lease helicopters to the Salvadoran Army
despite the current ban on military aid to that country.

Of all those discussions, I found that of the Salvadoran landreform project most
interesting.  In your editorial, you exhort the U.S. to ''press forward'' with a
program which has cost American taxpayers (according to the Op-Ed article) $50
million and which needs $425 million to continue.

The costs of such a program seem to outweigh the benefits, since, as the
articles point out, the rightist death squads and the wealthy landowners would
love to reverse the reform; the state security forces have assassinated more
than 20 of the reform field workers, and the peasants - most of whom have been
labeled ''leftists'' simply because they deplore the indiscriminate raping,
torturing and killing of their kin - see the reform as ''a cruel hoax intended
to buy time and divert attention from the counterinsurgency campaigns
terrorizing the population'' (to quote the Op-Ed article).

If the Reagan Administration truly intends to cut costs, it should stop forcing
U.S. dollars down the throats of people who simply do not want this kind of aid.

Any intervention by the U.S. in the affairs of El Salvador has serious
drawbacks. By supporting the military, we would have a direct hand in killing
the people. By supporting the anti-Government forces, we would add to the
violence and destruction of what can already be seen as a terrible civil war.

There can be no neutral intervention into the affairs of another nation, since
the stronger side is likely to use it to its own advantage. Therefore, I find
your call for ''perseverance'' in pushing the land reform quite troubling.

More troubling, however, is your reason for wanting the U.S. to keep pumping
millions of dollars (and now American lives) into this dubious effort. You say
that our perseverance ''is the only fitting memorial to the many who have now
died for it.'' Your intentions may be good, but you may recall that the very
same reasoning was used to continue another costly U.S. effort - in Vietnam.
EDWARD J. LAAKE, Cincinnati, Jan. 8, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCIPT OF PRESIDENT'S FIRST NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC TOPICS

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4537 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference yesterday in
Washington, his first since becoming President, as recorded by The New York
Times:

OPENING STATEMENT

How do you do, I have a brief opening statement here before I take your
questions.  Yesterday, Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan sent to the
Congress a request to raise the debt ceiling to $985 billion. This represents a
dramatic jump of $50 billion over the previous debt ceiling.

The Administration took this action with great regret because it's clear that
the massive deficits our Government runs is one of the root causes of our
profound economic problems. And for too many years this process has come too
easily for us.

We've lived beyond our means and then financed our extravagance on the backs of
the American people. The clear message I received in the election campaign is
that we must gain control of this inflationary monster.

Let me briefly review, for the American people, what we've already done: Within
moments of taking the oath of office, I placed a freeze on the hiring of
civilian employees in the Federal Government. Two days later I issued an order
to cut down on Government travel, reduced the number of consultants to the
Government, stopped the procurement of certain items, and called on my
appointees to exercise restraint in their own offices.

Yesterday, I announced the elimination of remaining Federal controls on U.S. oil
production and marketing.  Today, I'm announcing two more actions to reduce the
size of the Federal Government: First, I'm taking major steps toward the
elimination of the Council on Wage and Price Stability. This council has been a
failure; it has been totally ineffective in controlling inflation and it's
imposed unnecessary burdens on labor and business. Therefore, I am now ending
the wage and price program of the council. I am eliminating the staff that
carries out its wage-pricing activities and I'm asking Congress to rescind its
budget, saving the taxpayer some $1.5 million a year.

My second decision today is a directive ordering key Federal agencies to freeze
pending regulations for 60 days. This action gives my Administration time to
start a new regulatory oversight process and also prevents certain last-minute
regulatory decisions of the previous Administration - the so-called midnight
regulations - from taking effect without proper review and approval.

All of us should remember that the Federal Government is not some mysterious
institution comprised of buildings, files and paper. The people are the
Government. What we create we ought to be able to control.

I do not intend to make wildly skyrocketing deficits and runaway Government
simple facts of life in this Administration. As I've said, our ills have come
upon us over several decades and they will not go away in days, or weeks, or
months.

But I want the American people to know that we have begun. Now, I'll be happy to
take your questions.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Policy Toward Iran

Q. Mr. President, will your policy toward Iran be one of revenge or
reconciliation? And will the United States honor the recent commitments to Iran,
especially since you approved of most of them during the campaign?

A. Well, I'm not - certainly not thinking of revenge. And I don't know whether
reconciliation would be possible with the present Government or absence of a
government in Iran. I think that the United States will honor the obligations.
As a matter of fact, the most important of those were already put into effect by
the preceding Administration in negotiating the release.

We are, however, studying, because there were four major agreements and there
were nine executive orders, and we are studying thoroughly what is a pretty
complex matter, we've discovered, with regard to whether they are in keeping
with international and national - our own national laws.

And so I won't be able to really answer your questions on specifics until we've
completed that study.

Extent of Budget Cuts

Q. Mr. President, the Treasury Secretary said Monday that your budget cuts will
be of a much higher magnitude than people people thought they would be. You said
they would be across-the-board. Now that you've had some time to study the
budget, can you say where these - where these cuts will be made and what
programs will feel the cuts the most?

A. They'll be made every place. What we meant by - maybe acrossthe-board was the
wrong decision, although it describes it - what I meant was that no one is
exempt from being looked at for areas in which we can make cuts in spending.
And, yes, they probably are going to be bigger than anyone has ever attempted;
because this Administration did not come here to be a caretaker Government and
just hope we could go along the same way, and maybe do it a little better.

We think the time has come where there has to be a change of direction of this
country. And it's going to begin with reducing Government spending.

Retribution for Terrorists

Q. Mr. President, in your welcoming address to the freed Americans, you sounded
a warning of swift and effective retribution in future terrorist situations.
What kind of action are you prepared to take to back up this hard rhetoric?

A. Well, that's a question that I don't think you - you can, or should, answer
in - as to specifics. This is a big and it's a powerful nation. It has a lot of
options open to it. And to try and specify now just particularly what you should
do, I think is one of the things that's been wrong.

People have gone to bed in some of these countries that have done these things
to us in the past, confident that they can go to sleep waking up in the morning
and the United States wouldn't have taken any action. What I meant by that
phrase was that anyone who does these things - violates our rights - in the
future is not going to be able to go to bed with that confidence.

Strategic Arms Treaty

Q. Mr. President, you campaigned rather vociferously against the SALT II treaty,
saying it was slanted slightly toward the Soviet Union, and yet I noticed your
Secretary of State, Mr. Haig, now seems to suggest that for the time being at
least the United States will abide by the limits of the SALT II treaty, and he
hopes the Soviet Union will too. How long do you intend that the United States
should abide by the terms of a SALT agreement which you consider inequitable?
And what do you consider its greatest inequities to be?

A. Well, the SALT treaty first of all, I think permits a continued buildup on
both sides of strategic nuclear weapons but for - the main thing authorizes an
immediate increase in large numbers of Soviet warheads. There is no verification
as to the number of warheads on the missile and no method for us to do this.

I don't think that a treaty - SALT means strategic arms limitation -that
actually permits a buildup on both sides of strategic nuclear weapons can
properly be called that. And I have said that when we can - and I am willing for
our people to go into negotiations, or let me say discussions leading to
negotiations, that we should start negotiating on the basis of trying to effect
an actual reduction in the numbers of nuclear weapons. That would then be real
strategic arms limitation.

And I happen to believe, also, that you can't sit down at a table and just
negotiate that unless you take into account - in consideration at that table -
all the other things that are going on. In other words, I believe in linkage.

Soviet Intentions

Q. Mr. President, what do you see as the long-range intentions of the Soviet
Union? Do you think, for instance, the Kremlin is bent on world domination that
might lead to a continuation of the cold war?  Or do you think that under other
circumstances detente is possible?

A. Well, so far detente's been a one-way street the Soviet Union has used to
pursue its own aims. I don't have to think of an answer as to what I think their
intentions are: They have repeated it.

I know of no leader of the Soviet Union, since the revolution and including the
present leadership, that has not more than once repeated in the various
Communist Congresses they hold, their determination that their goal must be the
promotion of world revolution and a one world Socialist or Communist state -
whichever word you want to use.

Now, as long as they do that and as long as they, at the same time, have openly
and publicly declared that the only morality they recognize is what will further
their cause: meaning they reserve unto themselves the right to commit any crime;
to lie; to cheat, in order to obtain that and that is moral, not immoral, and we
operate on a different set of standards, I think when you do business with them
- even at a detente - you keep that in mind.

Let me take someone - the young lady.

Corporate Deals in Iran

Q. Mr. President, What's your opinion of American companies that now want to
resume business with Iran?  A. My opinion of American companies that want to
resume business with Iran? I hope they're going to do it by long distance. We
wouldn't want to go back to having just a different cast of characters with the
same show going on.

I can understand that, particularly in the field of energy, their wanting to do
that. But we are - we're urging that people think, long and hard, before they
travel to Iran, because we don't think they're safety can be guaranteed there.

U.S. Prisoners in Abroad

Q. Mr. President, three Americans are still incarcerated in Vietnam: Can you
tell us of the status of their cases and whether the Administration is doing
anything to get them back?

A. I have told our people about those three - they knew about them, of course.
But I've told them that yes, we continue. And we want to get them back also.

Now, I know I've been staying down front here too much, I've got to prove I can
look at the back rows there, too.

Hiring of Minorities

Q. Mr. President, some administrative officials have promised adherence to the
civil rights laws which are on the books but there has been considerable
discussion about dismantling the affirmative action aspect of - that give those
laws to some people greater meaning, and I'm wondering, Mr. President, if there
will be a retreat in the Federal Government on the Government's advocacy of
affirmative action programs generally, and in Federal hiring of blacks and
Hispanics, specifically?

A. No, there will be no retreat. This Administration is going to be dedicated to
equality. I think we've made great progress in the civil rights field.

I think there are some things, however, that have - that may not be as useful as
they once were, or that may even be distorted in the practice: such as some
affirmative action programs becoming quota systems.

And I'm old enough to remember when quotas existed in the United States for the
purpose of discrimination. And I don't want to see that happen again.

Natural Gas Decontrol

Q. Mr. President, when and how will you seek the decontrol of natural gas
prices?  A. Well, we haven't dealt with that problem yet: We thought oil would
do for a starter. But I can't really answer your question. That will be a matter
for discussion in future Cabinet meetings.

Grain Restrictions

Q. Mr. President, during the campaign you repeatedly talked about the unfairness
of the grain embargo, as you saw it: Do you have second thoughts now or will you
lift the grain embargo?

A. Well, with the grain embargo, my quarrel with it from the first was that I
thought it was asking only one group of Americans to participate - the farmers.

It was not - you only have two choices with an embargo: You either lift it or
you broaden it. And we have not made a decision, except that at the request of
Secretary of Agriculture John Block, I have taken the matter of the embargo out
of, you might say, the discussions of the National Security Council, and it,
next week, is going to -is on the agenda for a full Cabinet meeting as to what
our course will be. So, I can't answer what we do about it until next week.

As I say, it was asking one group of Americans to bear the burden and, I have
always thought, was more of a kind of gesture than it was a - something real.

Atlanta Child Killings

Q. Mr. President, what will you do to honor the request by Federal officials -
from Atlanta officials - for you and the Federal Government to intervene in the
Atlanta case of 17 missing black children?

A. Just a few minutes before I came in here that message was handed to me - that
the Atlanta Mayor wanted to talk. And we are going to get someone in touch with
him immediately.

Now, you recognize, of course, that possibly civil rights would be the only
basis upon which we could have any jurisdiction down there in this - for F.B.I.,
for example, on any other thing, there's been no evidence of crossing state
lines or anything. And yet we want to be helpful because that is a most tragic
case. And so we will be meeting on that very shortly.

Latin America Policy

Q. Mr. President, when the Jamaican Prime Minister was here yesterday, Mr.
Seaga, he suggested publicly that now be a good time for you, as the new
President, to have a foreign policy initiative for Latin America and for the
Caribbean. Do you intend to follow that suggestion? And, if so, how would your
policies differ from those of former President Carter?

A. Well I think we've seen a great reverse in the Caribbean situation and it
came about through Prime Minister Seaga's election.  It was the turnover -or
turnaround - of a nation that had gone - well, certainly in the direction of the
Communist movement; kind of a - it was a protege of Castro - and his election
was great - greeted by me with great enthusiasm because it represented a people
by their vote having experienced that kind of government turned another
direction.

And I think this opens the door for us to have a policy in the Mediterranean of
bringing them back in - those countries that might have started in that
direction - or keeping them in the Western world and the free world. And so, we
are looking forward to cooperation with Prime Minister Seaga.

Q. Mr. President, I think you meant Caribbean in that last answer.  A. What did
I say? Q. Mediterranean. A. Oh. I meant Caribbean. I'm sorry.

Draft Registration

Q. What do you intend to do, Mr. President, about the draft registration law
that was passed during President Carter's Administration? And in view of your
opposition to it in the campaign, how is that consistent with your avowed
intention to strengthen our national defenses?

A. Well, to answer the last part first: I just didn't feel that the advance
registration, on all the evidence we could get, would materially speed up the
process if an emergency required the draft.  It did create a bureaucracy; it
caused, certainly, some unrest and dissatisfaction. And we were told that it
would only be a matter of several days, if we had to call up in a draft, that we
could do that several days earlier with the registration than we would be able
to if there was no registration at all.

We - this is one that's - something to be looked at further down - I've only
been here nine days and most of these nine days have been spent in Cabinet
meetings on the economy, getting ready to send our package up to The Hill. And
so I just have to tell you that we will be dealing with that - meet with that,
and make a decision on what to do with it down the road someplace.

Timing of Tax Cuts

Q. Mr. President, speaking of your economic package, could you give us your
thoughts on an effective date for the tax cuts that you plan to recommend in
your economic recovery plan and specifying whether you prefer one effective date
for business and another for personal cuts, or whether you'd like to combine
them?

A. I'd like to see it all go forward all at once. As to date, I know there's
been talk of whether it should be retroactive back, or whether it should be as
of that minute. That to me isn't as important as getting, for individuals, the
principle of a 10 percent cut for each of three years in place, and the business
taxes also, so that we can all look forward with some confidence of stability in
a program.

And we're going to strive for that and I can't really answer you about what the
date will be until we submit the package.

Punishment of Iran

Q. Mr. President, I know you said earlier that you were not thinking of revenge
toward Iran, but does that preclude any punishment whatsoever for what they've
done?

A. Well, again, I have to ask your forbearance and wait until we've finished our
study of this whole situation, as to what we're going to do. I don't think any
of us have a friendly feeling toward the people that have done what they have
done. But, I think it's too complex for me to answer until we've had time to
really study this.

Q. One follow-up: Are you - would you go so far as to encourage American
businesses to resume commercial trade with Iran?  A. At this point, no.

Abolition of e Departments

Q. Mr. President, do you intend to follow through with your campaign pledges to
abolish the Departments of Energy and Education?

A. I have not retreated fro that at all. Yes. The process, however, that I have
asked for is for both Secretary Bell of Education and Secretary Jim Edwards of
Energy to reorganize, to produce the most effective streamlining of the
department - of their departments -that they can.

In education, to look at the appropriate role of the Federal Government in
education - if there is one. And to report back and then we will decide, making
our recommendations.

Much the same thing holds true with the Department of Energy. The reason for
this being that while they were new Cabinet-level agencies they incorporated
Government functions and programs that had been going on in them when they came
under that umbrella.

And we have to find out which of those functions that have been a Federal
Government function continue and where they would best fit.  But yes, I'm
determined that - and I believe - that it was wrong to have created the two
agencies to begin with.

Dairy Price Supports

Q. Mr. President, during the campaign, your chief farm spokesman put you on
record as favoring, for the time being, continuation of the dairy price support
level where it had been. Within the last couple of days your Budget Director and
your Secretary of Agriculture have indicated that the dairy program is too
expensive and should be cut back: Could you reconcile those differences of
approach for us?

A. Well, I could only tell you that this, again, is something to wait for the
next Cabinet meeting. All of these things are worked about between the
appropriate Cabinet members and our Director of Office and - of O.M.B. - and
then they come to the Cabinet for full discussion, so that others who have an
interest in this can have their input.

And so I can't answer you, because that has not yet come to the Cabinet.

Iran-Soviet Stability

Q. Mr. President, Iran and the Soviet Union share a long border in a region
vital to the future and stability of the world. Given the anti-U.S. sentiment
there, how do you best think the United States can insure the stability of the
region?

A. Of the - you said Iran, the border between Iran and the Soviet Union.  Well,
I think one of the first things that has to happen is - for stability -has got
to be in Iran itself to establish a government that can speak as a government
for Iran.

And part of our problem in all these long 444 days has been the inability of
anyone, seemingly, to speak for that nation; to have a government.

Now, I think that any country would want to help another if they really showed
an intent to have a government that would abide by international law and do what
they could to help them in that regard.

But until such thing appears apparent there, I don't know that there's anything
we can do.

Retaliation Against Iran

Q. Mr. President, if it's your intention to signal the world that this country
will respond with swift retribution in cases of international terrorism in the
future, why is it your policy not to retaliate against Iran?

A. Well, what good would just revenge do and what form would that take? I don't
think revenge is worthy of us. On the other hand, I don't think we act as if
this never happened and I'd rather wait until, as I say, we complete this thing.


Hispanic Appointments

Q. Mr. President, still I got impressed when I listened the other day: Viva la
roja, la blanca y azul. Mr. President, isn't it true that when Hispanics are
given the opportunity to serve this country they serve the country with
experience and with heart? In view of this - on the experience part -when are
you going to appoint Hispanic-Americans to serve in your Administration's
policy-making positions?

A. We are definitely recruiting and definitely trying to do that. I want an
Administration that will be representative of the country as a whole. And
please, don't judge us on the fact that we have only picked a hundred: There
will be 1,700 positions to fill in the executive branch and the White House
senior staff and staff.

And the personnel committee in our Administration that is talent hunting and
looking for these people contains members of the minorities - Hispanics - and
even a majority of women. And we want that very much so don't judge us now by
the tip of the iceberg: Wait till it's all in.

Federal Reserve Policy

Q. Mr. President. Yes, thank you. Mr. President, Paul Volcker, the chairman of
the Federal Reserve Board, has been implementing policies that are exactly
opposite in basic thrust from what you recommend. He has been squeezing the
productive sector of the economy in favor of the speculative sector. Now, I
mean, frankly, Mr.  President, there are important sections of the American
economy that are about to go under and won't even have an opportunity to benefit
from the programs you're putting forward because of the Federal Reserve
policies.

I have a two-part question: First of all, do you think that objective economic
conditions justify the interest-rate levels we now have? And I don't mean for
your answer to imply a criticism of the Fed, it's just an objective question.

And the second question is: Are you concerned that there might be a sabotage, so
to speak, of your policies by programs that the Federal Reserve might be putting
forward?

A. No I'm not concerned that there would be sabotage. I've met with Mr. Volcker,
and not with the intention of trying to dictate; because it is an independent
agency and I respect that. But I think that we have to face the fact that
interest rates are not in themselves a cause of inflation - they're a
consequence. And when you have, as we have had, double-digit inflation
back-to-back for two solid years now - the last time that happened was in World
War I. And when you have double-digit inflation there that way, there is no
question that interest rates are going to have to go up and follow that
inflation rate. And so the answer to the interest rates is going to be our
program of reducing Government spending, tied to the reduction of the tax rates
that we've spoken of, to bring down inflation; and you'll find that interest
rates come down.

We do want from the Fed, and would ask for, a moderate policy of money supply
increasing relative to legitimate growth. All of these things have to work
together. But I don't think that the Fed just deliberately raises interest
rates.

The reason that we've got to tie taxes and we have to cut - tie spending
together, is we, for all these decades, we've talked and we've talked about
solving these problems and we've acted as if the two were separate. So one year
we fight inflation, and then unemployment goes up. And then the next year we
fight unemployment, and inflation goes up. It's time to keep the two together
where they belong - and that's what we're going to do.

Conservative Unhappiness

Q. Mr. President, a number of conservative leaders - among them some of your
staunchest and most durable supporters, such as Senator Jesse Helms, are very
concerned about some of your appointments. The basis of the concern is that many
people who have been longtime Reaganites and supporters of yours do not seem to
be able to get jobs, like Bill Van Cleeve, who played a key role on your defense
transition team, whereas other individuals who have not supported you throughout
the years, or your philosophy, like Mr. Terrel Bell, the Secretary of Education,
who was for the establishment of the department which you said you wanted to
abolish, and Mr. Frank Carlucci, destined to be Secretary of Defense, who was
not a supporter of yours, that they have gotten jobs.

My question is: why are these individuals in your Administration; why is it, Mr.
Van Cleeve, and how much of a problem do you think this conservative
dissatisfaction with your appointments is?

A. The only problem that I've had that is more difficult than knowing which
hand-raised to point to here -and believe me it bothers me, I go home feeling
guilty on all the hands that I couldn't point to - the only problem greater I've
had is in the selection of personnel.

Now in many instances, some of the people that have been mentioned, whose names
have been mentioned by others, did not want a position in the Administration,
helped, worked very hard, and wanted nothing for it. But you also have to
recognize, there aren't that many positions. After all, look how many votes I
had. You can't reward them all.

Q. Thank you, Mr. President.  A. Thank you. All right. Thank you all, very much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: BOOK CLUBS DISCOVER HAROLD ROBBINS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words


HAROLD ROBBINS'S 15 novels have sold some 200 million copies, nine have been
produced as motion pictures, and his publisher estimates that more than 40,000
copies of his novels are sold each day. Yet for all their commercial success,
none of his novels were ever selected by a major American book club - until No.
16, ''Goodbye, Janette,'' which is scheduled for publication in the spring.

''Goodbye, Janette,'' a novel of the world of haute couture, is half of a dual
summer selection of the Literary Guild and is a Doubleday Book Club main
selection. Mr. Robbins, who has been writing for more than three decades, sounds
as proud as a first novelist.  ''This will be a new market for me,'' he said the
other day over the telephone from California. ''The book clubs are mail-order
business, and many of their members don't go into book stores.''

There is another reason for his pride. ''At one time book clubs were very
prissy,'' said Mr. Robbins, whose characters rarely have the same problem.
''Books had to be edited especially for them. You would almost never find them
'complete and unexpurgated.' '' Apparently those days are long gone, because
''Goodbye, Janette'' is described by its publisher as ''more deeply erotic than
anything Harold Robbins has written before.''

Raised in an orphanage in New York's Hell's Kitchen, Mr. Robbins now enjoys the
sort of life style that only money can buy. He owns a new home in Beverly Hills,
Calif., complete with a $30,000 computerized telephone system, as well as homes
in Acapulco, Mexico, and France. Yet in an industry where loyalties change like
last year's fashions, he is steadfastly loyal: he has been published in hard
cover since 1961 by Simon and Schuster, he has been published in soft cover by
Pocket Books since 1953 (except for two paperback originals), and he has been
represented by Paul Gitlin, the literary lawyer, since 1959. His loyalties are
similar with many of his foreign publishers.

''Mr. Gitlin and I long ago decided that such relationships were good for both
author and publisher,'' Mr. Robbins said. ''The advances and the deals he gets
for me are important, but it's also important to be at a house where people work
for you for years and do their very best to sell your books. My books, from my
very first novel published in 1948, are always in print in every country in the
world where I have publishing deals. Something like 8 million to 10 million
copies a year are sold from the backlist alone.''

Some books are remembered as much for their origins as their literary qualities.
A good example is ''A Confederacy of Dunces,'' last year's critically acclaimed
first novel by John Kennedy Toole.  Rejected by nine commercial publishers, it
was recommended to Louisiana State University Press by Walker Percy - a decade
after Mr. Toole had committed suicide.

The origins of ''Unit Pride,'' a Korean War novel scheduled for publication by
Doubleday next May, are equally interesting. Its authors are John McAleer, a
professor of English at Boston College, and Billy Dickson, a former convict, who
was murdered in 1973. In 1967, Mr. Dickson was paroled after having served 11
1/2 years in a Massachusetts maximum-security prison for robbing a bank and
briefly taking a hostage - a bank officer who turned out to be Professor
McAleer's sister-in-law.

Neither man knew of that coincidence when Mr. Dickson began corresponding with
Professor McAleer in 1965 in response to a book review Mr. McAleer wrote in a
Boston newspaper. Their correspondence eventually exceeded 1,200 letters, much
of it about Mr. Dickson's combat experiences in Korea. ''When I finally found
out who Billy was, I let my wife tell her sister whom I was corresponding
with,'' Professor McAleer related the other day with a laugh.

By the time Mr. Dickson was paroled, Professor McAleer (who is the author of
eight other books, including biographies of Rex Stout and Theodore Dreiser) had
fashioned a manuscript of more than 1,000 pages. ''We made it a novel because I
hadn't experienced what Billy had and because I visualized the people he was
talking about in terms of people I was with in World War II,'' said Professor
McAleer, who served in the medical corps in North Africa and India.

But there was little publisher interest in combat novels during the Vietnam War
era, and Mr. Dickson lost his enthusiasm for the book after his release from
prison. Nevertheless, the two remained friends, and the onetime convict became
godfather for the sixth McAleer child. Mr. Dickson was the owner of an
industrial cleaning service at the time a female employee stabbed him to death
during an argument.

When Reva Dickson inquired about her husband's manuscript in 1978, Professor
McAleer dusted it off, revised it extensively and sent it to an agent. Mrs.
Dickson will receive half of all the royalties, including money from the
paperback rights, which will be sold at auction next month.

''I admire Reva tremendously for the way she stuck by Billy and their two
children,'' said Professor McAleer, who dedicated the book to her. ''She worked
as a waitress and hatcheck girl to support the family, and the thing I'm
happiest about is that she'll gain from publication of the book.''

When he learned that three other publishers had made unsuccessful bids for a
book that he had purchased, Sam Vaughn, publisher of Doubleday, asked his
competitors to provide blurbs for the book - and all three complied. ''It
occurred to me in a fit of devilishness,'' said Mr. Vaughn. ''Publishers always
go to others for comments or endorsements, so I just thought why not go to the
editors who loved the book so much but didn't get it.''

The book is ''Darconville's Cat,'' a novel by Alexander Theroux, author of four
previous books and brother of Paul Theroux, author of ''The Great Railway
Bazaar'' and a dozen others.

Gordon Lish, an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, responded to Mr.  Vaughn's request by
writing, ''My God, what cheek!'' followed by ''Yes, yes, but what creative
publishing!'' He then proceeded to praise Mr. Theroux's writing.

Roger W. Straus Jr., president of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, acknowledged making
an offer for the book. Complying with Mr.  Vaughn's request, he said:
''Alexander Theroux's 'Darconville's Cat' is, in my opinion, the beginning of a
literary career and I congratulate him and Doubleday on a splendid book.''

Mr. Vaughn is pleased by his experiment, but he is not sure that it represents
the wave of the future. ''I just got a crabby letter from Gordon Lish,'' he
said. ''He forgot that I solicited the quote from him and he's a little upset
that I'm using it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Harold Robbins

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA'S PREMIER REASSURES THAIS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 30


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China pledged tonight that Peking would stand by
the non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia against foreign aggression.

In a speech at a dinner given by Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, Mr. Zhao
described Vietnam as a ''regional hegemonist'' and promised that Thailand and
the other members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations could count on
China's cooperation for a ''just settlement'' of the Cambodia problem.

Mr. Zhao arrived here today from Rangoon, Burma, on the second and last stop of
his first trip outside China since becoming Prime Minister last year. He was
given a warm welcome by the Thais, who count on China to back Thailand in its
anti-Vietnamese stand. Peking has also made clear its appreciation of the stern
Thai attitude against the Vietnamese invasion and continuing occupation of
neighboring Cambodia.

General Prem expressed his Government's gratitude for China's support and
reiterated the call by the non-Communist nations in the region for an
international conference on Cambodia. Vietnam opposes any international move
questioning the legitimacy of the Heng Samrin regime, which its troops
established in Phnom Penh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
KOREAN MOLDED BY ARMY FIFE

BYLINE: By HENRY SCOTT STOKES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 30


President Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea, who was in New York today prior to his
visit to Washington and talks with President Reagan on Monday, is a military
man. A paratroop officer who served in Vietnam, he was an unknown army
intelligence chief under President Park Chung Hee when Mr. Park was murdered by
the head of his own secret service in October 1979.

Mr. Chun was born on Jan. 18, 1931, in a hamlet near Taegu in what is now
central South Korea - an inhospitable, mountainous region - as the son of a poor
farmer. Japanese colonial rule of Korea ended in 1945, and soon after the Korean
War began in 1950 Mr. Chun gained admission to the 11th class of the Korean
Military Academy. It was the first class to receive a full four years of
training, and from it came many of the men who now dominate South Korea.

The academy offered one of the few promising careers open to a penniless youth
who had not gone to college. Mr. Chun graduated close to the middle of his class
in 1955, compensating for academic mediocrity by a strong personality and
excellence on the soccer field. He was acknowledged as a class leader early on,
his contemporaries said.

Mr. Chun married Lee Sun Ja, the daughter of the superintendent of the academy
and a member of a well-to-do Seoul family, and they had four children. A
balding, stocky man with a short neck - he wears built-up shoes to make him seem
taller - Mr. Chun projects a warm personality to visitors, is said to be
considerate of his staff and receives many more ordinary citizens than did the
austere Mr. Park, who was trained by the imperial Japanese Army.

Division Commander in DMZ

Mr. Chun is well-informed on subjects he studied professionally, such as North
Korea, which he observed as a front-line division commander in the demilitarized
zone 25 miles north of Seoul. Like many of his countrymen he is a passionate
anti-Communist, and like many ambitious staff officers after the generation that
fought alongside Americans in the Korean War, he was until recently wary of
contacts with Americans. He speaks little English.

The South Korean leader is a nationalist who has spent most of his life in
uniform, who saw the chaos in Korea after 1945 as the product of a decision by
the United States and the Soviet Union to divide the nation for the first time
in more than 2,000 years of recorded history, and who dreams of an independent,
reunited and strong Korea.

The entrance to his old office at the Defense Security Command, the army
intelligence center from which he monitored the 600,000-member armed forces for
loyalty to the flag and to President Park, bore the slogan ''Strong Army,
Prosperous Nation.'' He surrounded himself with Spartan officers who resented
the corruption of politics by big business under Mr. Park and hoped to create a
nation in a ''purified'' democratic image.

'Purification Rallies' Held

The first impression of Mr. Chun is of a sincere, bluff, alert leader. He said
when he became President last Aug. 27 that he hoped to build a ''democratic
welfare state,'' which he did not clearly define. His officers organized
nationwide ''purification rallies'' under martial law, and he purged all
opposition political leaders, not just the well-known Kim Dae Jung. He also
banned all political parties and undertook to cleanse the streets of
''hooligans'' and the universities of ''impure'' professors and students. The
press came under strict controls, and Koreans working for foreign news
organizations were a special target.

Mr. Chun has a firm handshake, a steady eye, a disarming smile, and, through an
interpreter educated in the United States, Michael Kim, speaks in what appear to
be more rounded remarks than the rambling phrases he used soon after taking
office. As he nears the end of a statement he turns to his interlocutor with a
direct but shy smile, as if seeking approval.

In an exchange last summer he criticized Kim Dae Jung on the ground that Mr.
Kim, a Roman Catholic, was married to a Methodist.

Religion Taken Seriously

Mr. Chun observed that this was ''highly unusual'' and added that he had
confirmed the fact with Vatican diplomats in Seoul. When Mr. Chun was told by a
visitor that the visitor's father was a Catholic but that his mother was not,
and that he considered this insignificant, the interpreter abruptly intervened,
without translating into Korean: ''In Korea we take religion seriously.''

The incident appeared illustrative of intellectual exchange in the Chun circle,
where opposition or even freedom of thought is seemingly suspect - and possibly
Communist in inspiration and pro-North Korean, as in the case of Mr. Kim, a
rival whose death sentence Mr. Chun commuted to life in prison before he left
for Washington.

Martial law was lifted by the President earlier this month, but a battery of new
laws passed by a legislature appointed by Mr. Chun assured his army-backed
regime of controls to match martial law, according to his critics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Chun Doo Hwan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Court-Martial Judge Narrows Garwood Charges

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Jan. 30


The judge in the court-martial of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines today
deleted allegations that Private Garwood had extolled Communism and called
fellow prisoners of war ''criminals of war'' while a captive of the North
Vietnamese.

Col. R.E. Switzer dropped the references at the request of defense attorneys but
rejected defense motions for dismissal of the remaining charges. Yesterday he
reduced to two years from six the period of Private Garwood's captivity in which
he is alleged to have collaborated.

Private Garwood was originally charged with collaborating from April 1967 to
Jan. 21, 1973. Colonel Switzer changed the cutoff to December 1969 after the
defense noted that the prosecution had presented no testimony on illegal
activities after that time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


Norway's Prime Minister resigns after 5 years in office 3
Chinese Premier promises to support Thais against Vietnam 4
Around the World 6
Tass accuses Reagan of distorting Soviet policy 6

Government/Politics
Interior Dept. orders de-emphasis of endangered species list 8
Despite a Reagan freeze order, some new rules may take effect 10

General
Around the Nation 8
Pilot training brings noise and money to town in Montana 8
New Yorkers provide a diverse welcome for former hostages 25
A regular cast of characters views the Harris trial 26
Boy, 15, drives subway train from Penn Station down IND line 27
Jury convicts man of murdering undercover officer in Harlem 27
The City 27
The Region 27
Hostages planned a mission to kill captors, a Marine reveals 28

Health/Science
California whales leap as if for joy at increase 8

Education/Welfare
More than 2,200 elderly people attend meeting on aging 26

Arts/Entertainment
Ad Reinhardt paintings at the Whitney Museum 13
New York City Ballet presents Peter Martins's ''Soldat'' 13
Revue at Perry Street Theater, ''Romance Is ...'' 13
''Collected Stories of Elizabeth Bowen'' reviewed 16
Bernstein conducts 3 works by Copland 18
Limon Company dances ''Kitchen Table'' at City Center 18
Film ''Maniac'' opens at theaters around city 47

Style
Consumer Saturday: A phone center for the disabled 17
The question of doctor-backed cosmetics 17
Tissue-paper fashion: Is it an art?  17
De Gustibus: Crispness fails test 17

Obituaries
Cozy Cole, jazz drummer 11
Msgr. J. Jerome Reddy, once of Brooklyn diocese 11

Sports
Walton accepts that his playing career is over 19
Mets sign Henderson and three others 19
George Vecsey on the rehabilitation of Lou Johnson 19
Chandler is a small boxer with large ambitions 19
Boxing promoter linked to bank embezzlement inquiry 20
Briscoe loses split decision to Ortiz at Felt Forum 20
Fibak upsets Connors to gain tennis semifinal 20
Pro Hockey Notebook 21
Crosby golf postponed again 21

27

Features/Notes
Questions and Answers: The state of the Polish labor agreements 2
Man in the News: President Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea 4
Issue and Debate: Should Reagan honor the deal with Iran?  11
Going Out Guide 15
Saturday News Quiz 18
About New York 25
Notes on People 26

News Analysis
Linda Greenhouse on television in courtrooms 6
Ari L. Goldman on the M.T.A. and suburban rail lines 26
Tony Schwartz discusses cable television in Manhattan 47

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

A year for arms control Tapping the Hudson A bad bet for Connecticut Letters 22
Russell Baker: in defense of ''the new elegance'' 23
Stephen Arons: the specter of MoM-and-PoP economics 23
Rosalyn S. Yalow: the fear of radiation 23
Richard B. Morris: the Union came first 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 70 words


''This isn't meant to take anything away from the hostages. We just want to
remind people that there are guys without arms and legs lying in that hospital
right now who never got a parade, and that there are still people missing in
Vietnam who may still be alive.  Where are the yellow ribbons for them?'' -
Gregory Steele, a Vietnam veteran and an organizer of a veterans' march
yesterday in Indianapolis. (22:3.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS PARADE IN SHADOW OF 52 HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS, Jan. 31


Several hundred veterans of the Vietnam War marched today in counterpoint to the
heroic reception of the former American hostages, expressing the wounded
feelings of many Vietnam veterans around the country and offering themselves the
parade they said nobody gave them when they came home from war.

The short march from the Veterans Hospital to the ornate war memorial raised in
memory of soldiers of the Mexican-American War and World War I, was not meant,
the march organizers said, to detract from the hostages' tumultuous reception.
It was, they said, intended to remind the country that many of the more than two
million Americans who served in Vietnam were still physical and mental hostages
of their duty overseas, and yet had never been considered heroes by the country
that sent them.

''This isn't meant to take anything away from the hostages,'' said Gregory
Steele, a former infantryman in Vietnam who was the principal organizer of the
march. ''We just want to remind people that there are guys without arms and legs
lying in that hospital right now who never got a parade, and that there are
still people missing in Vietnam who may still be alive. Where are the yellow
ribbons for them?''

The march today, which drew attention only from scattered strollers, was
endorsed by Frank Hamilton, the immediate past national commander of the
American Legion, which has its national headquarters in this city, and more
informally by the current leadership of the Legion.

Parade Called 'Very Fitting'

''We support it,'' said Ralph Burris, a spokesman for the Legion and himself a
Vietnam veteran. ''We think it's very fitting for the Vietnam vets to parade to
celebrate the return of the hostages, even if they didn't get a parade
themselves.''

But some of the marchers here today did not construe their little demonstration
as but another drum roll in the nation's long and loud salute to the hostages.

''This one's for us,'' said Rudi Josyfowcz, a former tank driver in the First
Cavalry Division in northern South Vietnam. ''Nobody asked us if we wanted to go
over there, and nobody gave a shoot when we got home. I've got a lot of friends
who are still having trouble with what went on in Nam, and I never heard about
the President going to visit them.''

Resentment appears to be fairly widespread among Vietnam veterans around the
country, especially those still bearing the physical and psychological scars of
their time in the Asian jungle.

'Ringing Off the Hook'

Kenneth Martin, a counselor at the Vet Center in Indianapolis, one of the
Veterans Administration's 90 ''outreach centers'' set up to help troubled
veterans, said the ''phone has just been ringing off the hook for the last few
days since the hostages came home.''

He added: ''What I'm hearing is that most of the Vietnam veterans think the
hostages have it coming, all the parades and speeches, but they're asking,
'Where's mine?' When most of our guys got off the plane maybe only Mom and Dad
were there, and when they got back into their community their friends would say,
'Where have you been the last two years?' or 'Oh, were you one of those
baby-killers?'''

Donald Tate, a psychologist at the Bamboo Rap Vets Center in Detroit, said the
outburst of wounded feelings was an example of ''post-dramatic stress that can
be triggered by any number of events that bring their war experiences back to
them.''

Dr. Tate noted, for example, that after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan some
of his clients expressed ''vague problems'' that quickly emerged as lingering
feelings of doubt or fear from their war experiences.

''They're not bitter about the hostages getting all that attention,'' he said,
''but they're saying, 'Wow, they're getting parades and the President is flying
to greet them. Why not us? We came back with honor, too.' They're feeling that
they've been shortchanged again.''

Special Sessions Last Week

The Miami Vet Center has been holding special ''rap sessions'' with the many
Vietnam veterans who have walked in this week wanting to unburden their
resentment.

''They're not angry about the hostages,'' said William Weitz, the center
psychologist. ''They're glad they're free.  ''But they ask, 'Did they do their
duty any more than I did mine?' They should get credit for being good survivors,
not heroes.'' Dr. Weitz calls the hostages' triumphal homecoming an important
''ritual of return'' that takes some of the burden of their ordeal off their
shoulders and disperses it on the nation as a whole.

It is a ritual, Dr. Weitz maintained, that would have helped many of the Vietnam
veterans who are still struggling with feelings of guilt and isolation arising
from their roles as agents in an unpopular and morally condemned war.

''It would have helped them put their experiences in place,'' he said.

Statement From V.V.A.W. Leader

Ron Kovic, a former marine who heads Vietnam Veterans Against the War, told
reporters yesterday at a Los Angeles news conference: ''If we use the word
'hero,' we should use it for the 55,000 Americans who died in Vietnam. I think
the word 'hero' is used too lightly. It is time Americans welcome home our
hostages from our folly in Southeast Asia.''

''I cried when I saw that ticker tape parade in New York on television,'' said
Marilyn Combs, who was an Army nurse in Vietnam and is now a counselor for
veterans for the state of Montana.

''I know men who were shot, who saw their friends blown up, and where are the
ticker tape parades for them? They weren't just led to the bathroom blindfolded.
They didn't volunteer to be high-paid officials in an embassy. They didn't have
any choice about going over there, and the country couldn't care less about
making it up to them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Viet Nam veterans

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PART OF HOMECOMING WAS A 'NEED FOR HEROES'

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words


WASHINGTON FROM Olyphant, Pa., to San Diego, the cheers were thunderous, the
tears were genuine, the emotions were unabashed and overflowing.  People stood
on cars and fences and shouted themselves hoarse at the passing motorcades or
wept by their television sets. In their homes and offices, they sang ''God Bless
America'' along with President Reagan and Bruce Laingen, the former charge
d'affaires in Teheran.

It was an extraordinary national jubilee, a blaze of patriotism that revealed as
much about the mood and psyche of America, about the national hungering for a
moment of pride, as it said about the grit and character of the 52 returned
hostages.

Suddenly their trauma became a triumph. Humiliation over the seizure of the
American Embassy, 14 months of pent-up frustration over the nation's inability
to wrench them free, and roller-coaster anxiety over their fate gave way to
relief, celebration, and instant adulation so supercharged that it made some of
the ex-hostages uncomfortable.

Not since former Col. John Glenn's orbital mission in 1962 and the return of the
Apollo astronauts from the moon in 1969 has the nation indulged in such a
massive public outpouring over officially feted heroes. The returning prisoners
of war from Korea and Vietnam and the crew of the intelligence ship Pueblo,
seized by North Korea in 1968, met a much more mixed and modest reception, even
though in many cases their ordeals in captivity were either longer or harsher or
both.

Even amidst the current thanksgiving, some believed it was being overdone.
Several former hostages themselves made a point that they did not feel like
heroes, but their families had shown real heroism.  A few were quick to sign
book contracts but others disdained being transformed into instant celebrities
or, by week's end, were so weary of hoopla that they sought seclusion. ''I don't
consider myself any more of a hero than the thousands of foreign service
officers who serve overseas,'' freed diplomat Donald Cooke told a television
interviewer last week. ''I really don't want to be in the public eye. But now it
turns out that since I didn't go to the press conference (at the United States
Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.) and hadn't been talking to the press, I'm
the mystery hostage who is for some reason or another not talking about it, and
now I'm getting more attention than I was before.''

Many people saw higher heroism among the volunteers, who took part in the
aborted mission to rescue the captive Americans last April, in which eight men
perished. Unhappy Vietnam veterans, feeling shortchanged by comparative lack of
recognition, arranged a protest march today in Indianapolis.

''I am second to no one in my relief and grateful happiness at their 444-day
delayed deliverance,'' retired Army Colonel Howard Wickert said of the hostages
and their ordeal, in a letter to the Washington Star. ''But...in Korea and
Vietnam 52 good soldiers were killed every morning before breakfast on routine
scouting and patrolling missions, and few hearts in this country bled for them.
Nice, young, drafted farm boys, hideously burned, are today in veterans'
hospitals, totally forgotten and forsaken by all but their kin and the hospital
personnel. Returning Vietnam heroes - true, combat heroes - have been spat on,
figuratively and literally by their countrymen... Do we have any values,
proportion or balance not manipulated by professional tubthumpers?''

As more than one historian has observed, much public reaction to returning
Vietnam veterans, the Korean POW's and the Pueblo crew was colored by the
feeling that those groups were tainted by controversy or anguish over their
cause or over their conduct during captivity.  By contrast, the hostages were an
unambiguous symbol that united the country. The euphoria over them was fed by a
public feeling that this time America was clearly in the right, both because a
mob had illegally seized the embassy and because, so far as is known, all 52
hostages showed their mettle under duress. The extent of their mistreatment is
still unclear and it obviously varied greatly from individual to individual, but
so far no case of collaboration has come to light.

This in itself helped redeem national pride and honor. It provided the kind of
positive image that Americans had been aching for after a decade of painful
scenes flitting across their television screens, ranging from the panicky
evacuation of the Saigon embassy roof to humiliated hostages paraded in
blindfolds in Teheran.
Role Reversal at West Point

In contrast to other recent episodes of Americans in captivity, this time
television enormously magnified public identification with the hostages and
their families. Satellite relays of angry Iranian mobs and split-screen family
reunions made millions of strangers vicarious participants in the hostages'
ordeal. Their release broke a mood of national discouragement. It rekindled the
national spirit, reviving patriotic feelings among some who said they had not
been so strongly moved since the early 1960's.

In a very real sense, the roles were suddenly reversed at West Point. The nation
that had worried so long about giving reassurance to the hostages now found
itself nourished by the reassurance of their example. In Mr. Laingen's phrase,
America was ''refurbished by their experience.''

''Nations have a way of creating heroes when they need them, and we desperately
needed some heroes,'' commented Harvard historian Frank Freidel. ''In the
Vietnam war we engaged in a litany of self-hate and we had the same thing going
on during the Iranian crisis. Now we can be proud, not just that these 52 people
are out but because they behaved so well.''

''This is analagous to the way we reacted to John Glenn's orbital flight after
the Soviet sputnik beat us into space,'' he went on.  ''We had a feeling then
that we were just second best. While this is not an achievement of comparable
quality, it's similarly important in helping to restore our national
self-confidence. Once again, this brought a great swing toward nationalism.''

The joyous homecoming also seemed to trigger a national catharsis.  A nation
that had stifled its bitter resentment toward Iran and restrained its military
power to let economic attrition work its slow, persuasive force, suddenly
exploded with emotion. Cheering, flag-waving parade-goers talked of the release
of the pent-up tensions they had felt.
Rejoicing in the Heartland

''It was something I simply felt I had to do,'' said Lois Layton, who spoke for
many others. She drove 200 miles from Norfolk, Va., to participate in the
Washington welcome. ''I'd been glued to the radio and television, feeling the
hurt and pain. I couldn't go over to Iran and fight, but I could come to
Washington and yell and scream.''

In the ubiquitous yellow ribbons and the signs proclaiming ''We never forgot
you,'' there was a subliminal note of atonement for the nation's impotence at
the height of the captives' distress.

''It's as if we paid 30 pieces of silver and now we are awash in absolution,''
remarked a Senator with an exemplary military record.  ''I don't want to take
anything from what these fine people have done, but I wonder whether we're doing
some great national mea culpa, almost a great national apology for not having
done more to free them. I guess we felt so degraded as a nation that we wanted
this chance to express our relief.''

Those literally caught up in the whirlwind of emotions were almost overwhelmed.
Vice President George Bush called the Washington parade, where crowds engulfed
the hostage buses, ''the most emotional experience of our lives.''

Farther afield, in the heartland, people rejoiced in the happy ending of the
hostage drama but quickly turned to their hopes for a new beginning on more
pressing issues of inflation and unemployment.  ''We very definitely were united
by the hostages,'' observed Willard Payton, a retired state employee in Des
Moines, ''but I don't think it blacked out the realization of the economic mess
we're in.''

President Reagan projected that mood at the White House when he told the
hostages: ''I'll not be so foolish as to say forget what you've been through;
you never will. But turn the page and look ahead.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of parade in New York City

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Mugabe Defuses a;
Political Land Mine

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2113 words


Prime Minister Robert Mugabe again demonstrated his political dexterity last
week, writing a compromise ending to a 17-day political crisis. He returned at
least nominal responsibilities for defense and security matters to Joshua Nkomo,
his rival but junior partner in the Government coaliton. As Minister Without
Portfolio, Mr. Nkomo also will assist in ''tasks which require special handling
in the national interest,'' Mr. Mugabe said.

On Jan. 10, Mr. Mugabe had dismissed Mr. Nkomo, who led his own army in the
pre-independence guerrilla wars, from his post as Home Affairs Minister (with
authority over police and paramilitary forces). Mr. Nkomo was offered, and
rejected, the less-powerful Public Service Ministry; accepting would have meant
a loss of prestige. In the same shuffle, Mr. Mugabe retired his controversial
Planning Minister, Edgar Tekere, saying Mr. Tekere needed ''lots of rest'' after
his acquittal (on a technicality) in the murder of a white farmer.

Asserting primacy over Messrs. Nkomo and Tekere was no small achievement. Both
still retain the loyalty of armed guerrilla units, which Mr. Mugabe hopes to
integrate soon into the Zimbabwean Army.  take a formalist tack.''

In its show at the New Museum, Fashion Moda gave a representative sampling of
the ''anti-esthetic'' work it has presented in its South Bronx space, a mix of
crude amateur and highly professional efforts by Hispanic, black and white
artists ranging in age from 15 to 62.  There was an environment by Candace
Hill-Montgomery, an abandoned ''outdoor'' picnic site of packing cases and wire
baskets with remants of food left on paper plates; a group of true-to-life
Hispanic heads, cast in plaster by John Ahearn; a satirical painting by Robert
Colescott entitled ''Eat Dem Taters,'' a takeoff on van Gogh's ''The Potato
Eaters'' with a broadly caricatured black cast of characters.

A back wall bore a huge collage of photos of jazz personalities assembled by Ray
Ross. On the floor lay ''Puddle,'' by Carmen Spera, a cluster of cutout plastic
pieces linked together by rubber cables that evokes the human figure. Stefan
Eins himself contributed a series of Fashion Moda posters, and Jane Dickson
showed a group of humorous black-and-white drawings focusing on male genitals.
Reactions to the show, culled from observers by this reporter, ranged from
''unspeakable'' and ''they should have been toilet-trained earlier'' to
''fascinating'' and ''of real cultural significance.''

Taller Boricua (pronounced Ta-yay Bo-reek-wa, and meaning simply Puerto Rican
Workshop), the oldest of the three groups, was established by artists 10 years
ago to provide a community-based cultural center promoting Puerto Rican culture
and esthetics. Some of its founding members were involved with the now-defunct
Art Workers Coalition, a politically oriented group that in the late 1960's
attempted to mobilize artists against the Vietnam War, and staged demonstrations
against museums and galleries for their lack of involvement with the city's
ethnic communities. Now occupying capacious quarters in a city-owned building at
1 East 104th Street, next door to the Museo Del Barrio, Boricua offers
community-oriented workshops, programs, and performances in the fine arts,
music, poetry and film. It invites young artists to share the studios of its
founding members, and in the last several years, it has mounted and locally
toured over 400 shows from the United States and abroad.

''We felt there was no chance to show our work in the downtown E1

THE NEW COLLECTIVES-REACHING FOR A WIDER AUDIENCE

''Ifound the art scene in Manhattan too closed in,'' says Stefan Eins, a 39-year
old artist from Austria who has been living in New York since the 1960's. ''I
felt it lacked nourishment, and a broad enough audience. I said, why not move to
a really bad area of the city, and see if I can establish a base there.''

And so two years ago, Mr. Eins took himself to the South Bronx, rented and
cleared out a rubble-filled storefront, then opened Fashion Moda, ''a Museum of
Science, Art, Technology, Invention and Fantasy.'' Presenting a wild melange of
shows by artists, community residents, children, graffiti-makers and other
creators, Fashion Moda has been a resounding success with its South Bronx
audience, and has attracted the attention of the glossy art world that it left
behind in Manhattan.

Now Fashion Moda's work has appeared, in a recent show at the New Museum on
Lower Fifth Avenue. The show is one of a series of three exhibitions at the
museum, with the overall title of ''Events,'' which marks a growing movement of
artists who work collectively, outside of the conventional art world boundaries.
They aim to reach a wider, less-sophisticated audience than the
upper-middle-class art patrons who frequent the established system of galleries,
museums and alternative spaces around the city. ''Events'' represents the first
show at the museum completely organized and presented by artists' groups. The
second, and current, ''Event'' is mounted by Taller Boricua, a collaborative
group of 10 Puerto Rican artists, currently exhibiting the work of four members
(through Feb. 5). And on Feb.  14, Collaborative Projects, Inc. (CoLab), an
association of between 35 and 50 young artists that last June organized the
much-talkedabout Times Square Show in a scruffy 41st Street massage parlor, will
mount a presentation of its own at the New Museum.
E1

BRITAIN'S LABOR PARTY IS DOWN AND MAY BE OUT A LONG TIME

By WILLIAM BORDERS

LONDON - Back in the 1960's and 1970's, when Sir Harold Wilson was Prime
Minister and leader of the Labor Party, he liked to soothe internal squabbles by
reminding his political colleagues that the party was ''a broad church'' able to
accommodate a wide ideological range. An unwieldy but often effective coalition,
he said, it had the virtue of not being rigorous or doctrinaire.

The party's ability to accommodate dissent has seldom been more severely tested
than last week, as its right wing charged off in one direction and its left wing
in another, leaving a beleaguered Michael Foot, just two months into the job of
party leader, struggling to hold it all together.

In a crisis recalling the split of 1931, after which Labor did not return to
power for 14 years, the party appeared about to lose four former cabinet
ministers and six members of Parliament. ''We want everyone now in the party to
stay in the party,'' Mr. Foot said, appealing for unity. ''We should be fighting
against this antihuman Tory Government and its cruel economic policies, not
against one another.''

But the right-wing faction, led by Shirley Williams and Dr. David Owen, saw no
room for themselves after the party radically changed the procedure by which it
selects its leader, and they formed a new ''Council for Social Democracy'' to
work for more moderate political goals. Though they stopped just short of a
formal break with the Labor Party, Dr. Owen said on Friday that he did not plan
to run on its ticket in the next election; Mrs. Williams had already said the
same thing last fall. ''I think we are almost inevitably on our way out,'' she
declared last week, and Tony Benn the hero of the radical left, demanded
imposition of a loyalty oath. The Williams faction, who regard themselves as
social democrats in the European mainstream, were advised belligerently by Mr.
Benn that they have ''no place in the party, if you do not believe in what it
stands for.''

For Mr. Foot, who became party leader after 30 years in Parliament, these were
difficult times. One of the reasons the committed socialist and Labor
left-winger was selected to succeed former Prime Minister James Callaghan was
because he was respected by all factions and was regarded as a potential healer
of ideological wounds that had deepened since Labor's defeat in May 1979. But
party divisions have only worsened. At the momentous party conference when the
rules for leadership elections were fundamentally altered, there were widespread
mutterings that the new leader was a bit of a ditherer and that the party had
gotten away from him. ''Mr. Foot is an honorable man doing his very best, but he
can't deliver,'' said former Transport Secretary William Rodgers, another
right-wing dissident, expressing a widely shared view.

In the rules change, a big victory for Mr. Benn and the left, the party took
away the exclusive power of members of Parliament to select the party leader -
the potential Prime Minister - forcing them to share it with the trade unions
and local party organizations. Mr.  Foot favored the change, which was anathema
to Mrs. Williams and other right-wingers. But he wanted members of Parliament to
keep a dominant position, with their weight in the election reduced from 100
percent to 50 percent, and leaving the unions and local party organizations 25
percent each. But after boisterous balloting punctuated by exuberant cheers and
clenched-fist salutes, the unions emerged with 40 percent. The parliamentary
party and the local organizations will have 30 percent each, a distinct rebuff
for the generally more conservative M.P.'s. ''It is outrageous and disgraceful
that the Prime Minister will be chosen by the block votes of a few labor
leaders,'' said Dr. Owen, the former Foreign Secretary.
Join Us, Liberal Party Urges

To the surprise of some, Mr. Foot, a skillful and persuasive orator, took no
part in the crucial debate. Instead, he sat silent and disconsolate on the dais,
his chin in his hand. David Basnett, a relatively moderate union leader went to
the podium, under a huge red banner that proclaimed ''Peace, Jobs, Freedom,''
and said imploringly, ''This is Michael's first conference as party leader.  We
should unite behind him, and give him the formula he wants.'' After the
radicals' victory, Mr. Foot said that ''the decision must be accepted. That is
now the constitution of the party. But if there are sections of the party who
wish to alter that provision, they are entitled to work for that change. I
wouldn't say that such matters cannot be reopened.'' This was stated more
emphatically by Denis Healey, the deputy party leader, who is himself a target
of the left wing. Mr. Healey said that the conference vote ''does not reflect
the majority view, and will have to be remedied.''

Mr. Foot minimized talk of a ''split,'' saying these are ''defections.'' The
party would ''go on in the tasks before it, whether these people stay or not,''
he predicted. However, in the party's National Executive Committee later, he
sharply told Mrs.  Williams, ''You had better make up your mind what you want to
do. If you want to join another party, it is quite intolerable that you should
stay here.''

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and the Conservatives were delighted, though
they were careful to keep their gloating private.  And David Steel, the leader
of Britain's third party, the Liberals, with 14 percent in the last election,
happily suggested that rightwing Labor dissidents combine with his group. They
could form ''an unstoppable combination at the next general election,'' Mr.
Steel said. ''This is the chance to do what so many of us have dreamed of for
years - to break the mold of a failed political system'' in a joint fight
against ''the growing extremes of right and left,'' represented, he said, by
Mrs. Thatcher and Mr. Benn.

The political infighting had little, however, to do with Britain's real
problems. Labor loyalists who wish the bickering would stop noted bitterly that
figures released last week showed nearly 2.5 million people unemployed - a 70
percent increase over last year.  Peter Shore, the party spokesman on economic
affairs, called on ''the splitters and the wreckers'' to desist so the party
could concentrate its fire on the Thatcher Government. ''The continuing
(economic) catastrophe,'' he said, had been virtually ignored while ''public
attention is riveted upon the Roman spectacle of a great party tearing itself to
pieces.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Late City Final Edition Week in Review Desk By WILLIAM BORDERS
Illustrations: photo of Michael Foot and Tony Benn

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ED KOCH: THE MAN BEHIND THE MAYOR

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7757 words


William H. Honan is the editor of The Times's Arts and Leisure section. By
William H. Honan His Honor, the Mayor of New York, was dedicating a new shopping
center in Brooklyn not long ago. He seemed to have the crowd with him as he
approached his peroration when suddenly a black member of the racially mixed
audience called out: ''We want John Lindsay!''

Edward I. Koch paused and reflected for an instant on this reference to a former
Mayor, whose concessions to unions and specialinterest groups he blames for many
of the city's present troubles. ''Everybody who wants Lindsay back, raise their
hand,'' Koch said. A few hands, mostly black, went up. The Mayor leaned forward
and thundered: ''DUMMIES!''

The audience loved it.  A month or two later, Koch attended a large meeting of
middle-class Irish and Italian constituents at a Roman Catholic high school in
Queens where the program called for putting his administration ''on trial.'' The
Mayor asked the priest on the dais if he could have two minutes for his opening
remarks. The priest said he could have one minute. Hearing this, Koch turned on
his heel and stalked out.

A reporter later asked the Mayor how he dared to insult an audience of more than
1,000 Catholics in this way.  ''You don't treat me with respect, I walk out,''
he replied.  ''They've got a kangaroo court in there and I don't happen to be a
kangaroo.'' And then there was the recent meeting at a local synagogue at which
Mayor Koch was asked if he could think of any truly great world statesman in
power today. ''Anwar el-Sadat,'' answered Koch. The audience booed. ''Aw, shut
up,'' said the Mayor. He then went on to remark that anyone who might be asked
to name three of the world's top leaders would have to mention the Egyptian
President and probably would not be able to think of the other two.  These are
just a few of the sort of stories that have come to characterize Mayor Koch,
who, in his first three years of office has defied enough con-ventional wisdom
to fill a textbook. At one time or another, the Mayor's blunt language has
provoked unions and managers, Jews and gentiles, blacks and whites, civil
libertarians and strict constructionists, and feminists and male chauvinists -
all having been skewered in Koch's gleefully egalitarian manner. Among
politicians, he has savaged fellow Democrats from State Senate minority leader
Manfred Ohrenstein to Jimmy Carter (although he supported President Carter in
the summer of 1979 when almost no one thought he would be renominated); and,
last summer, Koch became the first Democratic Mayor of New York to invite a
Republican candidate for President to Gracie Mansion. ''He's not going to do any
greater damage to us than Carter did,'' says Koch of President Reagan.  ''Let's
give him a chance.''

Koch gets along famously with some of the most unlikely people. The Mayor did
not meet Alfonse M. D'Amato, the new conservative Republican Senator from New
York, until the Steuben Day parade in September, but the chemis-try was right
and they quickly became buddies. Last month, D'Amato invited Koch to attend his
swearing-in ceremony in Washington - an occasion usually reserved for family,
childhood friends and party bigwigs. At the ceremony, Koch, a lifelong Democrat,
embraced D'Amato, declaring he has ''the potential of being one of New York's
great senators.'' D'Amato returned the compliment. ''Ed Koch,'' he said, ''is
the best Mayor that I have ever seen.'' Then, perhaps with an eye toward the
possibility of a Republican endorsement when he runs for re-election in
November, Koch, posed for a picture with D'Amato; George L. Clark Jr., the
Brooklyn Republican leader, and Anthony Prudenti, the Suffolk Republican leader.

Conversely, the Mayor has earned the wrath of some of the people one might
expect to be among his friends. Koch went to Mississippi in 1964 to help with
the registration of black voters, and has long championed the cause of civil
rights, but his reorganization of the city's poverty programs, as well as his
shrill rhetoric, has aroused a fierce resentment in many quarters of New York's
black and Hispanic communities. The Black United Front, a Brooklyn organization,
says that although Koch has balanced the city's budget one year ahead of the
legal requirement in the Federal Loan Guarantee Act, he has done so ''on the
backs of the poor.'' Herman Badillo, the Hispanic leader who once served as
Koch's Deputy Mayor for Policy, is so disgusted with Koch today that he says:
''I won't even talk to the bum.''

The odd thing about all of the Mayor's impolitic behavior is that it appears to
have made Edward Koch one of the most successful politicians in the country. The
most recent New York Times poll showed his public approval rating as 62 percent.
Still, the Mayor's confrontational and often pugnacious style has raised
troubling questions in the minds of some New Yorkers. One City Hall reporter
recently wondered in print whether the Mayor was ''in full control'' of himself.
Shades of Mad King Ludwig! Others see the Mayor's unorthodox behavior as the
crafty if not cynical maneuvering of a once-liberal Congressman who now baits
minorities in order to curry favor with a disaffected middle class, and who
cozies up to conservatives in the hope of becoming a fusion candidate with
Democratic-Republican-Conservative support.

What is the truth? What is the real Edward Koch like? What makes him tick, both
politically and personally?  There is yet another riddle about the Mayor: How
has he thus far escaped taking the rap for the miseries of the city? Everyone -
the Mayor foremost - acknowledges that the city's mass transit ''stinks''
(Koch's term), that the streets and parks are dirtier and more dilapidated than
ever, that crime is up and police protection down, and that schools, hospitals
and other municipal services are getting more expensive and less adequate day by
day. Of course, there is also a fabulous side to the city. Despite the
recession, Broadway is booming, chic restaurants are packed, the Metropolitan
Museum of Art outdraws many sports arenas, retail sales have leaped nearly 20
percent over last year, and the private sec-tor has lately added so many new
jobs that some financial analysts have begun to describe New York as ''recession
proof.'' Just how much credit the Mayor deserves for these accomplishments is
problematical, but even if he deserves lots, it is a wonder that Koch has not
also reaped a whirlwind of public fury over the decline of municipal facilities
and services which are clearly the responsibility of the resident of Gracie
Mansion. How is all of this possible?

I may be able to shed some light on these questions, difficult and complicated
as they are, as a result of having known and observed Edward Irving Koch for 22
years. I was one of the first to urge him to enter public life, and then served
as his first (and unpaid) press secretary in a campaign so punishing it nearly
cured him of all interest in politics. I then saw a good deal of him during the
tempestuous political wars in Greenwich Village during the early 1960's when, I
believe, his decidedly individual approach to politics was hammered into its
present shape. Over subsequent years, we have remained friends, and while this
relationship gives me the advantage of personal knowledge, I should say that
because of it there may be things about the Mayor which I do not perceive.

Let me start by admitting that I have no firsthand knowledge about what is
undoubtedly an important influence in Koch's life - his family background. He is
the second of three children of Polish Jewish immigrants who arrived in the
United States in the early 1900's and settled first in the Bronx and then in
Newark. His father was a furrier who lost his business in the Depression. He has
told me that his having come from parents who lifted themselves by their
bootstraps has had a profound effect on him, and recently, in response to a
question, Koch told Deputy Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr.  that, yes, he did indeed
run his city administration like a very large and quarrelsome ''Jewish family.''

Some writers have cited the Mayor's origins as the sole explanation for his
present political style and philosophy. In my view, however, his initiation into
political life was far too extraordinary - and traumatic - not to have exerted
an even greater influence.

When I first met Koch in Greenwich Village in 1958, he was a lanky,
cherub-faced, prematurely bald, 33-year-old lawyer with the odd combination of a
whimsical sense of humor and an all-consuming desire to succeed. As a liberal
Stevensonian Democrat, he was naturally attracted to the reform movement within
the Democratic Party -the so-called Lehman-Roosevelt-Finletter revolt against
Tammany Hall ''boss'' Carmine G. De Sapio. At that time, De Sapio - whose dark
glasses gave him the sinister appearance of a Hollywood gangster - wielded more
brute political power than any Tammany leader since the death of Charles F.
Murphy in 1924, and his high-handed use of it had given rise to widespread
dissention. At the end of 1956, Koch had become one of about 25 young liberals
who founded a local reform club which called itself the Village Independent
Democrats.  The V.I.D. was strategically located in Greenwich Village because De
Sapio lived in the heavily Italian south Village, known as ''Little Italy,'' and
from that base he had gained the only popularly elected office he ever held -
that of Democratic district leader of the First Assembly District, South. This
post carried with it membership in the county committee (Tammany Hall), which
made possible his election as county leader and his ultimate rise to kingmaker
of the Democratic Party. It followed that if De Sapio could be defeated as
district leader in the Village, which would require the votes of only a few
thousand registered Democrats, his power as a national figure would collapse
like a house of cards.

Membership in the V.I.D. was thus a golden opportunity for an aspiring young
politician, but Koch soon proved willing to throw it away. Then, as now, he was
a man who does not take kindly to real or imagined slights. After a few weeks in
the V.I.D., he felt that he was being excluded by an inner circle, and quit. A
year later, he joined De Sapio's local political organization, known as the
Tamawa Club. He tried that for about six months and then returned to the V.I.D.
Philosophically, Koch was back in the fold where he belonged, except that now he
was guilty of disloyalty - at least in his own eyes. During clubhouse debates,
the merest questioning of his solidarity with the V.I.D. would unloose an
impassioned defense. ''I will never apologize for what I have done!'' he would
declare. He protested too much. His torment led him to begin to think of himself
as an outsider. In a short while, this feeling of estrangement from the group
was to be reinforced by a series of brutal shocks which, as I now see it,
permanently cast Koch in the role of the lone political gunfighter which he
plays so conspicuously today. Other related characteristics such as his distrust
of political organizations and his penchant for sharp personal attack (no matter
how sacrosanct the target) may be traced to this period as well.

Before recounting those formative experiences, I should explain my own presence
in Greenwich Village at that time. After I was discharged from the Army in 1957,
the first civilian job I landed was that of drama critic of The Villager, the
''hometown'' weekly newspaper of the Village which had been modeled after
William Allen White's famous Emporia Gazette. Soon after my arrival, the sudden
demise of three octogenarians on the staff led to my appointment as editor of
the newspaper.

I met Koch one day when he strolled into The Villager office to talk about some
cause he had become involved in through the V.I.D. I was sufficiently impressed
to jot down a little of what he said: ''I'll tell you why I love the law. Here
are a few of my clients in the last year or so: a Village coffeehouse owner who
wanted to name names in connection with police payoffs before the New York State
Crime Commission; 10 folk singers who were arrested for singing in Washington
Square Park; a sculptor who wrote 'For my unborn children!' on a note, tied it
to a brick and chucked it through a window of the Soviet Embassy when they set
off their 50-megaton bomb.''

I also heard him on the speakers' platform when I covered V.I.D.  meetings in
the evening. Koch was so supremely confident, and often wryly self-mocking, that
his audience was immediately put at ease.  He would plant himself on the
platform and writhe, sometimes practically dancing, as he spoke.

This is where Koch discovered that he was truly at home in front of an audience,
especially when it came to debating and answering hecklers. The give-and-take
was often fierce, but Koch was remarkable for his lack of rancor. I recall one
occasion when he argued heatedly on one side of an issue for half the evening
and then suddenly broke into a jack-o'-lantern grin, threw his hands over his
head, exclaimed to his opponents: ''You're right!'' and sat down.

Generally, Koch was regarded as moderate, if not conservative. I can remember
his once being referred to as ''the Senator Taft of the V.I.D.'' The chief
exception was his outspokenness on civil-liberties questions. He once proposed
and successfully shepherded a V.I.D.  resolution censuring Parks Commissioner
Newbold Morris for refusing to issue a speaking permit to the American Nazi,
George Lincoln Rockwell.

It was during this time that I used to argue with Koch about capital punishment
in connection with the case of Caryl Chessman, the convicted rapist and murderer
who was on death row in California.  Koch supported the impending execution.
This is significant because nowadays Koch is sometimes accused of having
demagogically shifted his view on the death penalty in 1977 when he ran for
Mayor in order to win an election. The fact is, over the years, Koch has
consistently maintained that, first of all, the death penalty is a genuine
deterrent in at least some cases, even if not to the extent many people believe.
And second, he has held that, in any event, capital punishment is an appropriate
expression of the community's sense of outrage over such a heinous offense as
murder.

In the summer of 1959, when the V.I.D. for the second time challenged De Sapio
for the post of district leader, I thought The Villager should end its
traditional nonpartisanship and come out in support of the V.I.D. candidates. In
order to gather material for my pre-election editorial, I sought out the man I
knew to be a veritable geyser of facts, figures and arguments - Edward Koch. By
his own reckoning at that time, Koch had made some 200 street-corner speeches
for the V.I.D. I never told him the purpose of my questions, and if he guessed
it he was too shrewd to indicate his awareness. I then stayed up most of one
night and wrote a 4,000-word editorial for our front page. As the paper was
being printed, a bunch of strong-arm thugs sabotaged our presses and delivery
trucks. When the edition finally reached the streets, bundles of newspapers were
stolen from sidewalk delivery drops. This crude attempt to suppress a newspaper
inspired headlines and indignant editorials around the country, and damaged De
Sapio far more than anything I could have written.  Although De Sapio narrowly
defeated the V.I.D. that year - by a vote of 4,857 to 4,271 - the die was cast.
When De Sapio came up for reelection two years later, the V.I.D. candidates,
James S. Lanigan and Carol Greitzer, resoundingly defeated him and his running
mate, and the Tammany boss's house finally came tumbling down.

When I left The Villager for The New Yorker magazine, I felt free to join the
V.I.D., and, in the spring of 1962, Koch and I were appointed to a special
V.I.D. committee to study the forthcoming First Assembly District primary
election and recommend a course of action. As leaders of the ''war party''
within the club, we quickly decided to challenge Assemblyman William F.
Passannante, a De Sapio protege who lived at 72 Barrow Street, in the same
building as Koch.  V.I.D. president Stanley Geller and I then urged Koch to
become our candidate and persuaded the club to nominate him. I became his press
secretary.

Koch visited Eleanor Roosevelt at her apartment on East 74th Street and came
away with a strong endorsement. But that was our high point. Quite suddenly, a
number of the most politically skillful V.I.D.  members decided to ignore the
Koch-Passannante fight and devote their energies to a primary campaign to unseat
Congressman Leonard Farbstein in the 19th Congressional District, which included
a portion of Greenwich Village. Koch was furious. He suspected that some fellow
club members disliked him personally, and that others had never forgiven him for
his flirtation with the Tamawa Club. A cooler head might have said nothing, but
Koch's style was then as now confrontational. ''How could you vote to nominate
me and then refuse to work in the campaign? That's immoral!'' he would shout at
them.

A series of even more devastating blows came in quick succession.  Issuing a
statement from his home in Lake Placid, N.Y., Senator Herbert H. Lehman, the
then-84-year-old patriarch of the reform movement, endorsed Passannante. Koch
was infuriated when he heard speculation that one of Lehman's reasons for
supporting Passannante had been his fear that the reform movement might
otherwise appear anti-Italian. To Koch, that was prejudice in reverse - a
species of cynical ethnic politics that still enrages him today. He lashed back
with an angry statement in which he equated this venerable statesman of the
reform movement with De Sapio, the quintessential political boss. Senator
Lehman, he told The New York Times, was trying to create ''a new boss system''
in the Democratic Party. Reformers throughout the city were horrified - as was
Koch's fledgling press secretary. Then, a day or two before the election, James
Lanigan, the titular head of the V.I.D., who had defeated De Sapio as district
leader a year earlier, resigned from the club rather than join Koch in the
denunciation of Lehman.  On primary day, Passannante captured 62 percent of the
vote. Koch was beside himself with anger and grief. The bungling and the
amateurishness of the campaign, he felt, were bad enough, but what he regarded
as betrayal from every quarter - the rank and file as well as the reform
leadership - was unpardonable. The night he lost Koch wept, and through tears
delivered a speech to the assembled campaign workers in which he declared that
politics is a dirty, unprincipled business and he would have no more of it.

But in a month or so, he was back in action at the V.I.D. The presidency was up
for grabs, and Koch concluded that the leading candidate was the pawn of members
who were bent upon driving him out of the club. Impulsively, he called The
Villager and The Village Voice to announce his own candidacy for president. On
the night of the election, nearly 300 people jammed into the Textile Workers
Hall on University Place. Koch gave one of the most effective speeches of his
career, and when the ballots were counted, Koch had won by a vote of 119 to 110.
By conquest, the outsider had become the chief insider - temporarily at least.

In 1963, Koch succeeded the departed Lanigan as district leader, defeating De
Sapio's comeback attempt by 4l votes. Two years later, he opened another chapter
in his political life which essentially repeated the first chapter and stamped
Koch again - this time forever - as an outsider. John V. Lindsay, then a
Republican member of Congress, was running a close race for Mayor of New York
against Abraham D. Beame, and Koch did something unthinkable for a Democratic
district leader - he threw his support behind Lindsay.

I was aware of Koch's feelings about the Lindsay candidacy because I had
discussed it with him, urging him to support Lindsay as a fusion candidate. A
few years before, I had written a series of articles arguing the advantages of a
La Guardia-style multiparty government for the city. The articles were later
published in pamphlet form, and now Lindsay was using them in his campaign. But
for all my hollering about fusion, when Koch finally came out for Lindsay, he
did so at the urging of his friend Henry J. Stern, now a City Councilman. Koch
was convinced that, compared to Abe Beame and his crowd, Lindsay was a breath of
fresh air.

Today, Koch is most interested in fusion; he has made no bones about the fact
that he would welcome Republican and Conservative endorsement when he runs for
re-election as a Democrat. He does, however, draw a distinction between his
brand of fusion and that of his predecessors. ''Republicans like Lindsay and La
Guardia were minority-party candidates and needed fusion to win,'' he says. ''I
would like to have fusion support, not because I need it, but to change the
nature of what we are doing so that people will see my city administration as
concerned with the delivery of services in a nonpartisan way.'' Immediately
after Lindsay's victory in 1965, the new Mayor, according to Koch, refused to
return his calls. (''I don't accept that,'' Lindsay says today. ''That's petty
stuff.'') A year later, when Koch ran for the City Council, Lindsay refused to
endorse him. Koch won anyway. Then, in 1968, Koch ran for Lindsay's old seat in
Congress. Unable to generate much enthusiasm from the regular Democratic
organization, he needed whatever help he could get. Then Koch heard that Mayor
Lindsay was going to endorse his Republican opponent, Whitney North Seymour Jr.,
whose family had long supported Lindsay. Koch couldn't believe that the Mayor
would actively oppose someone who had just risked his political skin to support
him. He expected that Lindsay would at least remain neutral.  And so Koch
arranged to go to City Hall to get the word from Lindsay face to face. He got
it, all right, and after their meeting Koch stormed out of the Mayor's office in
such a blind rage that he literally marched into a coat closet. It was hardly an
auspicious way to launch his first campaign for Congress - spurned by his party
organization as an undependable maverick, disliked by many in the reform
movement as a discordant element, and now wrestling in the dark with a bunch of
winter coats somewhere in the depths of City Hall, having just been dumped by
the Mayor he had helped elect.  Such were the beginnings for Edward Koch. By the
time he had been in politics barely six years, he had more daggers in his back
than Julius Caesar. And thus, unlike so many politicians - whose ascent has been
eased if not in fact arranged by party organizations whose chief requirement is
absolute loyalty -Koch learned to trust no one and to go it alone.

Koch has another important characteristic - he is obsessed with public life.
When he was campaigning for Congress, he used to go out to greet voters at
subway entrances with a perseverance that left his staff gasping - in both
amazement and exhaustion. He persevered because he enjoyed it, really reveled in
meeting voters. His pleasure came not simply from being recognized and
complimented; when Koch met someone who was angry and who screamed at him, he
screamed right back - and had a good time doing it. Once, in a Saturday
afternoon crowd outside Bloomingdale's, when a demonstrator armed with a
bullhorn recognized Koch and called him an obscene name, Koch shot back: ''And
you're a ----, too!'' The demonstrator was flabbergasted. He picked up his
bullhorn and broadcast: ''Congressman Edward Koch just called me a ----!'' The
crowd roared its approval, and Koch basked in it like a sun-starved subway rider
stretched out on a beach in Barbados.

Outside of politics, Koch has no interests. None. He enjoys an occasional movie,
but he has told me several times with complete sincerity that what he likes best
about going to the movies is waiting in line - ''because then I can talk to
people.'' He has absolutely no taste for sports. As Mayor, he is obliged to go
to the opening baseball game once a season, but by the third inning he has
invariably disappeared. He reads few books, and like most in his profession
prefers oral briefings or office debates to memos. He goes to the theater now
and then, but not with great enthusiasm. ''I don't expect much,'' he says
whenever I take him. ''Most of what I see in the theater is pretty awful.''

Back in the spring of 1974, when he was serving in Congress and I happened to be
visiting Washington, I thought I should introduce Koch to Zelda Fichandler's
Arena Stage. He had never been to see a production there, and the Arena had just
received highly favorable reviews for a production of Georg Buchnner's ''Leonce
and Lena,'' directed in avant-garde fashion by the Rumanian Liviu Ciulei. Off we
went. Koch loathed every minute of it. At one point, a performer made up to look
like a clown who served as a master of ceremonies said to the audience
tauntingly: ''What's the matter? Don't you like German drama?'' Koch turned and
looked at me gloweringly. Silently he mouthed the words: ''No. I don't like
German drama.'' He never returned to the Arena Stage.

Koch's social life is another casualty of his all-consuming passion for
politics. He has never married, probably because of two mutually exclusive
requirements. On the one hand, he is a perfectionist in choosing the women he
wants to be with. They have to be as goodlooking and socially adept as Bess
Myerson. On the other hand, they have to accept his unwillingness to devote much
time to a purely emotional relationship. There are not many women who measure up
to the first standard who will also agree to the second. Consequently, Koch's
long-lasting personal relationships tend to be with married friends such as
David and Bobbie Margolis and Allen and Joan Schwartz, whom he has known since
the mid-1960's. He is a frequent weekend guest at their homes.

One of the particular pleasures Koch and his friends share is eating, while
incessantly talking politics. They like to explore new restaurants, and when
nothing new sounds interesting, they lean toward Chinese. Another treat for Koch
is to dine at home with the Margolises, in Manhattan or Quogue. Bobbie is a
gourmet cook, and Koch responds to her creations with sophisticated
appreciation. He has an amazing memory: He can recall a spinach salad Bobbie
Margolis made several years ago, or an especially succulent pork dish at a
particular Chinese restaurant at which the discussion ranged from Jimmy Carter's
prospects in the Iowa primary to the latest maneuver by Victor Gotbaum, the
labor leader, in the battle over Civil Service reform.

What accounts for his present popularity? I can think of three possible
explanations - not all of them flattering. First, New Yorkers like the Mayor's
candor and his openness about himself.  Second, Koch has an instinctive talent
for showmanship, and, whether intentionally or not, his performance helps to
distract the public from what it might otherwise complain about. Third, for
better or for worse, the Mayor is a consummate politician. Let me take these
observations one at a time.

To begin with, Koch is probably more unequivocal - or ''upfront,'' to use the
modish term - about what he is saying and who he is than any major American
politician since Harry S. Truman. Whether telling a group of picketing black
ministers that he will have them arrested unless they leave City Hall forthwith,
or resignedly announcing in Washington, ''We will never satisfy any labor-union
leader,'' Koch is remarkably blunt for a member of his profession. Jimmy Carter
said he was going to try a similar tack (''I will never lie to you''), but,
overwhelmed by events, he failed to do so, and his pieties developed a hollow
ring.

No politician with an ethnically mixed constituency has ever been more outspoken
about his own religious loyalties than Koch. In 1977, while running for Mayor,
Koch caused a stir by greeting President Carter at the Wall Street heliport with
these words: ''Mr.  President, welcome to New York City. I'm really troubled
about your position on Israel, and I have a letter which states why I think
you're wrong.'' Last October, when a synagogue in Paris was bombed and four
persons were killed, Koch issued a statement in which he denounced not only
those who had committed the crime but also French President Valery Giscard
d'Estaing for his Middle East policy. Said Koch: ''He is delivering Jews to the
P.L.O. and he should be ashamed of himself.'' At press conferences, where his
predecessors might have dropped a phrase or two of law-school Latin, Koch gives
lessons in Yiddish, rattling on something like this: ''They're just making a big
tsimmes out of it. Stop with your megillah. You don't agree? Well,
gesinterheit.''

To appreciate how unusual is Koch's insistence upon his ethnic identity, some
perspective is necessary. Fiorello La Guardia, New York's Mayor during the
1930's and 40's, was a past master of a political technique - a sort of
chameleonlike adaptation to one subgroup in the electorate after another - that
is nearly universal in the United States and is the exact opposite of Koch's.
The Little Flower exploited to the fullest what might be called his ethnic
versatility. His biographer, Arthur Mann, explained: ''Half Jewish and half
Italian, born in Greenwich Village yet raised in Arizona, married first to a
Catholic and then to a Lutheran but himself a Mason and Episcopalian, Fiorello
La Guardia was a Mr. Brotherhood Week all by himself....He was so many persons
in one, so uniquely unparochial in that most parochial of cities, that New
York-ers of nearly every sort were able to identify themselves with him although
rarely for the same reason.''

In contrast, listen to Koch, a true Sagittarian: ''I speak to everybody the same
way, whether black, white or brown, and whether Christian, Jewish or Moslem. I
think it's the height of pandering to speak differently to different groups of
people. To do that, as far as I'm concerned, is real discrimination, real
polarization. I believe in being truthful about what I am and who I am. For
example, there are about 7,000 Ukrainians living on the Lower East Side of
Manhattan. When I was in Congress, they were in my district. In 1969, their
leader came to me and asked me to march in their parade. I said sure. When I was
marching at the head of the parade, beside the Grand Marshal, I said to him: 'If
this were the Old Country, this wouldn't be a parade but a pogrom. And we
wouldn't be walking down Fifth Avenue. I would be running and you would be
running after me. But this is not the Old Country. We have to learn to work
together.' Well, the Grand Marshal agreed with me, and I think it was because of
our being honest with each other that the Ukrainians became some of my strongest
supporters. All across the country, I came to be called the Ukrainian
Congressman.''

This is not to say that Koch is incapable of waffling when a particularly thorny
issue comes along. No one can govern a city of the size and complexity of New
York and face every last issue forthrightly. Koch must dodge and duck. He
opposed any change in rent control, for example, at a time when he believed a
change was needed. (''Ed fudged his position on that,'' says one of the Mayor's
close advisers. ''I know. I argued that he should fudge it, and he did.'')

Nevertheless, the public is so taken with Koch's performance that it seems
willing to forgive him virtually any mistake so long as he owns up to it. Koch
was applauded for imaginative thinking when he set up special lanes for bicycles
last summer, and he was applauded for his honesty some weeks later when he
admitted he had goofed. He was hailed for his exceptional candor when he said
mass transit ''stinks'' and ''is going to get worse.'' Almost nobody asked:
''When are you going to make it better?'' It seemed enough that His Honor had
told it like it is. And when Koch scrapped with Victor Gotbaum until the two men
could no longer communicate directly but had to deal with each other through
their staffs, Koch was not widely criticized for truculence or hot-headedness,
but was praised as a man who is true to himself.

Is Koch received in this way because, in the post-Vietnam and post-Watergate
era, simple honesty is considered so rare a virtue in a politician? Are we in
the grip of what might be called a Diogenes fixation - having been lied to so
much that we crave only honesty, or the semblance of it? It may be so.

Koch, of course, staunchly maintains that he is a doer, not just a talker. He
points out that New York was in woeful financial shape when he assumed office in
1978. Within the first month he was ready with a tough plan to achieve fiscal
stability by drastically cutting municipal services. ''I have a billion dollars
less each year than my predecessors who were heading the city into bankruptcy,''
he says.  ''I don't have more cops, but I am getting more out of each cop. For
30 years, New York mayors have been trying to get two-man garbage trucks. I'm
the one who got them.''

Last year, Koch announced that he had balanced the city's budget 12 months ahead
of the legal requirement in the Federal Loan Guarantees Act. A couple of weeks
ago, in his budget message, the Mayor said that ''the worst pain'' of having to
cut services to balance the budget ''is behind us.'' Because the city has
weathered the recession so well, he said, money will soon be available to hire
l,300 new policemen, 225 sanitation workers, 375 firefighters, 336 correction
officers and have $35 million left over to rehabilitate some rattletrap subway
cars. The announcement is well timed in an election year, and surely Koch will
benefit politically, but the wonder is that he achieved his extraordinary
popularity while reducing city services.

That may have happened, in part, because New Yorkers have come to expect - and
accept - deprivation. But it is clear that Koch's success is also a dramatic
testament to the politics of candor.

The second reason for Koch's popularity, I believe, is that like Truman and La
Guardia - the two politicians he most admires -Koch is invariably fun. Good fun
and good copy. Instinctively, he gets involved with funny animals. When visiting
the Pyramids in December, some news photographers asked him to pose for a
picture. ''Bring me your toughest camel!'' quoth he, and shinnied up the side of
a somewhat mangy dromedary to be splashed across newspapers around the world
looking like Lawrence of Astoria. Here at home, he puckishly refused to pose for
a publicity shot with a rare white Bengal tiger.  After being dared to change
his mind, he quipped: ''No, the Mayor is not a coward, and the Mayor is also not
a schmuck!''

Furthermore, even if Koch isn't enthusiastic about attending the theater, he
certainly enjoys creating it. He understands that conflict - the stuff of drama
- is absorbing. Thus, although his aides constantly urge him to ''be genteel,''
Koch goes his own way, baiting State Senate minority leader Manfred Ohrenstein
by characterizing his voting record as ''zilch'' and then debating Ohrenstein's
videotape likeness at a press conference. Koch knows that putting on a show is
part of the job. ''The public enjoys it,'' he says matter-of-factly. And so they
do. His public shouting matches may also help to dramatize one issue or another
which he considers important, and they certainly take the public's mind off the
litter, the crime, the racket and the subway doors that don't open.

The final reason for Koch's success, I think, is his consummate political skill.
Even his critics do not deny him this, but charge that he has used his gift to
polarize the electorate, gaining the allegiance of the white majority by
attacking the black and Hispanic poor. They point to his slashing reduction of
city poverty programs (cutting the staff of one agency, for example, from 262 to
14), which has aroused anger in Harlem and inspired cheers in Queens. Koch's use
of such terms as ''poverty pimps'' -which are taken as coded racial slurs - has
also helped to create this impression. Koch protests that he had no such intent:
''Nobody got upset when I called Rabbi Bernard Bergman (the convicted
nursing-home operator) a poverty pimp.'' Koch adds that he originally got the
expression from Herman Badillo. ''It was O.K. for him to use,'' he says, ''but
not for me. Anyway, now that I see how people reacted, I've stopped using it.''

Herman Badillo served as Koch's Deputy Mayor for Policy until September 1979,
and is still bitter about the experience. ''When I started working for Koch,''
he told me recently, ''the Mayor said we would form a coalition of the poor and
the middle class. Then he decided it wouldn't work. He made a conscious decision
that he could not help the poor, and so he began moving to the right. He has
antagonized the poor more than any mayor in the history of the city.  He can't
go to any town meeting in the Bronx or Bedford-Stuyvesant without being heckled
off the platform. Like George Wallace, and like Mayor Rizzo in Philadelphia, he
has used this, this dumping on the poor, to gain popularity with the white
middle class.''

Koch responds: ''First, Herman Badillo stayed in my administartion for two years
and wouldn't quit until I fired him. He apparently has a strong stomach. Second,
the polls show that from 62 to 69 percent of the people in this city approve of
what I am doing. Is Badillo saying that this huge majority of New Yorkers are
racists? If he is, he's libeling them. When I walk out on a white Catholic
audience because they are rude to me, is that an appeal to blacks? When I
denounce the judge for giving Rabbi Bernard Bergman four months instead of four
years for what he has done to the poor, is that an appeal to anti-Semites?
That's ridiculous! I'm calling the shots as they in fact are, not appealing to
one group or another.''

Whether or not Koch has conquered New York by polarizing it, he is an undoubted
master of political persuasion. Take, for example, the manner in which he
recently induced Governor Carey to do an aboutface on the question of whether
Albany or New York City should assume the burden of what the city now pays for
Medicaid, the health-care program for the poor.

Koch has long recognized that the city's share of Medicaid - $733 million this
year and rising at the rate of 11 percent annually - threatens to undo all his
efforts to put the city on a sound financial basis. In January 1980, he joked
with the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, remarking, ''If
that (Medicaid costs) were lifted from our back, Senator, we, the City of New
York, could lend money to Chrysler!'' The senators guffawed, but made no move to
pick up the tab. A month later, at a meeting in Carey's Manhattan office, Koch
asked the Governor if the state would assume the local cost of Medicaid. Carey
gave Koch an elaborate answer, carefully arranging several piles of books on a
coffee table to demonstrate that the state was already taking over the cost of
the senior colleges of the City University of New York, the cost of the State
Supreme Court justices in New York City and other city expenses and therefore
could not be expected to pick up the city's share of Medicaid, too.

Undismayed, Koch asked the city's Office of Management and Budget to make a
nationwide study to learn how other states handled the problem. A month or two
later, he received a report which showed that only five other states required
local governments to make contributions to Medicaid, and of them all only New
York required localities to pay as much as 25 percent of the total bill.

Armed with this report, Koch began to do what he does so well, calling on the
power brokers of the city and state. In early August, he spoke to the New York
City Partnership, a coalition of the city's top business executives including
men like David Rockefeller, chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, and Richard Shinn,
chairman of Metropolitan Life. Koch talked to them the way he talks to
everybody. He put them at ease. Pretty soon, David Rockefeller was fetching him
a cup of coffee and another captain of industry was scooting off to get him a
Danish. Koch said he had balanced the city's budget a year ahead of the legal
requirement by ''paring service capabilities to the minimum.'' The captains were
impressed. ''Now,'' Koch continued, ''unless we can get the state to help with
Medicaid we will be plagued with the problem of the city's budget
indefinitely.'' The captains, who are well known for their aversion to
bankruptcy, were even more impressed. When Koch was finished, Richard Shinn
stood up and said Koch had made a doggone good case and the coalition ought to
support him.

''I thought he made an excellent impression on our group,'' says David
Rockefeller of this meeting. ''I do like him. I think he's probably doing the
best job of any mayor since La Guardia.''

Koch's next stop, a few days later, was Felix Rohatyn, the highpowered financier
who is the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation. ''My relationship
with the Mayor is not close,'' says Rohatyn, ''We haven't always agreed. That is
almost inevitable from an institutional position. On the matter of Medicaid,
however, we were of like mind. As a matter of fact, I went up to Albany in
November and delivered a speech urging the state to take over either welfare or
Medicaid, to be paid for by increases in state gasoline taxes.''

Next came breakfast at Gracie Mansion with Stanley Fink, Speaker of the State
Assembly; and then another breakfast with Warren Anderson, the State Senate's
Republican majority leader. In each case, Koch pressed his argument vigorously
yet without antagonism. In October, the Mayor went public, arguing at a
conference on New York City's priorities at Sterling Forest that it should be
the responsibility of the state to assume the local cost of Medicaid. Then, in
December, he made his pitch to a group of county executives meeting at
Manhattan's new Grand Hyatt Hotel, and that won him a standing ovation.

Meanwhile in Albany, Governor Carey did not receive phone calls on the matter
from David Rockefeller and Felix Rohatyn; the mighty make themselves heard
indirectly, as when the python merely rolls an eye.  In short order, the
Governor became the target of what he describes as ''screams from county
executives throughout the state.'' The ponderous machinery of government began
to heave and sway. On Jan. 6, the telephone rang at City Hall. It was the
Governor calling:

''I've got a surprise for you, Ed. Tomorrow, I'm going to propose in the State
of the State Message that we begin the assumption of all local Medicaid costs in
this fiscal year.''

''Governor,'' said the Mayor, ''I love you!'' What lies ahead for the outsider
who became Mr. Inside? Will his candor, showmanship and political expertise
maintain his popularity, or will today's scattered enemies come tomorrow as
battalions? The best answer may be the one Koch himself likes to use when
presented with the imponderable, quoting with mock gravity his friend Anwar
el-Sadat: ''These are questions for the future generation.''

Meanwhile, Koch has said repeatedly that he wants to be Mayor of New York for
three terms. I believe him, but I also recognize the shrewdness of that
statement. If he said he wanted only two terms, that would raise the specter of
lame-duck ineffectuality during a second term. And to express an interest in
four terms would sound arrogant. After all, only Franklin D. Roosevelt had four
terms. Three sounds just right.

If Edward Koch is going to continue in office for another nine years as he
proposes, and if the majority of his constituents are going to continue to think
of him as the best mayor since La Guardia, it may be that New Yorkers will have
to build a new airport - so they can name one after him, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mayor Koch (page 18) photo of Mayor Koch and
Police Commissioner photo of Mayor Koch (page 20) photo of Mayor Koch (page 21)
photo of Mayor Koch and Eleanor Roosevelt (page 66)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A GUIDE TO REALPOLITIK

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


FOR THE RECORD Selected Statements 1977-1980.  By Henry Kissinger.  332 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown & Co. $12.95.

By GADDIS SMITH

WHERE would we be now if there had been no Carter Administration and if Henry
Kissinger had remained the directing mind behind American foreign policy? And
what will be the shape of foreign policy in the years ahead if, as seems
probable, Mr. Kissinger's ideas are again ascendant? The former Secretary of
State's own answers to these questions are implicit in this collection of
articles, speeches, interviews and testimony - a record of his thoughts since he
left office in January 1977.

Experienced Kissinger-watchers will find nothing surprising here; nevertheless,
since the pieces all stem from the belief that only Great Powers count, the book
serves as an elegant and succinct guide to realpolitik. The familiar central
message would bring nods of warm assent from American Cold Warriors of the
Korean War era: The United States must manage all of its affairs - its attitude
toward human rights, relations with allies, arms control, energy policy, its
response to the third world - so as to increase its power in relationship to the
Soviet Union. We must banish all sentimentality from our foreign policy,
especially the belief that the moral values of individuals can be applied to
international relations. Power to contain Soviet expansionism, not peace for its
own sake, must be the nation's strategic objective, its vision of the future.

The earlier pieces, written in 1977 and 1978, are Olympian in tone. The old
veteran does not want to criticize lest he add to the difficulties of the
neophytes who are trying so sincerely to do the right thing. But the 1979 and
1980 pieces, written in the context of the fall of the Shah, the debate over
SALT II and the approaching Presidential election, are more strident. Mr.
Kissinger charges the Carter Administration with abandoning a loyal friend (the
Shah), undermining American military power by unilaterally forgoing such weapons
systems as the neutron bomb, failing to stop Soviet adventures and generally
creating a situation of extreme danger.

His opinions about Iran and the Shah are part of his larger criticism of the
Carter Administration for failing to accept the argument that the end justifies
the means on issues of human rights.  Mr. Kissinger tells us that we should
distinguish between authoritarian regimes that trample on human rights because
they are threatened by subversion or external pressure and totalitarian regimes
that deny human rights as a matter of ideology. Although he admits that the
Shah's regime was not perfect, he implies that the Carter Administration must
bear the responsibility for the Shah's collapse. The Shah, Mr. Kissinger says,
embarked on liberal reforms in the belief that he could not otherwise retain
American support, losing control of the situation and his throne in the bargain.
The naked message beneath the verbiage is that we should urge more repression,
not less, when ''friendly'' despots begin to wobble in the face of an incipient
revolution. Mr. Kissinger also argues that a concern for human rights, which can
cause us to withdraw support
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Gaddis Smith, author of a book on Secretary of State Dean Acheson, teaches at
Yale.
from regimes that do not meet our standards, can raise that dread monster of
isolationism.

Mr. Kissinger testified in favor of the SALT II treaty, but his approval was so
adorned with criticism of the Carter Administration that his words provided
powerful ammunition for the opponents. SALT II, he argued, should be accompanied
by a great increase in American military power. We must also abandon the
principle of agreed mutual vulnerability, which has been a foundation of
strategic arms control negotiations since SALT I. While admitting that he once
helped frame the ''amazing theory ... that vulnerability contributed to peace
and invulnerability contributed to risks of war,'' he now sneers at that notion.
The renunciation of this theory is based on the even more amazing assumption
that strategic invulnerability can be attained and that a race toward
invulnerability does not mean an increased risk of nuclear war.

Mr. Kissinger asserts that the fate of the world depends on the ability of the
United States and its allies to maintain a balance of power with the Soviet
Union. This may well be true, but it does not follow that this balance of power
will alone determine the fate of the world or that every American policy should
be linked to that one issue. Mr. Kissinger wants complete linkage. He shows
little sympathy for the viewpoint of third world leaders, but at the same time
attaches ultimate significance to what the Soviet Union or a Soviet proxy such
as Cuba may do in the third world. ''Had we succeeded in Angola,'' he writes,
''there would
have been no Ethiopia. ... I think this was one of the decisive watersheds.'' He
compares recent failures to stop Soviet adventures in the third world to the
French and British failure to stop Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland in
1936 - the last, lost chance to prevent World War II. That is nothing but a
variation, equally dubious, of the Munich analogy so often advanced by
proponents of the American war in Vietnam.

Carter's Panama treaties and the Camp David accords receive Mr.  Kissinger's
approval. But overall he indicts the late Administration for being naive and
hopeful jellyfish. Remember, he tells us, those who ''try to avoid difficult
choices by making comfortable assumptions about the future win no awards for
restraint; they only speed their own demise.'' In short, we must assume the
worst.

The most eloquent essay - Mr. Kissinger's oration at the funeral of his patron
and friend, Nelson Rockefeller - stands alone, quite out of character with the
rest of the book. Here Mr. Kissinger recalls that Rockefeller in his final years
''would say, because I needed it, but, above all, because he deeply felt it:
'Never forget that the most profound force in the world is love.' ''

Aside from this moment, with its poignant self-awareness, there is little love
in these essays or in the world view the author advances. Love divorced from
power, Mr. Kissinger is saying, may be a profound force, profoundly dangerous.
Those who walk the path of love walk to destruction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Henry Kissinger

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUN CONTROL: IS IT TIME FOR IT?

BYLINE: By ISABEL M. DeLUCCIA; Isabel M. Deluccia lives in North Haledon.

SECTION: Section 11; Page 26,; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


THE year 1980 ended on a tragic note, thanks to handguns. Dr.  Michael
Halberstam, a Washington physician, writer and TV commentator, and John Lennon,
the most famous member of the Beatles, were murdered in December.

Ironically, shortly before his death, Dr. Halberstam and his good friend, Nelson
Shields, chairman of Handgun Control Inc. in Washington, were discussing the
handgun issue at dinner. Mr.  Shields's son, Nick, was murdered in San Francisco
by a psychopath using a .32-caliber ''Saturday night special,'' which got him
involved in the gun-control issue.

As a result of their conversation, Dr. Halberstam wrote and broadcast some
commentaries for Cable TV News Network. In one, he said:

''Let's start to put some of the same energy and urgency into controlling
handguns as we put into muscular dystrophy. Start now.  Don't wait until someone
you love or someone you respect has been murdered by a psychopath with a grudge
against society and a .32 special in his pocket.''

Two weeks later, Dr. Halberstam was dead, murdered with a .38-caliber handgun. A
few hours later, the murder of John Lennon shocked our nation and the rest of
the world. The weapon? A .32-caliber ''Saturday night special.''

''The outrage of Lennon's death,'' Mr. Shields said, ''was reflected in the
thousands of calls and letters we received at the Handgun Control office in
Washington.''

All the outrage gradually faded, as did the newspaper headlines.  ''A few days
ago, I heard a member of the gun lobby talking about weathering the storm of
public outrage,'' Mr. Shields said. ''He'd seen it before and predicted that it
would fade in the new year.''

The failings of human nature are predictable, especially to the gun lobby in
Washington. It has the strong support of zealots who react like puppets on a
string whenever handgun-control legislation is mentioned. These same fanatics
never fail to vote on Election Day.

The gun-control lobby is ever-vigilant. Its latest catchy slogan reads: ''Guns
Don't Kill - People Kill.'' State Senator H.L. Richardson of California, the
founder and chairman of Gun Owners of America, says the problem is not the guns,
but our criminal-justice system, which he calls a ''joke.''

Our judicial system has its roots in the English judicial system.  English
policemen, except the guards who protect the royal family, do not carry guns.

In a recent article, Senator Richardson said: ''No, the answer to our crime
problem is not controlling guns, but punishing criminals. Until we realize that,
and actually start meting out meaningful punishment, all the gun-control laws
ever conceived will not significantly reduce crime.''

Are more jails the answer? Is treating the symptom more effective than curing
the cause?  Mr. Richardson feels that ''the fallacy in the current debate is
that all of the attention has been focused on the weapons, not on the criminals
and the incredibly lenient treatment we accord murderers and others convicted of
violent acts.''

Our system has innumerable shortcomings; overloaded court dockets is one of
them.  Senator Richardson claims that he and other Americans are revolted that
so many criminals are being studied in depth by psychiatrists, rather than being
on their way to swift trials and executions.  Actually, one-tenth of 1 percent
of accused murderers are studied by psychiatrists.

During the Vietnam war, American youth was outraged over what it considered a
senseless war. Little did Americans realize that more people at home than
servicemen on battlefields were being killed by handguns. Unfortunately, the
situation has worsened. In cities and suburbs and on college campuses, people of
all ages now face a onein-five chance of being threatened by a handgun.

Owning a gun for one's protection is not the answer; 55 million to 60 million
handguns are owned by Americans for ''self-protection.'' How many of these
people actually will be able to defend themselves with their guns should the
need arise? Intruders seldom give warning.

Guns in the hands of some people are as dangerous as in the hands of criminals.
Recently, a 70-year-old widow killed a 21-year-old youth with her handgun. The
reason? He refused to move his car from in front of her driveway. And she didn't
even own a car!

Congress will soon consider, again, a Federal handgun-control bill sponsored by
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Representative Peter
W. Rodino Jr., Democrat of Newark. Among its provisions are:

- Limiting handgun ownership to three a person.

- Requiring police checks to avoid the sale of handguns to anyone with a history
of criminal activity, mental illness or drug addiction.

- Stopping the manufacture and sale of ''Saturday night specials,'' requiring
handgun manufacturers to keep track of their products' ownership, as the
automobile industry does.

It is not a very strong bill, but it is better than none at all.  While you and
I cannot beat a path to Washington, we can write our Representatives and make
them aware of our feelings. Please take time to write a concise letter; your
message may help prevent the injury or murder of someone close to you. Address
your letter to:

The name of your Representative, c/o Congress of the United States, House of
Representatives, Washington, D.C. 20515.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA PLAYS DOWN SUPPORT OF ASIAN REBELS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 1


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China, in a conciliatory gesture to the
non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia, said here today that Peking would seek
to prevent its ties to the Communist parties of the region from harming its
relations with the five non-Communist Governments.

Mr. Zhao's statement, made at a news conference, represented the kind of
assurance that the five members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
had long wanted to hear from a Chinese leader. Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila
of Thailand said in a private conversation that he was very pleased with the
Chinese Prime Minister's carefully phrased comment, and senior diplomats said
they viewed it as the most tangible public accomplishment of Mr. Zhao's visit
here.

Despite an easing of tensions between China and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations since the accession of Deng Xiaoping to supreme leadership in
Peking, the non-Communist nations have been openly concerned about Peking's
unwillingness to withdraw support publicly from the Communist insurgent
movements that beset three of the countries.

Pro-Chinese guerrillas have been active in the jungles and mountains of
Thailand, Malaysia and the Philippines; such movements are dormant in the other
two member nations of the non-Communist group, Indonesia and Singapore.

Shift in Chinese Position

Contrary to previous Chinese statements, including those of Mr.  Deng when he
toured this region in 1978, Mr. Zhao declared in reply to a question, ''We will
try to take further actions to prevent our relations with the Communist parties
of the Asean countries from affecting friendly relations between China and the
countries of Asean.'' Asean is the abbreviation for the non-Communist group.

The official Chinese position, which used to anger leaders in this region by the
blandness with which it was stated, had been that relations between states are
one thing and those between parties another. While fostering improved ties with
non-Communist governments in the region, Mr. Deng and others often said, the
Chinese Communist Party could not neglect its fraternal duties to brother
Communist parties.

''Now we have only ideological and moral relations with the Communist parties in
Asean countries,'' Mr. Zhao said. ''We sincerely wish that the Asean countries
will be united from within and enjoy stability and prosperity.''

In the past, Peking supplied material support to the insurgent movements,
sheltered their leaderships and broadcast their propaganda to their countries
from China. This support has decreased since the warming of Governmental
relations, but Peking had hitherto stood by its full political backing.

Situation in Cambodia

This major verbal concession to the non-Communist countries was viewed by
diplomats as motivated by the increasing stake that China has in Southeast Asia
because of the rise of Vietnam, and with it the Soviet Union, as a major
regional power. The principal focus of discussion in the three days of Mr.
Zhao's visit here has been Vietnam's continued occupation of Cambodia.

As expected, Mr. Zhao used his news conference to condemn in strong terms
Vietnam's overthrow of the pro-Chinese Cambodian Government of Prime Minister
Pol Pot and to reject last week's proposal by Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos for a
conference between them and the members of the non-Communist group to stabilize
this region.

The Prime Minister, gesturing vigorously, described the proposal as a subterfuge
to circumvent United Nations resolutions calling for the withdrawal of the
Vietnamese occupation army and a maneuver to obtain recognition of the
Vietnamese-installed Government of President Heng Samrin.

He urged all anti-Vietnamese Cambodian groups to cooperate with the remnants of
the Pol Pot regime, nominally led by Prime Minister Khieu Samphan, calling
particularly on the former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the
former Prime Minister, Son Sann, to join a united anti-Vietnamese front.

Offer of Support to Thailand

Mr. Zhao offered to ''stand resolutely by Thailand'' against any Vietnamese
aggression but said the nature of such support would depend on ''consultations
between the two governments.''

In reply to another question, Mr. Zhao reiterated an indirect warning to
President Reagan that any efforts to alter Washington's decision to break formal
diplomatic relations with Taiwan ''would be an interference in the internal
affairs of China and a setback to the present Chinese-American relationship.''

Mr. Zhao flew later to the northern town of Chiang Mai, where he was received by
King Phumiphol Aduldet. He will return to Peking tomorrow, ending his first
foreign tour as Prime Minister. His trip began in Burma.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COPPOLA RISKS ALL ON $22 MILLION MOVIE

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 1


Francis Coppola, the Academy Award-winning director of ''The Godfather II,''
narrowly averted bankruptcy last week by pledging $1 million in personal
property and by preparing to pledge another $7 million.

Mr. Coppola, who mortgaged everything he owned, including his house in the Napa
Valley and his automobile, to make the $31.5 million ''Apocalypse Now'' in 1979
and then bought a 10-acre studio in the heart of Hollywood for $6.7 million last
March, will be starting production on his $22 million ''One From the Heart''
tomorrow.

But the cameras will roll only because he has put up $1 million of San Francisco
real-estate holdings as collateral for a loan of the same amount from the
Security Pacific Bank. The loan, which will carry a minimum of 21 percent
interest, became necessary when $8 million of foreign investors' money was
withdrawn from ''One From the Heart'' at the last moment.

Needs $1 Million a Week

''To get through each week of shooting, I will have to put up one million week
by week from the real-estate package that represents all my personal assets,
until I've put up the eight million,'' Mr.  Coppola said. These include several
apartment buildings and other holdings.

How Mr. Coppola got to the point of either declaring bankruptcy or pledging $8
million of his own began more than a year ago when ''One From the Heart'' was
being developed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Written by Armyan Bernstein, the
comedy-romance of lovers in Chicago, at one time was to star Jill Clayburg and
Michael Douglas and to be produced for M-G-M by Mr. Bernstein and Ed Feldman.

''We went after Coppola to direct,'' said Al Newman, M-G-M vice president for
publicity. ''He wanted to - but not as an employee. He attempted to buy the
picture. We resisted.''

Eventually M-G-M let Mr. Coppola have ''One From the Heart'' in return for the
United States and Canadian distribution rights and 20 percent of the equity.
M-G-M also guaranteed completion money. Mr.  Coppola's Zoetrope Studios, which
he wholly owned, was to produce the movie at his new studios. David Begelman,
M-G-M president, said today that ''the status of 'One From the Heart' is
entirely up to Zoetrope, since they have the financing and the production
facilities.''

In Surreal Las Vegas

Mr. Coppola's ''One From the Heart,'' which he describes as ''a fantasy about
romantic love, jealousy and sex - all the kinds of love between men and women,''
is set in a surreal Las Vegas and stars Frederic Forrest, Raul Julia, Terry
Garr, and Nastassia Kinski, the 20-year-old star of Roman Polanski's ''Tess.''

His original budget for the movie was $15 million. Chase Manhattan Bank, which
had agreed to supply about half the financing for Zoetrope movies up to an
aggregate of $20 million, was to put up $8 million for ''One From the Heart.''
The remaining $7 million was raised by preselling the movie to foreign
distributors, just as Mr.  Coppola had presold ''Apocalypse Now.'' When the
budget climbed another $8 million several months ago because of the decision to
make it a fantasy that would require $4.5 million worth of sets, foreign
tax-shelter money was found to fill the gap.

The trouble began several weeks ago when the foreign tax-shelter investors
pulled out. According to Mr. Coppola, the withdrawal came partly because the
investors, organized by Howard Schuster, were ''burnt out from 'Superman II' and
partly because M-G-M refused to make a minor monetary accommodation.'' Suddenly
there were rumors that Zoetrope couldn't meet its payroll.

Converted Assets to Cash

''We have an immense payroll,'' Mr. Coppola said today of the nearly
400-employee company. ''But we met our payroll this week as we have always done.
Like any company when there is a shortfall, we converted more assets into
dough.''

Although the payroll was always met, many of his top executives got together and
voluntarily took a 15-percent cut in salary in December without telling Mr.
Coppola.

According to Mr. Coppola, Zoetrope has nonliquid assets of $55 million and
liabilities of $17 million. That did not make the unexpected crisis any easier,
since most of the assets are real estate and equipment.

'' We expected our partners would step in and be helpful when the production
date was imminent, to help me on a short-term basis,'' Mr. Coppola said. ''But
M-G-M wouldn't even float our payroll for two weeks. Yet they couldn't cooperate
enough when we had a tax shelter to make it possible,'' Mr. Coppola added
bitterly.

Sought United Artists' Help

With M-G-M refusing to put up any money, Mr. Coppola knocked on other doors,
including United Artists, which would be releasing ''One From the Heart'' for
M-G-M. But United Artists was having its own ''Heaven's Gate'' problems.

''The deal was not appetizing to anyone because we didn't have a free and clean
property,'' said Lucy Fisher, head of production at Zoetrope. ''We had too many
bed partners.''

Mr. Coppola does not have any distribution rights left to offer any new
financier. So he volunteered part of his gross percentage, but the break-even
point on the $22 million movie was too high to attract any nibbles. In addition,
even his original $15 million budget had been questioned by many people in
Hollywood who wondered whether his admittedly good actors were strong enough at
the box office to carry the weight of a $15 million movie.

The actual cost of the movie, including its $500,000 miniature of Las Vegas and
its almost entirely animated $4.5 million background is under $15 million, Mr.
Coppola says. The rest of the money is in various fees, including $2 million of
overhead for Zoetrope, a $2.5 million contingency fee for M-G-M, and a $3
million fee for Mr.  Coppola, which he has already ploughed back into his
studio.

Urged to Declare Bankruptcy

When no new money could be found, it was recommended to Mr. Coppola that he
declare bankruptcy, an action that would have taken the pressure of interference
away from ''One From the Heart.''

''Those people were trying to save me personally,'' Mr. Coppola said. ''We could
have made the movie under the protection of the state, since finishing the
picture would have been the surest way of paying creditors. But my decision was
not to afford myself that luxury.''

One of Mr. Coppola's executives once said, with a mixture of rue and admiration,
''If there are nine easy ways to do something, Francis will manage to pick the
10th way.'' Three times an Academy Award-winning writer - for ''Patton,'' ''The
Godfather'' and ''The Godfather II'' - he is a compulsive risk-taker who has
described making movies as ''the adventure of taking the next step.'' ''Every
one of my own future projects is dangerous,'' he added.

His greatest risk - his surreal Vietnam War film, ''Apocalypse Now'' -has paid
off. Once in debt to United Artists, which guaranteed his bank loans, for $30
million, he now owes less than $5 million.  ''Apocalaypse Now'' has grossed over
$200 million and brought United Artists film rentals of $85 million. When he has
paid United Artists its last $5 million, the negatives of ''Apocalypse Now''
will belong to Mr. Coppola, who has already sold the film to Home Box Office for
$2.5 million and expects to sell it to a television network for at least $10
million.

'Playing My Talent'

''The reason I take such chances is because I don't have money behind me,'' Mr.
Coppola said. ''The only way I can win is by playing my talent for all it is
worth. Once, when I was young and wanted a movie camera desperately, I took
$1,000 to Las Vegas and tried to win myself $20,000 for a camera.''

That time, he lost. Now, he is angry at what he perceives as Hollywood's desire
to see him lose again. ''The majors don't like the fact that we make movies and
keep the negatives,'' he said. ''If you run a grocery store why would you want
another grocery store to compete with you? Especially since the motion picture
industry, as it exists now, is the new Detroit, a group of lackluster companies.
How many times do I have to be laughed at? They laughed at me for 'Apocalypse.'
They laughed at me when I decided to present Abel Gance's 'Napoleon' atthe Radio
City Music Hall. They're laughing because for 'One From the Heart,' I'm building
Las Vegas at Zoetrope instead of going to Las Vegas. The movie I'm making is not
about the real Las Vegas. It's a metaphor. By now people should realize that
what I do is different. Zoetrope has been in business for 12 years and has a
string of hits. When I think of how they laugh at me, the idea of going bankrupt
and taking $30 million and putting it in my pocket and disappearing begins to
get attractive.''

Mr. Coppola has been rehearsing ''One From the Heart'' for six weeks and expects
to shoot the movie in a little over a month, which is half the usual time. The
movie will be produced and edited on a new electronic system that, he says,
''can cut 25 percent to 30 percent of the cost out of making a movie and that
will completely transform the movie industry.'' He expects to have the movie in
theaters by July. One reason that he can afford such high interest rates on his
loans is that he will be paying for such a short time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Francis Coppola

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood's Insanity Defense Is Assailed by Prosecutors

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 2


Prosecutors declared in their final arguments today that there was little
evidence that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines was mentally ill in the 14
years he was allegedly held captive in Vietnam.

Maj. Werner Hellmer, senior prosecution counsel in the 11-week courtmartial
proceedings against the marine, told a jury of five Marine officers, all Vietnam
veterans, that ''the overwhelming evidence from the other prisoners of war was
that he was not suffering from any mental disease.''

Private Garwood, a 34-year-old Indiana native, could be sentenced to life in
prison if found guilty of the charges against him, collaborating with the enemy
for two of the 14 years and abusing a fellow prisoner of war without justifiable
cause.

Ridiculing psychiatrists who have said that Private Garwood was driven insane by
his captors, Major Hellmer said that was ''just the old brainwashing theory
brought up to date.'' He contended that Private Garwood was sane and knew what
he was doing when he wore the uniform of the Vietcong and carried a rifle for
his captors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TIME TO REMEMBER OUR VIETNAM HEROS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


To the Editor:

In August of 1969, after nearly 400 days in Vietnam, I stepped off a plane in
Twentynine Palms, Calif., to be greeted by a welcoming committee made up of
three 70-year-old retired men handing out four-ounce paper cups of orange juice.

After rude and mechanical paperwork processing by military clerks, a fellow
marine and I were charged twice the meter rate for a terrifying cab ride to L.A.
International Airport. We flew to New York in near anonymity - just two more
G.I.'s going somewhere standby. In fact, we almost clung together in fear of the
hostile citizens, who we knew had been against us our whole 13 months overseas.

My family met me at the gate in New York, and we were soon all weeping, hugging
and kissing in a joyous but deliberately quiet reunion. We certainly didn't want
to draw attention to ourselves.

I have watched the hostages and the flood of joyous emotion which has greeted
their every moment since their release. They deserve all the adulation we can
give them. They are heroes.

But so were many hundreds of thousands of us. We laid it on the line for our
country every day we spent in Southeast Asia. No one offered us, not one of us,
a public gesture of thanks. No media coverage, no dental checkups, no sprees at
the PX, no isolated decompression, and certainly no ticker-tape parades.

Besides the joy that I've felt in the last week, I've felt something else, that
just maybe this national outpouring of emotion is also a catharsis for the lousy
era this country has had since the beginning of the Vietnam War. And maybe those
of us who went to Vietnam are finally getting our heroes' welcome vicariously
through the former hostages.
BRIAN K. SHERWOOD, New York, Jan. 28, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TIME TO REMEMBER OUR VIETNAM HEROS;
* To the Editor:$


SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


While there is such great excitement and massive coverage by the media of the
return of the Americans held hostage in Iran, it is time to focus some attention
on the Americans who are still unaccounted for in Vietnam and who seemingly have
been forgotten.

I would remind people again of this great shame and protest against the lack of
interest in these unfortunate men who served their country in combat duty.
SHEILA WATERS, Director, (U.S.A.), P.O.W. International, Baltimore, Jan. 26,
1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Welcomings Continue, Texas to Massachusetts

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


It was a day of thanksgiving yesterday at City Hall in Dallas, Tex., where a
homecoming ceremony honored two former hostages, Lieut. Comdr. Robert Engelmann
of the Navy, of Hurst, and Sgt. John McKeel of the Marines, of Balch Springs.

Mayor Robert S. Folsom paid tribute not only to the former hostages but also to
the Americans who died and served in Vietnam.  Charles Jones Jr., the only black
among the 52 held hostage for 14 1/2 months in Iran, returned home to Michigan
and to a crowd of about 500 at the Detroit Metropolitan Airport.

Mayor Coleman A. Young gave Mr. Jones a key to the city and presented his family
with bouquets of flowers tied with yellow ribbons.

William F. Keough Jr., of Waltham, Mass., was honored at a special joint session
of the Massachusetts Legislature and said he hoped the failed mission to try to
rescue the hostages would not be remembered as ''a waste of American manhood.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAYOR ASSAILS 'SLOW DISPOSITION' OF CASES UNDER TOUGH GUN LAW

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 992 words


Mayor Koch said yesterday that New York State's six-month-old strict law on
pistols did not seem to be working and that he was prepared to request that
special sections of the courts be set up to handle cases involving guns.

Choosing his words carefully, the Mayor avoided saying outright that the new law
was a failure. Nevertheless, the thrust of his comments was that changes were
needed and that he was looking toward the courts to take the necessary steps.

His principal concern, Mr. Koch said, is ''the slow rate of disposition'' of
such cases by the courts since the law went into effect on Aug. 12. Essentially,
the statute eliminates plea bargaining and requires minimum one-year terms for
most defendants who have prior felony convictions and are found guilty of
carrying unlicensed, loaded handguns.

Only 77 Sent to Jail

According to the Mayor, between Aug. 12 and Jan. 21 there were 4,106 persons
arrested and 2,222 indicted under the gun law. Of these, he said, the courts
disposed of 239 cases and imposed sentences in only 104 cases. Moreover, the
Mayor said, only 77 of the 104 received terms of at least a year.

''If only 77 people, out of 4,106 arrested, have so far been sentenced to jail
for one year or more, it appears that the law is not working,'' he said.
''People must know that if they carry a gun they will go to jail.''

His ''gut reaction,'' Mr. Koch said, is that some judges are orchestra still
does mean something to an artist. If the New York Philharmonic or one of its
brothers in the Big Five offers a musician a four-appearance job in a
subscription week, the fee can be adjusted downward, and it usually is. Thus a
$10,000 artist may play for $8,000 a performance, going to the bank with $32,000
(less, of course, agents' fees and other expenses) instead of $40,000.

But even at that, orchestras are suffering.  ''We can't afford some top soloists
for our subscription season any more,'' says Harold Lawrence, president and
executive director of the Oakland Symphony. ''We engage them only for galas with
highpriced tickets.''

Sampson Field, the president of the New York Philharmonic, concurs. ''Artists
can raise their prices. We can't. We can't price ourselves out of the field or
limit ourselves only to the very wealthy.'' Ernest Fleishmann of the Los Angeles
Philharmonic has a particular gripe. He says he doesn't begrudge the top
artists, the big box-office draws, their fee. The very great ones are worth it
artistically and at the box office. ''It's the ones in the middle, in the
$4,000-$6,000 bracket, who are out of line,'' he says. ''Nothing happens at the
box-office. I object to the medium artist asking for a big fee, and managers are
making a mistake when paying outrageous fees for routine artists.''

One thing is certain. The top American orchestras have to have a certain number
of top artists every season, and that leads to some intensive bidding. ''It's
like a competition,'' one Philharmonic official bitterly says. ''Chicago or
Philadelphia will be afraid that we'll have artists they don't have, so they'll
jack up their prices.  Then we in New York have to meet those jacked-up prices.
Orchestra managers around the country are talking about it. What the hell can we
do about those crazy prices? Perhaps we can get together and form our own
union.''

A few years ago, soloists and conductors cost the Philadelphia Orchestra about
$400,000 for a season. ''Now,'' says Sy Rosen, the executive director of the
orchestra, ''that figure has doubled.  Things are going to get worse before they
get better. Everybody is asking for more. It won't stop until the public refuses
to pay the E1

TIMES SQ. PLANS TIED TO PROGRAM REAGAN OPPOSES

By IRVIN MOLOTSKY Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, Feb. 3 - The Urban Development Action Grant program, which the
Reagan Administration said today it would try to eliminate, is important to New
York City and its plans to revive the Times Square area.

A grant of $22.5 million under the Federal program has been sought to help in
the construction of the Portman Hotel on Times Square, a $261.5 million project.

But Mayor Koch said in New York City last night after his return from Washington
- where he was among 12 Mayors who met with President Reagan - that the Portman
Hotel would be built with or without the Federal grant. The hotel is planned on
the west side of Times Square between 45th and 46th Streets.

''I believe that property in that area is going up and they will find a way to
build that hotel,'' the Mayor said.

Also Relying on Program

The other big project relying on funds from the urban grant program is the
development of the South Street Seaport in lower Manhattan, but it apparently
would not be affected, a New York City official said, because its $20 million
Federal grant has already been approved.

The official, Julian Spirer, who is director of the city's Washington office,
said, ''This does not appear to present a risk to the South Street Seaport
because any new action is likely to be prospective.''

In other matters that were discussed today, Mr. Koch said there were indications
that the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act was in trouble. New York and
other cities have relied upon the Ceta program to pay the salaries of some
public employees.

Mr. Koch said Mr. Reagan was receptive to two of his suggestions.  One would set
up a pilot program in 10 cities, including New York, in which businesses would
be permitted to pay less than the minimum wage in return for employing
youngsters regarded as otherwise unemployable.

The other involved Vietnam War veterans. Mr. Koch, reading from notes, said:
''At lunch, the President said that he was disturbed at reading that the Vietnam
veterans were upset that no one was paying attention to them. I said, 'Why don't
you declare Sunday as a holiday to honor Vietnam veterans?' He said, 'I'm going
to put that in my head.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood's Jury Delays Consideration of Verdict

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 83 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 3


After hearing final arguments by defense attorneys in the court-martial of Pfc.
Robert R. Garwood, a 34-year-old marine accused of collaborating with the enemy
in the Vietnam War, the jury of five Vietnam veterans decided today to wait
until tomorrow to begin deliberations.

In their final arguments, defense attorneys contended that the Garwood case was
''one of a kind'' and would not create any precedents for the Marine Corps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DAYS OF CAPTIVITY: THE HOSTAGES' STORY

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 22820 words


FROM THOSE INSIDE, AN ACCOUNT OF HOW THE EMBASSY FELL AND HOW THEY ENDURED
CAPTIVITY

THE EMBASSY OCCUPIED

The Narrators

This description of the embassy takeover and the 14 1/2 months that 52 Americans
spent as hostages in Iran, based on detailed interviews, is from and about these
men and women:
Thomas L. Ahern, 48, political officer and narcotics control coordinator. Robert
G. Anders, 55, consular officer. William E. Belk, 44, communications and records
officer. Robert Blucker, 53, economics officer and oil special= ist. Donald J.
Cooke, 25, vice consul.  William J. Daugherty, 33, political officer. William A.
Gallegos, 22, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Bruce W. German, 44, budget
officer. Duane Gillette, 24, Navy Petty Officer 2d Class, administrator at
Defense Attache Office. Alan B. Golacinski, 30, regional security officer.
Joseph Hall, 31, Army Warrant Officer, operations coordinator, Defense Attache
Office. Donald R. Hohman, 39, Army Sergeant 1st Class, medical corpsman on
temporary duty from West Germany. Leland Holland, 53, Army Colonel, chief of
security. Michael H. Howland, 34, security officer. Charles Jones Jr., 40,
communications specialist and teletype operator. Malcolm Kalp, 42, economics and
commercial officer. Moorhead C. Kennedy Jr., 50, economics and commercial
officer, third ranking diplomat at embassy.  William F. Keough Jr., 50, head of
International School of Islamabad, Pakistan, formerly with American School in
Teheran. Steven W. Kirtley, 22, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Kathryn L.
Koob, 42, International Communication Agency cultural officer, director of
Iran-America Society. Frederick L. Kupke, 34, communications officer and
electronics specialist. L. Bruce Laingen, 58, charge d'affaires, top American
diplomat in Iran at time of takeover. Steven M.  Lauterbach, 29, general
services officer. Gary E. Lee, 38, general services officer. Paul E. Lewis, 23,
Marine Sergeant, security guard. Cora A. Lijek, 26, consular assistant. Mark J.
Lijek, 30, consular officer. John W. Limbert, 37, political officer. James M.
Lopez, 22, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Ladell Maples, 24, Marine Sergeant,
security guard. John D. McKeel Jr., 27, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Michael
J. Metrinko, 34, political officer. Jerry J. Miele, 42, telecommunications
officer. Elizabeth Montagne, 42, secretary.  Bert C. Moore, 45, administrative
consul. Richard H. Morefield, 51, Consul General. Paul M. Needham Jr., 30, Air
Force Captain, logistics plans and programs officer, adviser to Iranian Air
Force. Robert C.  Ode, 65, retired from Foreign Service, special consular
official on temporary 45-day assignment. Gregory A. Persinger, 23, Marine
Sergeant, security guard. Jerry Plotkin, 47, private businessman.  William E.
Quarles, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Richard I.  Queen, 29, vice consul.
Regis Ragan, 38, Army Master Sergeant, representative of military sales liaison
office. Barry M. Rosen, 36, International Communication Agency, press attache.
William B. Royer Jr., 49, International Communication Agency. Thomas E.
Schaefer, 50, Air Force Colonel, military and air attache. Henry Lee Schatz, 32,
agricultural attache. Charles W. Scott, 48, Army Colonel, chief of Military
Assistance and Advisory Group. Donald A. Sharer, 40, Navy Commander, chief of
Air Force section, Military Assistance and Advisory Group. Rodney V. Sickmann,
23, Marine Sergeant, security guard. Kathleen F. Stafford, 29, consular
assistant. Joseph D.  Stafford, 30, consular officer. Joseph Subic Jr., 23, Army
Staff
Sergeant, administrative assistant, Defense Attache Office.  Elizabeth A. Swift,
40, chief of political section, ranking political officer. Victor L. Tomseth,
39, senior political officer. Phillip R.  Ward, 40, administrative officer,
communications section. Westley Williams, 23, Marine Corporal, security guard.

The morning of Sunday, Nov. 4, 1979, was bleak in Teheran. At the United States
Embassy, Moorhead C. Kennedy Jr., the mission's thirdranking diplomat, was in
his second floor office as a seething crowd of Iranian demonstrators shrieked
outside.

''I remember standing in a window and looking down on all the noise and
anti-American anger,'' the economics specialist said.  ''And I wondered to
myself what it would be like to die.''

On the broad avenue of Takht-E-Jamshid outside, the throng of 450 angry young
protesters had appeared at 7:30 A.M., as it had for days, to take up its
venomous chant:

''Death to the Shah!'' ''Death to Carter!'' ''Death to America!'' Two weeks
earlier, on Oct. 22, the overthrown Shah of Iran, Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, had
been admitted to the United States for cancer treatment. Since then, the
demonstrators had grown increasingly hostile in daily protests outside the
whitewashed brick walls of the park-like embassy compound.

Now, the crowd's rage had reached a fever pitch.  Many members of the embassy
staff were openly uneasy.  At midmorning, a Marine guard burst into Mr.
Kennedy's office and shouted: ''Everybody downstairs! There's a break-in.''
Screaming protesters had breached the great wrought-iron main gates and were
pouring over the walls.  Some waved clubs and sticks.  Huge posters of the
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini bobbed on poles as the crowd went wild.

''I looked out again as we left,'' Mr. Kennedy said, ''and saw this sea of
fanatical faces and heard these voices.  They were like - they were lowing for
death.''

It was the opening cry of an international crisis that was to last for 444 days,
a siege that would scar the lives of scores of American hostages and their
families, transform the United States and Iran into almost warlike enemies and
rally Americans together in a sense of outrage and national purpose that had not
been seen in years.

The story of the embassy takeover and of the hostages' experiences in captivity
is an account of men and women who explored the limits of human endurance in an
ordeal that led to several attempted escapes and at least two attempted
suicides.

It is, in many respects, an ugly story.  No hostage reported subjection to
systematic torture, mutilation or sexual abuse.  But all were mentally or
physically maltreated and many have come home with bitter feelings for their
Iranian captors.  Some also speak ill of the clergymen who visited them in
captivity, of the Carter Administration, the Iranian revolution and, reflecting
the tensions of their ordeal, of one another.

Some tell of beatings, mock executions and cruel episodes of Russian roulette. A
few describe the agonies of months of solitary confinement in dank, windowless
dungeons and dark closets. Most relate ordeals of deprivation, in which
conversation, fresh air, exercise, news, mail and showers were forbidden.

There are also accounts of the kinds of resourcefulness well known to prisoners:
the use of toilet paper and wastebaskets as secret communication links;
nicknames and words of contempt for captors in codes and languages the Iranians
did not understand; a marine's morale-boosting cartoon drawings; arm-wrestling
matches between one hostage and a guard, and hours spent teaching English and
other subjects to captors.

Most, however, recount a time of boredom, loneliness and doubt, of bad food,
filthy living conditions and numbing routine relieved only by books, playing
cards, solitary thoughts and occasional conversations with, or outbursts of
defiance against, their captors.

The captors emerge as people with goals, desires, faults and opinions on matters
ranging from politics and revolution to cookery and culture, and with
personalities ranging from brutal to friendly and even compassionate.

The accounts, above all, show the complexity of a tale that involves 52 to 66
Americans held by hundreds of Iranians in dozens of places in addition to the
embassy, including apartments, homes and jails in Teheran, Tabriz, Qum, Isfahan
and other cities and villages. Some were moved as many as 24 times.

The United States Embassy in Teheran is a 27-acre compound of trees, lawns and
some 25 buildings crisscrossed by paths and driveways and surrounded by 8-to
12-foot walls secured by a number of metal gates.

It is an imposing setting, even by diplomatic standards, situated between
elegant and ugly extremes of a city of four million people dating to Ninth
Century Persia. To the south rises the dazzling downtown skyline of palaces,
monuments and skyscrapers; to the north lie slums, with shanties and open
sewers. The peaks of the Alborz Mountains shimmer in the background.

The main buildings in the compound are the chancery, near the south wall; the
consulate, on the west; the residences of the ambassador and his deputy on the
east; an apartment building for visitors, to the north; and in the middle a
warehouse known as the Mushroom Inn.. Barracks, guard houses, a commissary and
utility buildings dot the compound.

Like most embassies, it was a militarily indefensible position.  Just 13 Marine
guards with light arms and a handful of civilian personnel were responsible for
the security of an area roughly the size of 25 city blocks bounded by a
mile-long wall.

Sundays are working days in the Islamic world, and Nov. 4 began as had many
earlier days, both inside and outside the compound. The day was overcast, and
early-morning temperatures hovered in the 40's as the embassy personnel arrived
for work, joined by dozens of Iranians who served in clerical posts and as
guards.

Relations between the United States and Iran had badly deteriorated, and one
result was that the top-ranking officials of the embassy were not present on the
day of the takeover. A new United States Ambassador, Walter L. Cutler, had been
named the previous April to succeed William H. Sullivan, but his selection had
been rejected by a new Iranian Government anxious to register its displeasure
with Washington. Mr. Cutler had never taken up his post.

The embassy was under the direction of a charge d'affaires, L.  Bruce Laingen, a
career Foreign Service officer. On the morning of the takeover, he and Victor L.
Tomseth, the embassy's senior political officer, and Michael H. Howland, a
security officerchauffeur, went to the Iranian Foreign Ministry on Foroughi
Avenue, a mile to the south, to discuss continuing diplomatic problems.

That left Moorhead Kennedy in nominal charge of the staff, with security in the
hands of Col. Leland Holland, an Army officer who was chief of security. Mr.
Kennedy recalled that the embassy had repeatedly warned the State Department,
after the Shah was hospitalized in the United States, that the situation was
getting out of hand and that Iran could not be relied upon to protect the
embassy in case of attack. The warning was apparently ignored.

''That was a fundamental mistake,'' Mr. Kennedy said.  Allowing the former Shah
into the United States had given the militants the excuse they were seeking, he
said, adding: ''We threw a burning branch into a bucket full of kerosene.''

As the Sunday morning wore on, the menace from the demonstrators outside the
walls seemed to grow, and staff workers inside watched with mounting concern.
Some were ordered to lock their safes and offices.

But it was too late. The invasion began between 10:15 and 10:30 A.M.  ''To put
it bluntly,'' said Sgt. James M. Lopez, a young marine, ''all hell broke loose
and we couldn't stop it.''

Dozens of Americans - perhaps as many as 45, but in any case most of the
embassy's personnel - were trapped in the chancery when the mob, armed with
sticks, baseball bats, lead pipe clubs and, by some accounts, a few pistols,
rushed into the compound.

Elsewhere on the grounds, at least 14 members of the embassy staff were in the
consulate; four others were in the apartment building inside the north wall and
three were in the warehouse. A few Americans were outside the embassy compound.
To many, it was unclear what was happening or what the Iranians intended to do.

''We did expect the possibility that they would come over the wall and burn some
buildings, but it was low on the list of possibilities,'' said Duane L.
Gillette, a Navy petty officer involved in low-level intelligence work. ''The
fact that it happened just showed that we were unprepared.''

At the chancery, the heavy front doors were bolted shut by marines who retreated
from the main gatehouse as the crowds rushed up the steps and began pounding to
get in.  As he fell back, Cpl. Westley Williams pulled out his walkie-talkie and
radioed a warning to all security personnel in the compound.

Embassy personnel inside the chancery, meanwhile, were ordered to high-security
areas behind heavy steel doors on the top floor of the two-story brick building.
Looking out windows, some saw a bedsheet banner with a message in English
suggesting that the demonstrators wanted access to the building only to stage a
sit-in.

Meanwhile, several marines, including Corporal Williams, who had put on flak
jackets and helmets, began prying open a case of rifles, shotguns and pistols on
the ground floor of the chancery.  They also carried tear gas grenades.

Alan B. Golacinski, the embassy's regional security officer, reached Mr. Laingen
by radio just as the charge d'affaires was leaving the Iranian Foreign Ministry.
Mr. Laingen decided to stay at the Foreign Ministry rather than return to the
besieged embassy.

''It was clear at that point,'' Mr. Laingen said, ''that I could not ever have
gotten there physically.'' To minimize bloodshed, he ordered that no guns be
fired at Iranians. Later, when it became apparent that the invaders intended to
seize the compound, Mr. Laingen ordered the destruction of secret documents.

No shots were fired and only tear gas was used in what proved to be a delaying
action to give the document-shredders time to work.  Corporal Williams recalled
that Mr. Golacinski had asked Mr.  Laingen's permission to go outside to try to
persuade the demonstrators to disperse. Mr. Golacinski went out and, moments
later, apparently became one of the first hostages.

Soon afterward, Mr. Kennedy looked out a second-floor window and saw Mr.
Golacinski being led around outside with his hands tied behind him. ''Golacinski
was outside yelling in to us to surrender, that resistance wouldn't work in the
long run,'' Mr. Kennedy said.  ''We were delaying.  We didn't know there was a
pistol at his head.''

In the east wing of the chancery's 30-room second floor, activity by American
and Iranian employees was feverish. This area, consisting of the charge
d'affaire's office and the political and communications sections, was sealed off
by steel security doors.

A group of about 10 persons, following contingency plans, was locked behind the
six-inch-thick steel doors of the top-secret security vault. They shredded
documents, smashed electronic equipment and fed codebooks and other secret data
into grinders.

Others in sealed-off outer offices manned radios and telephones, calling
Washington and Iranian Government officials.  Before the lines went dead, some
calls reached the State Department, but Iranian officials were either
unreachable or unresponsive.

John W. Limbert Jr., a political officer, reached the office of Prime Minister
Mehdi Bazargan. ''I kept saying to the man on the phone, 'What are you going to
do?' And they kept saying that help is on the way - sort of like, 'The check is
in the mail.' And I kept saying 'But what are you going to do? They're coming
through the windows.' ''

The Iranians got into the chancery by rolling up a truck, attaching chains to
the bars of basement windows and ripping them away.  Sometime before noon, the
intruders began pouring into the basement.

''There were between 300 and 500 of them and they came in like water over a
dam,'' said Charles Jones Jr., a communications specialist. The embassy
personnel, he said, ''kept moving to higher floors, like people trying to escape
a sinking ship.''

Corporal Williams and another marine, Sgt. John D. McKeel Jr., under orders not
to fire, met the invaders on a stairway, leveled their shotguns and started
backing up.  Two tear gas grenades were set off and the marines donned masks as
gas began billowing through the area.  Sergeant McKeel sprayed one attacker in
the face with chemical Mace.

Remembering the crated weapons on the first floor, the marines ran upstairs and
grabbed armfuls of rifles and shotguns and fled toward the second floor as the
shouting invaders moved up from the basement.

On the top floor, the weapons-laden marines reached the secure east wing. They
were admitted, and Iranian employes were let out through the big steel doors.
There were closed-circuit television cameras inside, enabling embassy personnel
to see what was happening outside the secure doors. But what they saw did not
help.

At least one bound, blindfolded hostage, possibly Mr. Golacinski, was being held
in front of the television camera. Over a hand-held radio that had been taken
from him, an Iranian told those inside that the hostage would be killed if they
did not open up.  It was sometime between noon and 1 P.M.

With the bulk of the group facing imminent surrender, 10 Americans, including
Mr. Jones and Frederick L. Kupke, a communications officer and electronics
specialist, locked themselves in the top-secret vault room at the far end of the
wing and continued shredding material.

The decision to surrender ''just happened,'' according to Mr.  Kennedy.  ''No
one was really in charge,'' he said.  ''And anyway, to hold out longer wouldn't
have changed things.''

The outer doors swung open and the Iranians, eyes watering from the tear gas,
rushed in.  Searching the area, they realized that there were more Americans in
the vault room.  Efforts to burn through to the vault room with blow torches
failed.

Then, an Iranian leader grabbed a hostage, held a knife at his throat and
threatened to kill him unless those in the vault surrendered.  ''It was now
about 3 or 3:30 P.M.,'' Mr. Jones said, ''and most of the classified documents
had been destroyed.'' Before coming out, however, the last holdouts slammed and
locked the safe.

The Iranians, finding virtually all documents shredded and the safe locked, were
enraged. They attacked the holdouts.  ''They kicked me in the ribs, stepped on
my hands and held a gun to my head,'' said Mr. Jones.  ''They wanted to know why
I was helping Americans. They thought that as a black man I should be on their
side. They said the papers belonged to the people of Iran, not to us.''

''They wanted the combinations to some of the safes,'' Mr. Kupke recalled. ''I
was kicked and knocked down on the floor.  There were two or three guys on each
leg and a couple of guys on each arm. One of them pulled out a knife, a pretty
good-sized pocket knife. The guy in charge said, 'Open up the safes.' I said I
couldn't.  He said, 'If you don't we'll cut your eyes out,' and I said 'I
can't.' ''

''The other guy,'' he continued, ''then put the knife blade against my eye -the
bottom of my eye, and I proceeded to squirm and tried to convince them that that
wasn't the thing to do.  I was really scared.''

Another of the holdouts in the vault, who asked to remain anonymous, said he had
the vault's combination coded on a piece of paper in his wallet. A terrorist
searching him found the scrap, but did not realize what it was. ''Then he took a
bill of lading, which was absolutely meaningless, out of the wallet and kept
that,'' the holdout related. When he was alone later, the hostage said, he ate
the paper bearing the combination.

After these assaults, Mr. Jones said, ''We were blindfolded and hoods were
placed over our heads. We were then led out into the hallway and forced to face
the wall or kneel or sit.''

As militants began scouring the embassy premises, the new captives were pulled
into the hallway, searched, bound with plastic tape and blindfolded. Then they
were taken outside, where large crowds chanted: ''God Is Great!'' ''Long Live
Khomeini!'' and other slogans.

Donald R. Hohman, an Army medic, vividly recalled the moment: ''They took me to
the outside of the embassy, removed the blindfold and made me face what looked
to me like at least two million screaming Iranians.  They were yelling, 'Death
to the Americans!' over and over and over and over until it was like an
earthquake, there was so much vibration from the noise.

''It sounded like the walls were going to come down on top of me.  The whole
building was shaking. I have never been so terrified of anything in my whole
life. I must have turned white all over with fear. I muttered to one of the
guards, 'Please, please take me back inside.' And pretty soon they did.''

Finally, the hostages were marched across the embassy compound to the
ambassador's residence, where they were distributed to various rooms, tied to
chairs and told to keep silent.

Sgt. Rodney V. Sickmann, a young Marine guard, said he felt the surrender had
been handled as well as possible.  ''If somebody had fired a shot,'' he said,
''we probably would all have been shot.''

In the two-story consulate building, the place where American travelers went for
aid and Iranian immigrants obtained visas for the United States, 60 or 70 people
were seeking information or help. On hand also were at least 14 Americans,
including several Foreign Service officers.

Usually, two marines were on duty at the consulate. But Richard H.  Morefield,
the Consul General, had cut back visa services the day before because of the
demonstrations, and as a result only one marine, Sergeant Lopez, was there.

Richard I. Queen, a consular official who was released after 250 days as a
hostage because he contracted multiple sclerosis, also was on duty in the
consulate.  He said the first word that militants had broken into the compound
was overheard on Sergeant Lopez's radio.

''The news we received was very sketchy,'' Mr. Queen said.  ''But shortly
afterwards, we started noticing that some of the militants were gathered around
the consulate.'' When they moved in, Mr.  Morefield ''gave the word that we were
to leave the consulate,'' Mr.  Queen said.

Through a large sliding door on the north side of the building, the consulate
had direct access to Bist Metri Street.  To their surprise, the consular
officials found no protesters there and began moving out in small groups to
attract less attention.

Sergeant Lopez remained behind to destroy equipment and drive back the invaders
with tear gas grenades. Most of the Americans, including Mr. Morefield and Mr.
Queen, were captured nearby, but others escaped, and they gave Sergeant Lopez
much of the credit.

''We turned to the left and walked quickly, not running,'' said Mr. Morefield.
Three or four blocks away ''they surrounded us and said 'Come with us.' I said,
'You've got the building - it's yours,' and they told me: 'You're a hostage.' ''

''The group I was in was about six people,'' Mr. Queen said.  ''We started
walking and we got about two blocks when we noticed that a group of militants
were following us, running after us. We were walking slowly.'' Any inclination
to run was forgotten, he said, when a police officer appeared and ''fired a shot
over our heads.'' They were then led back by militants who shouted ''C.I.A.!''
and antiAmerican slogans.

Kim King, an American tourist who was at the consulate to discuss some
complications concerning his visa, followed five American consular officials on
a circuitous route through the streets, then made his own way to Mehrabad
Airport and left Iran without incident.  The five consular officials were to
have a more noteworthy adventure.

They were, in fact, beginning an odyssey that was to become one of the most
celebrated episodes of the hostage crisis.  The five, Robert G. Anders, Kathleen
and Joseph Stafford and Cora and Mark Lijek, made a lucky turn and hurried to
Mr. Anders's apartment nearby.

Over the next five days, the five Americans hid in three or four homes,
including those of two Americans being held hostage, and they kept in touch by
telephone with Mr. Laingen at the Foreign Ministry.  Mr. Laingen, in an effort
to get them out of the country, nearly blew their cover.

He told the Iranian chief of protocol and his colleagues that the five were free
in the city. ''We were in effect asking the Government of Iran's cooperation in
insuring their security and facilitating their departure,'' Mr. Laingen
recalled.

''They in effect threw up their hands, saying 'Oh, my God, we've got enough to
worry about with all that compound situation. Let's not worry about this now.'
We never raised it with them again.'' Within days, it was clear they should not
have said anything, but the Iranians had apparently forgotten the matter.

Finally, the five called the Canadian Embassy and were greeted with an
invitation to refuge.  In late January 1980, they and Henry Lee Schatz, an
American agricultural attache who was away at the time of the takeover and had
found refuge in the Swedish Embassy, were spirited out of Iran with the help of
the Canadians.

Sergeant Lopez, whose rear-guard actions probably saved the five from captivity,
was not as lucky.  The sergeant was somehow under the impression that the
Canadians had a car waiting outside to spirit Americans away.

''If I had been two seconds quicker, I would have been in the Canadian Embassy
also,'' he told CBS News.  ''But I evacuated everyone and had torn the red
stripes off my blue trousers and thrown an old windbreaker over myself and tried
to look as scuzzy as possible to pass for an Iranian.

''And I was locking all the doors, barricading as much as possible to give them
a hard time to get into the building and the last door I locked I came out,and I
found out later that as I was walking out the door the car from the Canadian
Embassy was driving off.  So, it was the luck of the draw with me.''

As the takeover began, four unarmed marines, including Sgt. William Quarles and
Sgt. Ladell Maples, overheard Corporal Williams's radioed warnings and
barricaded themselves in a room on the top floor of the 10-story apartment
building at the north end of the compound. With them was the wife of an Iranian
employee of the embassy.

After pulling on fatigues and flak jackets, they went to a window and watched in
amazement as the Iranians moved over the grounds.  Sometime afterward, a band of
Iranians entered and began searching the apartment building, which was almost
vacant at the time.  Led by a man with a pistol, they soon burst into the room
where the marines were gathered.

''Hands up,'' the gunman shouted.  The woman was released. The marines were
searched, then led downstairs, where they encountered a contingent of Iranian
national police officers who apparently had come to turn the captors out and the
prisoners loose.

A heated argument developed between the police and the gunman.  A police officer
pulled Sergeant Quarles's hands down and the gunman shoved them back up again,
and that is where they stayed. It was a symbolic victory for the Iranian
protesters, who were now clearly in command.

At 10:30 A.M., as the Iranian mobs were breaching the walls of the compound, the
embassy's top officials, Mr. Laingen and Mr. Tomseth, were just leaving the
Foreign Ministry. They had gone there to discuss possible diplomatic status for
some of the embassy's military personnel and, having had little success, they
were heading back to the embassy.

As they reached their waiting car, the driver-security man, Mr.  Howland, told
them he had monitored a message over the car radio.  There was trouble at the
embassy, he said.  Mr. Tomseth recalled:

''We got in and started out, but we had not gone more than a few hundred yards
when a second message came to the effect that there were hundreds of people
pouring into the embassy compound and that it was advisable that we not return
just yet.''

Turning back to the Foreign Ministry, not so much to take refuge as to seek the
help of the Iranian Government in ousting the intruders, Mr. Laingen and Mr.
Tomseth found no one willing to take charge. They saw the chief of protocol, the
senior Under Secretary, the deputy to the senior Under Secretary; all seemed
unable to do anything.

By afternoon, Foreign Minister Ibrahim Yazdi appeared, but he had troubles of
his own.  Within 48 hours, he would lose his job to Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, and
already his authority in revolutionary Iran was so vitiated that, as Mr. Tomseth
put it, ''Had he gone over to the embassy, he not only would not have gotten
those people out of there, he might well have been taken hostage himself.''

Mr. Laingen, Mr. Tomseth and Mr. Howland camped all day in the Foreign
Minister's office. ''I staged a kind of sit-in at the Foreign Minister's desk,
refusing to go and pressing throughout for assistance,'' Mr. Laingen said.  By
evening, Mr. Yazdi, apparently willing to promise them anything to get rid of
them, told Mr. Laingen that the militants would be removed the next day.

''We didn't believe it,'' Mr. Tomseth said. ''It was clear he wanted us to
leave.  He wanted us to go, anywhere, he didn't care.  But we insisted on
staying.''

The Americans spent the night on couches in diplomatic reception rooms on the
third floor.  The next day, further efforts to gain Government help to oust the
embassy invaders proved futile, and another night was spent on the couches.

Then, 48 hours after the takeover, Iran's clergy-dominated Revolutionary Council
ruled that the three Americans should be given ''protection'' at the Foreign
Ministry. They were told they could leave, but that safe conduct anywhere could
not be guaranteed.  And though they were not heavily guarded, they decided to
attempt no escape and to do nothing that might jeopardize resolution of the
crisis.

Thus, their change from guests to hostages came subtly, almost imperceptibly,
Mr. Tomseth said.  Theirs was by far the most civil treatment accorded any of
the hostages.  For all but the last few weeks of the crisis, when they were sent
to a prison, the three were housed in a well-furnished former diplomatic dining
room, 40 feet by 60 feet, with Persian carpets and crystal chandeliers. They
were given blankets, sheets, mattresses, bedrolls, cots, card tables, chairs, a
couch, writing materials and a table for table tennis.

At first, they were given a couple of 24-hour-a-day telephone lines to
Washington, as well as access to the Foreign Ministry's Telex facilities.  But
these became, after a while, almost vestigial diplomatic tools.  ''We found we
didn't have that much to say most of the time,'' said Mr. Tomseth.

After the first hectic radio messages on the day of the takeover, there was no
contact between the three men at the Foreign Ministry and the hostages at the
compound until the day, 443 days later, that they were all released.

Life at the Foreign Ministry was humdrum, if not oppressive. The Iranian
diplomatic staff - the career professionals, as opposed to the political
appointees - ''were absolutely appalled at what had happened and totally
sympathetic to us,'' Mr. Tomseth said. But they could offer little but sympathy.

In contrast to the turmoil at the embassy compound a mile to the south, the
office of the Iran-America Society on Teheran's Park Avenue was almost
somnolent. Kathryn L. Koob, the director, was holding a staff conference,
talking of ways to put the educational and cultural exchange program back on its
feet. It had been virtually shut down by the Iranian revolution.

Suddenly, the phone rang.  It was an Iranian director of the society, whom Miss
Koob declined to identify, with word of trouble at the embassy.  Under
instructions to wait for a call from the embassy in such an event, Miss Koob
waited until she could stand it no longer.

''I called the embassy and I heard this strange voice at the switchboard say,
'Embassy occupied.' '' She then called Mr. Laingen's secretary, Elizabeth
Montagne, on a private line.

''I understand you've got company.'' ''You'd be surprised what's going on around
here,'' Miss Montagne replied.  ''Kate!'' - it was Elizabeth Ann Swift, a
political officer, on an extension - ''we're under attack.  Bruce is at the
Foreign Office - -''

Suddenly, the line went dead. The compound had fallen.  Throughout the day and
into the next, she, her bilingual Iranian secretaries and William B. Royer Jr.,
a teacher who had formerly been director of the society, kept tuned to Iranian
radio and television stations for news and, with an open telephone line to the
State Department, sent summaries and recapitulations to Washington.

On the afternoon of Nov. 5, six Iranians arrived at the society office, but Miss
Koob slipped out the back door with her secretaries and fled to the German
Institute, just around the corner.  Later, after the Iranians had gone, they
returned to the office and resumed the calls to Washington.

In the late afternoon, however, a much larger group of Iranians appeared and
surrounded the office.  There was no escape.  The Iranian secretaries were
released, but Miss Koob and Mr. Royer were taken to the embassy compound. There,
like the other hostages, they were bound, blindfolded and forbidden to talk.

The first days and weeks in captivity were the worst for many hostages. Nearly
all were housed in the ambassador's residence, and were bound to chairs or
handcuffed and blindfolded 24 hours a day.  They were forbidden to speak and
denied showers, exercise and activity of any sort, except for meager meals and
trips to the bathroom.

There were interrogations, death threats, humiliations before screaming crowds
and television cameras, at least one mock execution, daily propaganda harangues
and cruelties that ranged from incidents of Russian roulette to incarceration in
a closet.

The women were separated from the men after the first few days, and the hostages
were distributed in smaller groups to various buildings in the compound, but the
rigors were unchanged.

A whispered word by Charles Jones, the communications specialist, to a fellow
hostage drew swift retribution from a guard behind him who ''grabbed my head,
pulled it back, slammed it into a wall and told me to shut up.''

''I shut up,'' he said.  In the climate of fear and uncertainty that prevailed
at the time, every move held terrors. ''On the second day,'' Duane Gillette, the
Navy petty officer, said, ''they moved me from one room to another.  They
blindfolded me for it. One of the others was moved before me.  When he went, I
heard a shotgun blast. Then they came for me.''

The blast was apparently an accident, and no one was hurt. What had seemed like
a pending execution was simply a move to the next room, Mr. Gillette said.

Two days later, Jerry Miele, a communications officer, and several other
hostages were paraded blindfolded before roaring crowds in scenes that were
televised to a shocked world.  ''They took me outside to the crowd,'' he
recalled.  ''I thought I was going to get it there.''

The fear of death was present even in more relaxed moments. The hostages were
guarded around the clock by young Iranian gunmen, many of them students who were
ill at ease with their weapons.  ''The first week, they had about five people in
there with weapons - they were really paranoid,'' said Sergeant Sickmann, who
feared that he would be shot accidentally.

For a week, Sergeant Sickmann was bound so tightly that his wrists and arms
hurt. He could see nothing, say nothing and, after a while, could feel very
little. As wearying hours passed into days, the sergeant, who would later awe
his captors with feats of armwrestling and calisthenics, grew stiff with
inactivity.

''There was about 15 of us,'' he said. ''and we were sitting at this long table,
and I was tied to the back of the chair.  You could never get out of this chair,
except to go to the toilet. If you wanted to lay your head down, they'd put a
pillow on the table.  Otherwise, we just sat there until nighttime, when they'd
put us on the floor. They'd tie our hands and feet and cover us.''

In the middle of his second night in captivity, Mr. Morefield, the Consul
General, was awakened by gunmen.  ''Are you Richard Morefield?'' one asked.
''Yes.'' ''Come with us.'' Mr. Morefield said he thought he was going to be
executed.  He and some other hostages were herded into a van and driven
somewhere - he believes it was a student dormitory in northwest Teheran - and
there he was subjected to the first of three mock executions that he would
experience.

''It was absolute terror,'' he said.  He and five other hostages were dragged
into what appeared to be a shower room and seated on a plain wood bench. There
was a drain in the floor. Visions of their own blood flowing down the drain
overwhelmed some.

Mr. Morefield recalled: ''So I just started praying'' - mostly Hail Marys, he
said - and listening in an agony of suspense as the captors behind them cocked
the hammers and clicked the triggers of their weapons.

On the same night, Moorhead Kennedy, the economics specialist, was also awakened
about 2 A.M. and taken to a car.  A blanket was thrown over his head, and he
could hear weapons being loaded into the trunk.  ''Some other hostage in the car
- I think it was a marine - whispered when he heard the guns rattle that two
people already had been shot,'' Mr. Kennedy said.

But he and a few others were sent to ''a very fancy home,'' where life improved.
Though still under orders not to talk, he said, he and his fellow captives were
able to whisper, pass notes in bathrooms and pass the time with chess, card
games, books from the embassy library and an occasional censored news magazine.

On the third night, Robert O. Blucker, an economics officer, recalled that
Ayatollah Khomeini's son, Sayed Ahmed Khomeini, came to the compound ''to see
the Persians and greet them and encourage them in what they were doing.''

''He was fingering his 'worry beads' and smiling and talking to them,'' Mr.
Blucker said.  ''He didn't want to look at any of us.  We were allowed to stand
around in this crowd of Persians and watch the proceedings, but he never
acknowledged our presence in any way.  I figured at this point that the whole
affair had Government backing.''

After the first few weeks, the treatment of most hostages improved. Blindfolds
came off. Bonds were kept on some, but were loosened.  Talking was still
prohibited, but enforcement was relaxed. Meals were more regular. Exercise was
permitted.  Terrors were ebbing and life began falling into rigorous routines.

Not for everyone, however. ''I remained blindfolded and bound and prohibited
from talking from Nov. 4, 1979, to March 17, 1980,'' said Mr. Jones.  ''I
remember that day because it was my wife's birthday and St. Patrick's Day.''

For Col. Charles W. Scott, an Army attache, life as a captive was just the
reverse of that of most hostages: he was treated reasonably well for a few days,
then subjected to solitary confinement, mock executions and other cruelties.
The change apparently came as a result of interrogations when the militants
''accused me of being a spy.''

The interrogations, which began soon after the embassy takeover and continued
for weeks, were harsh for some and easy for others. Some hostages were openly
defiant; others were cooperative.

The treatment they were accorded in their captivity sometimes, but not always,
appeared to be related to their performances in the interrogations and whether
they were perceived to be spies. There were other factors, too, including their
positions on the embassy staff and the degree to which they complied with their
captors' wishes.

There were two sources of information on possible spies among the hostages. One
was a State Department document that the militants brandished on Dec. 1 and said
they had found in the embassy files. It suggested that Malcolm Kalp, an
economics and commercial officer, and William Daugherty, a political officer,
were intelligence agents.

The militants also found a false Belgian passport in the possession of Thomas L.
Ahern Jr., the embassy's narcotics liaison officer.  The passport appeared to
suggest that Mr. Ahern had a double identity and possibly a dual role in Iran.

Mr. Kalp, who spent 374 days in solitary confinement, more than any other
hostage, has denied that he is a Central Intelligency Agency operative. He has
said that his alleged role as a spy had nothing to do with his harsh treatment
in the hands of the Iranians; that, he said, stemmed from his unwillingness to
cooperate and his attempted escapes.

Soon after the embassy fell, Miss Montagne, Mr. Laingen's secretary, was taken
roughly to a gunman who demanded the combinations of locked embassy safes,
combinations that she did not know. In one of the most chilling accounts of the
captivity, she told NBC News how he had put a gun loaded with one bullet to her
heart.

''He went click, and the bullet went up one chamber - I could feel it go up,''
she said. ''And then he said, 'I'm a very good judge of character, and I know
you're lying to me.' And I said, 'If you think I'm lying you're a lousy judge of
character, because I'm telling you the truth: I cannot open those safes.'

''Then he went click and the bullet went up another notch.'' There was further
dispute over what she knew and ''click - the bullet up another notch.''

''Is this worth dying for?'' the gunman asked.

''I said, 'No, it's not,' and he went click, and the bullet went up another
notch.

''And I - this little game must have taken about four, five, minutes, it seemed
an eternity - and I can remember my mind being very, very clear, and very, very
sharp.  I remember my heart trying to jump out of my chest.  He kept pointing
the gun at me, and the last - there was one click to go.

''And he said, 'Do you think I'll pull the trigger?'

''And the only thing I could think of was, 'I wonder what it would feel like to
have bullets go through my chest.' Then, I thought, 'Well, it can't hurt for
long.'

''We stared at each other, and then he - he put the gun down.  He said, 'O.K.,
so you don't know the combinations.' ''I just kind of collapsed.''

Miss Swift also was subjected to the torments of a gunman seeking the
combination of a safe.  She knew the combination.

''You've got five minutes to open the safe or I'll kill you,'' he told her. ''I
didn't think he would,'' she said.  ''I lied and said I couldn't.'' She waited
five minutes and nothing happened.

''I am very familiar with the kind of courage it takes to fight in combat,''
said Colonel Scott, who served in Vietnam and won the Silver Star and the Bronze
Star. ''But I say there is a different kind of courage to face interrogators
when you are completely alone and don't know when you are ever going to see
another American or whether you are going to get out of the situation alive and
in one piece.''

The colonel, under questioning by the Iranians, said his mission was to help the
Iranian Army obtain spare parts for nonlethal military equipment, but his
captors did not believe him.  As a result, he said, he was kept in prison
throughout his captivity, including eight weeks in solitary confinement.

''I was never permitted to leave my cell except blindfolded, even to go to the
toilet,'' Colonel Scott said. ''In the entire 14 1/2 months, other than the last
25 days, I had only spent 11 days in a cell where it was possible to see
daylight. The rest of the time, I was in a cell that amounted to a closet - no
windows, no circulation of air.''

Michael J. Metrinko, an embassy political officer, was also accused of being a
spy.  He said his captors had seized many of his papers - files, classified
reports and address books that listed many Iranian friends he had made in three
years of service there - and regarded these as proof of nefariousness.

He was amused rather than broken by their interrogation technique, however. They
had evidently been told that they could successfully break down a suspect by
long periods of intensive questioning. Mr.  Metrinko was, in fact, grilled for
six hours at a time.  But the captors then made the mistake of letting him sleep
between sessions.

The duration of the questioning varied widely. Mr. Kennedy's interrogation
lasted only a few minutes; after his captors found that he was an economics
specialist, they seemed to lose interest in him.  Col. Thomas E. Schaefer, an
Air Force attache, was questioned four to eight hours a day for two weeks.

''They kept telling me I was black and should help the oppressed people of the
world,'' Charles Jones said. He was questioned five times. ''I kept telling them
that Iran was their country, and that I had nothing to do with their revolution
- that I was an American first.''

Mr.  Blucker, the economics officer, was taken to a house in north Teheran and
kept in handcuffs on a cold floor for weeks. He repeatedly refused to tell his
captors where his apartment was, sure they wanted only to loot it. He was beaten
by a group that included a ''monstrous little dwarf'' with a pistol stuck in his
belt and ''two or three terrorist thugs.''

The interrogations became less frequent after about two weeks, and the first
major development of the hostage crisis occurred: On Nov.  19 and 20, 13 of the
hostages - five female secretaries and eight black men - were released in what
the militants evidently regarded as a propaganda coup.

Mr. Jones was the only black kept in custody; he never learned why he was not
released, or why he was treated so harshly.  Miss Koob and Miss Swift assumed
that it was because of their relatively high positions on the staff that they
were the only women not released.

The release raised many false hopes among other hostages. Mr.  Metrinko, who had
been kept with one of the blacks who was allowed to leave, said: ''I could hear
the guards discussing the release of the hostages. They kept discussing taking
them out to the airport and having reporters talk to them about their treatment.
I was naturally overjoyed.''

Then, the crushing truth emerged.  ''I realized when the guards talked the next
day about the reception at the airport that they had left.''

When Mr. Blucker was moved to the house in north Teheran, Colonel Schaefer and
Capt. Paul Needham, an Air Force logistics officer, were with him. They were
kept bound in a bedroom and forbidden to talk.

On Thanksgiving, Colonel Schaefer began a hunger strike to protest such things
as the lack of mail. On the fifth day, he said, his captors marched him into the
kitchen, placed a place of spaghetti in front of him and lowered an automatic
rifle at him. ''You will eat now,t,'' they said.'' He ate. ''I was so hunger I
was going to eat anyway,'' he said.

At 6 o'clock one morning in November, probably toward the end of the month, some
of the captors went into the room where Richard Queen was being kept, his hands
still bound, and took him and some of the others to a warehouse basement on the
embassy grounds. It was the hostages' introduction to the Mushroom Inn.

''There were no windows,'' Mr. Queen recalled. ''It was like living in a tomb.
You didn't hear the outside world.  You didn't see the outside world. You didn't
know what was going on at all. You were completely cut off, as though you were
living in a tomb.''

There were several rooms in the Mushroom, and Mr. Queen shared one until
mid-March with Joseph Hall, an Army warrant officer.  The hostages in the
Mushroom were ordered not to speak to one another.  And according to Mr.
Gillette, the petty officer, who spent some time there, ''It was frowned upon if
you looked at the other hostages.''

Mr. Queen and Mr. Hall and some of the others managed to whisper to a fellow
hostage, especially on the infrequent occasions on which they were allowed to go
to the toilet unaccompanied by a captor.

As Mr. Gillette recalled, he was put in a room in the Mushroom 8 feet by 12 feet
with 16 others, and was restricted to one corner.  ''I was in a location where I
had three of the militants in front of my bed with Uzi submachine guns and
G-3's,'' he said. ''I could not get involved with the clandestine communications
that were going on - notes being thrown back and forth.  That was the worst of
it, to not talk to any of the other hostages.''

Mr. Queen said he had been able to take a shower ''every second or third day''
in the Mushroom and that once a week he was taken to a ''very small courtyard''
near the ambassador's residence, where ''we were allowed to exercise and see the
sun and hear the traffic, hear the birds, for about 20 minutes.''

About Dec. 17, Mr. Morefield, the Consul General, was brought to the Mushroom
with about 20 other hostages. Compared with the student dormitory where he had
previously been held, Mr. Morefield said, at the Mushroom the food was better
and the hostages had more contact with their captors. He and eight or nine
others shared a big room that had been divided into small cubicles with
temporary partitions.  In his space, he was able to walk two steps in one
direction, three in another. He, too, was prohibited from speaking with the
others.  But, through eye contact and gestures, he said, he was able to get some
messages back and forth.

One of those apparently moved to the Mushroom at the same time as Mr. Morefield
was John Limbert, the political officer, who had served in the Peace Corps in
Iran, been an instructor at Pahlavi University, married an Iranian woman and was
one of the most proficient speakers of Persian among the hostages. Mr. Limbert
recalls being kept in a room subdivided with bookcases.

''The program stayed very much the same,'' Mr. Limbert said of the experience in
his new quarters.  ''Read, sleep, exercise.  I asked some of the students to
bring me books in Persian and they brought me some books by Dr. Ali Shariati, a
kind of patron saint of the revolution. You kind of made your own routine. I
dreamed about the future, past and future. My hands were tied together but
pretty loosely and I was getting 13 to 14 hours of sleep.''

Mr. Queen busied himself in the Mushroom by organizing a lending library with
embassy books. Others were able to volunteer to work with him and sometimes they
would talk.

Mr. Morefield said that some of the hostages seemed to want to establish a
dialogue with the captors, but that, initially, he ''felt that I couldn't and
didn't want to.'' And he limited his exchanges with them to requests for
permission to go to the bathroom, or to ask for more or less food.

In the first week in December, Moorhead Kennedy, the economics specialist, and
his roommates were moved to the basement of the embassy from an elegant suburban
house where they had spent nearly a month. As they were being ordered out of the
house, their captors told them not to bring any personal belongings and, for the
first time, they were handcuffed instead of being bound with cloth and rope.

''We still thought we faced death at that point,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''We
figured we were going to die the way they went about the move.  I went
peacefully.  I guess that's the way you go.  I mean, what else do you do?''

In the first months, Mr. Kennedy said, there were a number of ''terrible
scares'' and he brooded a great deal about being shot.  ''After that,'' he
continued, ''we began to feel they had too much invested in us to kill us unless
something was done to really endanger us.''

One of the scares, Mr. Kennedy said, occurred one day in December as he and
others were being moved from one room to another.  ''You could smell fear in the
second room,'' he said, ''You have to smell it to know what it's like.  We
thought it was the anteroom to death.  Then, suddenly we were taken back to our
original room.''

''We got there,'' he added, ''just as they were putting away the vacuum cleaner.
'' Another bad scare came a day later when the students gave writing paper to
Mr. Kennedy and some of the other hostages.  ''We thought it was maybe for a
last letter home, a last will and testament,'' he said. ''But, instead, it was
one of those infrequent moments when the students were in a mood to move mail.''

Christmas 1979 underscored the hostages' predicament and intensified their
loneliness. They had been in captivity nearly two months. The initial terror had
ebbed, but many were beginning to feel that they were in for a long ordeal.

Mr. Morefield had been cheered to learn that the students were planning to
permit American clergymen to conduct Christmas services.  But his spirits
plummeted, he said, ''when I walked in and saw the obvious propaganda use that
had been made of it.''

The four visiting clergymen spent two hours negotiating with the captors before
they saw the hostages. The Rev. Dr. William Sloane Coffin Jr. of the United
Church of Christ, who is the senior minister of the Riverside Church in
Manhattan; the Rev. M. William Howard Jr., a Baptist from Princeton, N.J., who
is president of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the U.S.A.;
Msgr. Thomas J.  Gumbleton, an Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Detroit, and Leon-Etienne Cardinal Duval, the Archbishop of
Algiers, were brought to the heavily guarded embassy at 11:30 on Christmas Eve
in a police-escorted caravan of Mercedes-Benzes.

The clergymen said later that they had told the militants that they wanted to
conduct an ecumenical service for the entire group of hostages, and they said
they had almost walked out before yielding to a demand that they meet the
captives in small groups.

Mr. Howard, the Baptist minister, presided over the session that Mr. Morefield
attended. A table laden with food and microphones attached to Coca-Cola bottles
dominated the room. On the walls, along with traditional Christmas decorations,
were revolutionary and antiAmerican posters. As the hostages prayed with Mr.
Howard and sang hymns, Iranian television cameras focused on them. Beyond the
view of the cameras, Mr. Morefield said, were ''about 40 of our captors who
obviously were there, I think, to intimidate us.''

His emotion, that Christmas morning, was ''absolute rage,'' he said. He was so
angry, he said, that he worried later that he might have been rude to the
minister.

Mr. Morefield said he believed that Mr. Howard had come to Iran because he felt
it was his Christian duty. But others among the hostages questioned the motives
of the clergymen who visited them at Christmas, and later.

''Some priests upset us greatly,'' said Mr. Gillette, the petty officer. ''They
were more worried about, I think, creating turmoil in the United States, rather
than the condition of the hostages.''

James Lopez, the Marine guard, described the Christmas services as ''a dog and
pony show,'' and he expressed bitterness about the visit by clergymen the
following Easter, too.  He was shocked, he said, to learn that the clerics were
''saying conditions were nice and everything was copacetic and we were having
such a good time in Camp Teheran.  We couldn't believe they were actually buying
that garbage the Iranians were putting out.''

For Sgt. Rodney Sickmann, the political ramifications of the Christmas
ceremonies had been signaled in advance. Early in December, he said, ''they
started buttering us up, trying to get us to make statements and signing
different documents.''

''Stuff like this,'' he said. ''We knew what they were trying to do, and every
time they asked us to make a tape, we'd just say things for America, which
really upset them.''

William F. Keough Jr., the former head of the American School in Islamabad,
Pakistan, said he recognized that the Iranians had been trying to exploit the
clergymen's visits for propaganda, but he said: ''Many of us thought we should
go along with this because every opportunity we had to get our face on camera
was assurance for people back home.  My feeling was your family needs to see
you.  You never say what the Iranian students want you to say.  There are ways
of not answering questions, frustrating questions, switching to the Red Sox. You
get off the topic. The clergymen were obviously being exposed to artificial
conditions.''

By Christmas, Robert Blucker, the economics officer, had been moved back to the
ambassador's residence in the embassy compound and had shared two separate rooms
there with various colleagues. Mr.  Blucker, a quiet, studious man who read
voraciously, refused to attend the religious services at Christmas, but he took
part in the holiday dinner that the captors prepared.

''It was quite good, compared to what we had been having,'' Mr.  Blucker
recalled. ''I think there was turkey and stuffing, two or three kinds of cake
and pie.''

''It was a bang-up meal,'' said Moorhead Kennedy. ''Our morale was very high for
the first time.'' Mr. Kennedy said he thought that Mr. Coffin had done ''a
marvelous job'' and that he was ''absolutely aware of what we were going
through.''

''It looked very black for us,'' he continued. ''He hit just the right note as
far as I was concerned.  And I will always be in his debt.''

On the other hand, Mr. Kennedy said, ''The group that came out at Easter were a
disaster. The priest said to one of our number, 'I sure would like to spend,
say, 20 days with you fellows.  It would give me a chance to meditate.' ''

''Well, not long before then,'' Mr.Kennedy added, ''we had been stood up against
that wall, and we all said to ourselves, you know, we'd very much like to have
had him with us.''

On Christmas Day, Miss Koob sat alone in the library on the second floor of the
chancery overlooking the main entrance to the embassy and Takht-E-Jamshid
Avenue. Outside, hundreds of Iranians were sounding their rhythmic death chants
for President Carter and the Shah. Hour after hour, the crowd chorused.

Like the others, Miss Koob was thousands of miles from home, without family or
friends. ''But the message of Christmas,'' she said later, ''was the same.''

A deeply religious person, she had always believed, she said, that ''Christmas
is Christ. It's not tinsel, it's not the tree.'' That afternoon, her beliefs
were being tested, and she remembers saying to herself: ''If you really mean
what you say, here's your chance, kid.''

At 11 P.M. Miss Koob heard what she took to be a church bell ringing, probably,
she thought, in the church directly across the street. It was the catalyst she
had needed. ''I had a worship service,'' she said, ''and it was Christmas.''

In the ambassador's residence, Mr. Blucker had found that if he climbed up on
the radiator in the bathroom he could catch a glimpse of the sky and the trees
and could even watch the dozens of green parrots and the gray and black ravens
waging their daily battles for sovereignty on the embassy grounds.

''Nice to watch,'' he said, ''It was nice to see the outside.'' But on Dec. 30
he was moved to a room in the basement of the chancery that he was to share with
three others: Barry M. Rosen, the press attache; Robert C. Ode, the retired
Foreign Service officer who been recalled to temporary duty in Iran, and Bruce
W. German, the embassy's budget officer.

There had been an attempted escape at the embassy a few days earlier. ''Whether
that persuaded them that the ambassador's residence was not a good place to keep
a bunch of people, I don't know,'' Mr. Blucker said. ''I had heard one night an
unusual amount of gunfire and wondered what in the world was going on. I found
out later that was the night of the escape attempt, when they fired on Bill
Belk.''

Life in the basement was worse. There were no windows and the guards seemed more
hostile. After a while, one of Mr. Blucker's roommates was moved out. He would
not say who.

''We were known as the bad people in that room,'' he said. ''Next door to us
were the good people. They had no guard sitting in their room. They had cards,
tennis balls to bounce, picture puzzles to play with, access to a tape recorder
with some tapes. At a certain point they decided one of ours was a good man, a
good boy.  So they moved him into the room with the good boys.''

''I can't prove anything about the good boys,'' Mr. Blucker continued. ''I am
satisfied I know who they are, but I can't prove it so I'd better not say. They
were young people, unideological, with no high position in the embassy. I
suspect that what they did was that they just didn't resist. That they were
politically inert.''

On the other hand, Mr. Blucker said, ''A bad guy was somebody who followed my
kind of conduct. They passed a petition around calling on the U.S. Government to
return the Shah.  I refused to sign that. It wasn't appropriate. I refused to
write any letters to senators or newspapers demanding that actions be taken to
get us out. I was generally hostile. I made no remarks against the Shah, or
against David Rockefeller or Henry Kissinger. In fact, I didn't try to be
anything but the bourgeoisie, the reactionary.  And I fussed at them, I snarled
at them.''

At one point, Mr. Blucker referred to those who had ''collaborated'' with the
Iranian captors. Then he corrected himself and said ''cooperated.'' In their
initial days home, neither he nor any of the other hostages reported any
instances in which they felt their colleagues had behaved disloyally to the
United States.

Pressed to distinguish between cooperation and collaboration, Mr.  Blucker
replied, ''I don't know. I don't know.  The words are hard to define.  Where
does one stop and the other start?  Cooperation includes collaboration and other
things.  It's just too complicated to go into.''

One of the former hostages, who asked that he not be identified, said: ''I know
that a lot of people did things that I wouldn't do and I didn't approve of and I
wish they hadn't done.  But I don't want to label them.  There were several
people, perhaps, I shouldn't say a lot.''

In television footage arranged by the captors, some of the hostages were shown
making statements that were critical, in varying degrees, of the Shah and United
States policy, and to some extent portraying better conditions than actually
existed for the captives.

In one 34-minute videotape made by the Iranians, but rejected for broadcast by
the American networks, Sgt. Joseph J. Subic Jr., a young Marine guard, talked of
United States surveillance flights and showed where computer equipment had been
concealed in the floor and ceiling of the embassy warehouse.

Since returning home, Sergeant Subic has not commented on this incident. But
another young marine, Sgt. William A. Gallegos, said that he had been ''forced
in various ways'' to be interviewed by two NBC News television reporters under
the supervision of the Iranians five weeks after the takeover.

''I was not beaten,'' he said. ''I did it for my military superiors. I'm sorry
the public didn't understand.'' ''I was saying that the treatment was good for
my fellow colleagues so that they would not be mistreated,'' he continued. ''But
also I was trying to say that we were not being treated well.''

Several of the hostages said that in the final days of captivity they felt
obliged to make statements before Iranian cameras.  ''I was not forced,'' said
Sgt. Gregory A. Persinger. But, he added, ''It was on the view you either do it
or you're not going to be released.''

Most of the hostages said that they had come through the experience surprisingly
well, but there were tensions.  Had there been conflict among the captives?
''Obviously,'' said Mr. Morefield, ''there were quirks or characteristics that
were very annoying.'' Did anyone ever come to blows?  ''Yes,'' he said.
Seriously?  ''No.''

On Jan. 18, Mr. Limbert, the political officer, was moved from the Mushroom to
solitary confinement in the basement of the embassy in a windowless
10--by-12-foot room, illuminated with fluorescent lights and furnished with a
bare mattress, a small typewriting table and two chairs.

Mr. Limbert discovered that his room was next to one occupied by William E.
Belk, the communications and records officer, and Specialist Hohman, the Army
medic. The rooms were separated by a thin partition that came about an inch
short of meeting the permanent wall, leaving a gap like a mail slot.

''We could slide notes through there,'' Mr. Limbert said. ''We'd trade news,
sort of, 'What did you see? What did you hear?' It could be anything, whatever
the students might have let slip, anything. One of my neighbors was able to
smuggle a radio to me.  He left it in the bathroom.  It was about the size of a
cigarette pack.  We had news for about a month then, broadcast in Farsi. They
were never able to discover the radio, but, of course, I couldn't take it with
me when I moved.''

On Jan. 28, the six embassy employees who had been hiding with the Canadians -
five members of the consular staff and an agricultural attache - flew out of
Iran on a commercial airliner. The Canadian Government had issued them
diplomatic passports and the Central Intelligence Agency had helped forge
Iranian exit visas.

It was not until months later that the hostages learned of the escape. In less
than a week, however, they were subjected to a new episode of terror. The
hostages say they still do not know exactly what brought it on. Richard
Morefield said he thought it might have been in retaliation for an escape
attempt. Moorhead Kennedy said he thought it had to do with a suicide attempt.

In any case, the first assault came at 1 A.M. on Feb. 5. There would be several
more.  Seven Iranians wielding automatic rifles and wearing white masks,
fatigues and combat boots burst in on 21 hostages sleeping in the Mushroom and
herded them together against a wall, spread-eagled.

''They told us not to talk, not to move,'' said Paul Needham, the Air Force
captain who had gone to Teheran to advise the Iranian Air Force. ''One of the
guards barked out an order.  A round was chambered in each weapon.  He barked
out another order. I could hear the safety catch go off. He barked another order
about 15 seconds later and a round hit the floor. It was ejected and fell to the
floor.  I thought I was dead as the last order was barked out.  I thought it was
to fire. I do not speak Farsi and I thought he had said to fire.''

Gary E. Lee, the administrative officer, later recalled thinking as he waited
for the bullets to tear into him, ''Boy, I sure hope they hit me in the head and
not the back, so I go quickly.''

Colonel Scott, the military liaison chief, was certain he heard someone cry out
in Farsi, ''Get ready.'' ''My knees were knocking,'' said the colonel, a veteran
of two combat tours in Vietnam. ''I thought things had deteriorated so badly
that they were just going to get rid of us.''

The men in white masks had put the hostages against the wall in two groups, Mr.
Queen said.  ''When they moved the first group in, they had everybody lie
down,'' he said, ''but, one, Commander Sharer, said, 'You're going to shoot me
standing up, not lying down.' He refused to lie down. And they were all standing
up when I came in.

''When we were all in the room against the wall,'' Mr. Queen continued, ''there
was dead silence. Then I heard the metallic clicking of the weapons, locking the
bolts, removing the safety.  I don't know which.  It was just this harsh
metallic click. And I really thought that was it. I just stood there. I knew it
was my last moment. I said the Lord's Prayer and tried to give myself the last
rites, because I was sure that we had just breathed our last.''

''No one said anything,'' he added. ''No one sobbed.  Just pure silence.''
''Then,'' he continued, ''we were taken individually into a small room and
stripped to our underpants, searched.  While this was going on, another group
went into our little rooms and tore them apart.  Then we were taken back
individually to our rooms.''

In the next few days, more of the hostages were terrorized by the men in white
masks.  Moorhead Kennedy and some of the others sharing his basement room at the
embassy were preparing for bed late one night, he said, when two of the masked
men charged in yelling, ''Savak! Savak!'' Savak was the Shah's brutal secret
police organization, triumphantly dismantled by the revolutionaries.

The hostages were hauled out of their rooms and forced to strip to their
undershorts in the cold night air. Inside, other Iranians were ransacking their
clothing and personal belongings.

The sharp clack of rifle bolts resounded in the night.  ''The masked men
chambered rounds into their weapons,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''They tweaked our
elastic bands on our shorts as they walked back and forth behind us. They poked
their cold guns into our backs.''

Death seemed imminent. Mr. Kennedy said he trembled, but otherwise managed to
control himself. When he and his roommate, Frederick Kupke, realized there would
be no shooting, Mr. Kennedy said, they ''jumped for joy.''

Before the men were returned to their rooms, their belts were taken away, Mr.
Kennedy said, and they found that their razors had been seized. Later, the
hostages would refer to that night of terror as ''the panty raid.''

Another night, Sergeant Sickmann and some of the others were blindfolded by men
in white masks and marched down a hallway. One at a time, Sergeant Sickmann
said, the masked men took the hostages into a room and told them to strip down
to their underwear. Then their blindfolds were removed.

''We just had our face against the wall,'' the sergeant said. ''He told us not
to look. So here we are, we've got our eyes closed, myself and the other
hostages, sitting there, shaking like a leaf against the wall. You hear these
rifles cocking. We thought we were goners then.''

In December, Sergeant Sickmann and some of the others had been shown films, he
said, of people ''who were killed lying on the ground with their heads blown
off.''

''All these images started showing, you know? They kept coming into my head,''
he continued, ''and the rifles being cocked and stuff like that. It was sick. I
thought I was going to be the same way.''

One of the masked men ''started searching private parts of your body,'' Sergeant
Sickmann said, and, finally, he and the others were told to get dressed.

A week later, he said, there was a similar search.  On March 13, Captain Needham
recalled, he and some others again stood before a firing squad that did not
fire. That time, however, the gunmen did not crank ammunition into their
weapons, he said.

Robert Blucker was one of the few lined up. He said later, ''I didn't think
they'd shoot us in that fashion.'' In the search, Mr.  Blucker said, the
Iranians found $1,020 in cash on him. They had known about it and had told him
previously that they were not thieves and did not want his money. That night, he
said, they kept it.

Colonel Scott said that after he experienced one of the mock executions his fear
of being killed disappeared.  ''You can just get so scared,'' he said, ''You get
angry and once you get angry it sustains you through many sorts of stress.  I
refused to think about death after that.''

The midnight raids and the firing squads constituted probably the most
concentrated punishment the hostages endured after the first days of their
captivity. And many of them apparently shared that fright.

But generally the treatment varied greatly. Hostages suspected of being
intelligence operatives and those few who tried to escape had a hard time. At
least to some extent, the behavior of the hostages, their personalities and the
personalities of the captors who confronted them figured in their treatment. But
not always.

Two of the hostages, William Keough, who at 6 feet 9 inches towered over the
Iranians, and Robert Blucker, were determinedly aggressive. And the Iranians
stayed at a respectful distance.

''We complained about the hotel service,'' Mr. Keough said, ''that the bathroom
was dirty and said, 'When the Ayatollah comes around I'll tell him how dirty
this place is,' or 'Send in your sister to clean up.' ''

Mr. Keough said he had never been physically threatened ''because I made it
obvious early on that this was not the thing to do.'' ''When a man would open a
door of the cell and hand out food,'' Mr. Keough continued, ''I would demand
more bread or oranges. They would back away immediately and say, 'Bread is
finished,' or 'Oranges is finished,' and my large foot would be in the door and
the door somehow wouldn't close until such time as we got bread and oranges.
There was a lot of testing going on.''

As Mr. Keough's birthday approached, he teased the captors for six weeks, saying
he was expecting a cake. When the day came on Sept. 11, the guards delivered a
cake. After Mr. Keough and the others had finished the cake, he said, he turned
to the guards and asked, ''Where's the ice cream?''

Toward the end of the captivity, Mr. Blucker said of his guards, ''I had them so
scared they were afraid to come into my room.  I wouldn't let them in with their
shoes on because they tracked in too much dirt. I yelled at them or I snarled at
them.  You could get to them by bitching at them. They told me, 'You're like an
old woman.  You say, 'Do this, do that.' That didn't upset me. I told them they
needed an old woman to tell them what to do.''

At one point, Mr. Blucker said, one of the captors ''was almost pleading with me
to go before the cameras.'' And, Mr. Blucker said, when he refused, the young
man replied, ''Oh, you're so stubborn.''

Malcolm Kalp tried many times to escape. After yet another attempt failed, Mr.
Kennedy said, they put him in a room and ''welded his windows shut.''

Perhaps as draining over the long run as the cold rifle barrel in the back was
the daily worry of being accidentally shot. Many of the young guards, the former
hostages say, were as awkward with their automatic rifles and submachine guns as
a ballerina on a tractor.

''When we were taken outside,'' said Michael Metrinko, the embassy political
officer, ''there were 20 or 30 guards who kept their G-3's and their Uzis
pointing at me. I always thought it would be funny if one of them were to go
off. They would have a massive blood bath, killing each other because they were
also pointing at each other.''

''Those guys were nervous,'' said Mr. Keough, ''I was afraid they'd make a
mistake.'' Sergeant Lopez, one of the Marine guards, found it ''slightly
nerve-racking because we had all these little kids running around with shotguns.
They were 17-18. They had no weapons training and they're walking around playing
John Wayne and Audie Murphy and what have you.''

In mid-February, Mr. Kennedy's group was moved out of the embassy basement to an
upstairs room that ''had a few windows,'' and was given a stove on which to heat
the food that sometimes had been arriving cold from a command kitchen somewhere
else.

''Once,'' Mr. Kennedy said, ''we ate by candlelight. We were living the good
life.'' Toward the end of the month, conditions improved, too, for some of the
others. Mr. Blucker and his roommate at the time, Robert Ode, were moved to an
upstairs room with a window, a desk, two leather chairs and a pair of
mattresses.  They ''also had the privilege,'' Mr. Blucker said, ''of asking for
tea and dates. You might not get them, but you could ask for them.''

A man who implied that he represented the Government, but who Mr.  Blucker said
he later discovered was associated with the Red Crescent Society, the Islamic
equivalent of the Red Cross, dropped in on the two hostages to ''assure us that
things were going to be better.''

''I thought at least,'' Mr. Blucker continued, ''that perhaps the Government was
taking control of the situation. There were no serious confrontations at that
point.  They were doing their best to be kind. People who were usually very
solemn put on sort of frozen smiles.''

As February blended into March, the hostages with Mr. Kennedy were allowed to
make telephone calls home, but not before one of the Iranians had nettled them a
bit by asking, ''Who will be the first to give up his turn to call to his
friend?''

They all deferred to one another. Mr. Kupke was finally chosen by the guards to
go first. Mr. Kennedy saw this as another ''ethnic act'' on the part of the
guards. Mr. Kupke is one-fourth American Indian.

Mr. Kennedy said his call went through on March 22 at 4 A.M.  Eastern standard
time. He talked about eight minutes to his wife, Louisa, who had taken a leading
role among the hostages' families.  He placed the call ''at that hour because I
figured that would guarantee that my one chance to phone the states would result
in talking to Louisa.''

''We had a very nice talk,'' he said.  In mid-March Mr. Blucker said he asked
''the chief terrorist in charge'' for a nearby private room with a sunny
exposure. He said he was told that a C.I.A. agent was being housed there, but
that a change could be arranged.

''I assumed that having been unable to get anything out of me, he was trying to
bribe me with kindness,'' Mr. Blucker said. ''So I went into that nice little
room by myself, sunbathed every day for a few hours.  I was able to throw down
the window from the top and finally have perfect fresh air.  That brought on a
million mosquitoes, of course, and, for a while, my face looked like a
battlefield. But I left it open anyway. And I never paid off. I never did a
thing for them. I never wrote a letter for them.''

THE arrival of April brought spring and mounting hope to the imprisoned
Americans. ''Spring was in the air,'' recalled Moorhead Kennedy. ''They began
taking pictures of us, as though gathering souvenirs before it was all over. The
Red Cross came and checked on us. Everything seemed to be coming up roses.''

A Swiss Government airplane was on a Zurich runway on April 1, ready to fly
doctors to Teheran to prepare for the imminent release of the hostages. Cots had
been brought to the Iranian Foreign Ministry for the hostages to rest on before
they left for the airport.

But the talks collapsed when Ayatollah Khomeini insisted that the issue should
be decided by the Iranian Parliament.  The hostages knew nothing about that
effort, of course, nor did they did know about the plans for the American
military rescue mission that were also under way that spring.

Abruptly, on April 25, the relative peace was shattered.  ''All of a sudden
there's running up and down the hallways,'' said Sergeant Lopez. ''There's vans
being backed in, the door kicks open, and they tell us, 'Pack, you will be
leaving soon.' They were very frazzled, they were very nervous, which made us
nervous because these clowns were running around with automatic weapons, fingers
on the triggers, locked and loaded.''

''Something had gone down,'' he said. ''We didn't know what.'' It was not until
much later that Sergeant Lopez and his fellow hostages learned that the upheaval
on April 25 had been caused by the abortive United States rescue mission that
ended with eight Americans dead in a conflagration on the bleak salt flats of
the Iranian desert.

That evening some of the hostages held in the embassy had just finished eating a
dinner of chili found in the commissary when their captors announced that the
Americans should pack up, Sergeant Sickmann recalled.

He said the captors had told the hostages to use the bathroom because it would
be 10 hours before they had another chance. ''They blindfolded us and took us
down to a van they had waiting,'' he said. ''We got in and they handcuffed us.''
With Sergeant Sickmann were a fellow Marine sergeant, William Gallegos, and
Jerry Plotkin, a Californian who said he was in Iran on business.

''I don't know how many cars were with us,'' said Sergeant Sickmann, ''but we
drove from about 11:30 that night till about 7 o'clock the next morning. The
roads we were on, they felt like they were cow pastures. We were bouncing up
hitting the top of the van with our heads.''

''You can't sleep,'' he went on. ''You could lean on somebody else's shoulder,
but then he'd move, and everybody would have to move because you were handcuffed
together. We finally got to Isfahan that morning. We didn't know this until
about a month later, when they told us where were were.''

Other hostages experienced similarly disorienting, uncomfortable journeys to
cities and towns around Iran. Moorhead Kennedy remembers hearing a lot of noise
outside on the night of April 25. ''We were told to pack,'' he said. ''We were
blindfolded again and taken outside into the hall. From under the blindfold we
could see that our gear was being piled up. We thought that maybe the Shah was
dead, that maybe it was all over.''

Mr. Kennedy's hopes expired when he heard the sound of handcuffs clicking. He
was driven off into the night, certain only that the upward tilt of the darkened
van meant that he was being taken to the hills outside Teheran.

For the two women, Miss Swift and Miss Koob, who were brought together in the
embassy in March and stayed there together for the rest of their captivity, the
day of the raid brought signs that something unusual had happened.

''We could hear all the movement and shuffling up and down the hall,'' Miss Koob
remembered. ''We knew people were being moved from their current rooms. We
didn't know why or where or what.''

Their treatment changed slightly. An embassy cook who had been preparing their
main meals left and the student guards started doing the cooking.

The three Americans at the Iranian Foreign Ministry, Bruce Laingen, Victor
Tomseth and Michael Howland, also lost privileges after the raid. The Iranians
took away their table-tennis table.

Sergeant Sickmann knew that he was not going to stay long in his new quarters,
he said. ''They were buying us food, bringing us sandwiches, little hot dog
sandwiches, and we knew this couldn't last forever, because they hated to spend
money on us,'' he said. ''Back at the embassy, they just took everything out of
the commissary.''

He was correct. In a few days, he was moved to the old United States consulate
in Shiraz. By the first week in June, he said, he had been taken back to
Teheran, where he spent three days in the chancery, then moved to a prison.

After they got home and had time to think about the rescue effort, some hostages
wondered if it would have worked.  ''I was never sure what I felt about it
because I wasn't there to make the decision,'' said Mr. Hohman, the Army medic.
''Thank God for the sandstorm,'' said Miss Koob. ''There was a certain risk and
a certain number of the hostages might not make it out. And I just felt from my
location in the embassy at the time, I might not be one of those who made it
out. I was on the second floor. There was no escape route.''

On the other hand, a number of the hostages cheered the attempt after they heard
of it. ''I was jubilated,'' said Robert Blucker.  ''It was good to know they
were not prepared to leave us there forever,'' he said, ''that they were
prepared to try something even though it might mean some of us would be killed.
I thought it should have been attempted even if a large percentage of us were
killed.''

After the rescue attempt, moves were frequent. Some of the hostages believe this
was a tactic to upset them psychologically. In an interview with The
Virginian-Pilot of Norfolk, Va., Comdr. Donald A.  Sharer of the Navy described
what happened. A guard would come into the room, he said.

'' 'Pack your stuff,' the guard would say.  '' 'Why do we have to pack our
stuff?' '' 'Just pack your stuff.' '' 'Are we going home?' '' 'Just pack your
stuff.' '' ''Then all through your mind it would go: They're going to take us
out and shoot us.''

Scattered about the country, teased by a scrap of information here, a scrap
there, the hostages spent the middle months of 1980 trying to cope with the
reality of a life without benchmarks, of a tedious imprisonment that showed no
signs of ending, and of all-too-frequent reminders of their precarious and
hazardous situation. Mr. Kennedy told how, through an open window in a Teheran
jail where he was being held, he could hear the gasps and screams of Iranian
prisoners being beaten and tortured.

The outside world knew of events that had enormous potential importance for the
hostages - the release of Richard Queen on July 11, the death of the former Shah
on July 27 in Cairo, the announcement by Ayatollah Khomeini on Sept. 12 of terms
for the release of the hostages. But for them, after the disruption and
dispersion following the failed rescue mission, one dreary day of captivity was
much like another. ''I often considered writing a poem,'' said Petty Officer
Gillette, '' 'Killing Time is Killing Me.' ''

OCCASIONALLY, amid their constant fears, there would be a touch of the
ludicrous.  There was, for instance, Miss Koob's telephone bill. On the day of
the embassy takeover, she had kept a telephone line open for hours between her
office in the Iran-America Society and the State Department in Washington.
Sometime after mid-March, when she and Miss Swift became roommates, there was a
knock on the door. An Iranian guard entered and asked, ''Did you make a phone
call to the United States Nov. 4 and 5?''

''Yes, I did,'' she recalled replying.  ''Fine,'' he said. ''Then you will take
your checkbook and you will write a check for 60,000 tomans (about $6,000).''
''Wait a minute,'' she replied. ''There are two problems. I don't have a
checkbook and I don't have an Iranian bank account and, Number Two, that wasn't
my phone call.''

They argued. Finally, the guard told her they would ''find'' her account and
take the money from it. ''I told him to please bring me what was left,'' she
said, ''but I never saw him or the money.''

For the most part, though, there was not much to laugh about. The hostages coped
in varied ways.  ''I determined to live as normally as possible,'' said Mr.
Kennedy. ''I made up my mind I would keep myself and my things clean and tidy,
that I'd keep myself as presentable as possible, sort of like the British
dressing for dinner.'' And so, he said, he would sweep his room until not a
grain of dirt remained. He would scrub his toilet so clean that his guards
started using it. Moved to a new place, he would immediately post family
pictures and begin scrubbing up.

William Keough, the schoolmaster from New England, treated his captors like
recalcitrant pupils, using his height of 6 feet 9 inches to intimidate them.
''Once we got over the initial pushing around, we established early on that this
was not the thing to do,'' he said. He advised some of his fellow hostages how
to behave. ''I spent quite a bit of time instructing people on certain things
they should know: How to push the limits, explaining to them that Iranian
students understand confrontation, that we should be training the students, that
we should be capturing the students rather than having them capture us.''

For some, skill at games became a mainstay of life. Bert C. Moore, an
administrative consul, said he had dominated the gamesmanship among his summer
roommates, Sgt. Paul Lewis, Philip Ward, a communications officer, and Sgt. John
McKeel.

''We had cards and checkers,'' Mr. Moore recalled. ''After the first couple of
games, they refused to play checkers with me. When you win and still have eight
men left, they didn't think that was a very good game. Finally, I got them all
so they played gin rummy. I started out out slow and went hard, and they decided
they didn't like that game.''

Sergeant Lopez found that ''day-to-day life was pretty much boredom.'' But he
enlivened it for his fellow captives by sketching cartoons that, said Mr.
Morefield, became ''a tremendous morale factor.'' ''Some of them were just
devastating,'' he said.  At first, the sketches were passed around
surreptitiously. Then the captors - who presumably did not understand some of
the nuances - permitted them to be posted on a wall near where hostages would be
taken to watch propaganda films on videotape.

Michael Metrinko, who worked in the embassy's political section, remembered
feeling ''extremely good'' when he saw one Lopez sketch depicting a mullah with
a belfry in the background and bats flying around it. The artist signed it,
''Political prisoner being illegally detained by the Iranian criminals.''

Mr. Morefield laughed at one drawn for his 51st birthday on Sept.  9. ''It
showed an old doddering captive flanked by two equally old doddering guards,''
he said.

Many of the hostages' recollections of this middle period of their captivity
were of the fussy domestic details with which they filled their days.

Miss Koob and Miss Swift recalled a regular routine. They would get up between 8
and 10 A.M. They would visit the bathroom, wash their faces, brush their teeth.
Then their captors would bring breakfast, which was bread with cheese, jam or
butter, tea, sometimes juice.  Then they would study, pray, read Scripture.
Between noon and 1 P.M., Miss Swift would exercise. The women would eat lunch,
wash the dishes, read some more. Miss Koob would do some needlework. At 5:30
they would exercise for 45 minutes, then eat supper. After evening devotions
they would do what Miss Koob called ''junk reading'' - pulp novels, Gothics,
mysteries, romances. At 10:30 they would exercise for another 45 minutes,
running figure eights or circles around their room.

Said Sgt. Gregory Persinger of the Marines: ''I would wake up at 10 in the
morning, walk an hour, exercise for close to two and a half hours, doing 1,000
sit-ups to begin with, push-ups and regular calisthenics. After that, I would
sit up and read maybe, a couple of hours until the food came for lunch.'' Then
more walking, more exercise, more reading, bed.

Mr. Morefield said that he had been overweight - 210 pounds when he was
captured. He exercised, touching his toes, simple little things like that, when
his captivity began, then built up, by the time the long months ended, to 50
repetitions of off-the-wall push-ups and numerous squat jumps and sit-ups and an
hour's jogging in his room.  He weighed 178 when he left Iran, he said, ''and if
I'm smart, this might have have added 10 years to my life.''

SOME of the hostages told of attempts to escape. None succeeded.  As early as
the night of Dec. 23, 1979, William Belk who worked in the embassy's
communications section, wriggled free from the twisted sheets that bound his
hands, cut through a window screen and slipped onto the embassy roof.

He had expected to emerge in darkness. But, he said, ''much to my chagrin, I
found that the lights to the compound that embassy workers had not been able to
get working in recent days were on. It was lit up like a stadium and here I was
sitting on top of a building.''

He crawled to a courtyard where young Iranians were walking around in small
groups.  ''The only thing I could think of was to act like a student,'' he said.
''I had a sweater so I pulled it up over my head and pretended to be putting it
on and started mumbling away. I walked right out behind five other students.''

But as he ducked around a building, Mr. Belk was confronted by a female guard
with an automatic weapon.  ''Stop,'' she cried in Farsi.  He lunged at the guard
and tried to wrestle her gun away. She screamed and got off two wild shots, but
he jerked the magazine out of her gun and broke away. He had made it to the top
of the compound wall before patrolling guards spotted him and started shooting.

Startled, and winded from his sprint, the adrenaline pumping through his body,
Mr. Belk toppled from the wall, injuring his leg.  ''I couldn't run any further
and I couldn't get back on top of the 12-foot wall,'' he said. ''I tried to hide
as best I could.'' But it was fruitless. In moments he was surrounded. The
guards slapped him around, he said, took him back to his room and blindfolded
him.

Later, three Iranians returned to the room and accused Mr. Belk of having
connections with the Central Intelligence Agency. One of them kicked his injured
leg. Another jammed the barrel of a .45-caliber pistol behind his ear and told
Mr. Belk, ''People who try to escape get shot.'' Then he pulled the trigger. The
hammer clicked on an empty chamber.

Mr. Belk spent the next 10 days in isolation.  The morning after he tried to
break out, Miss Swift asked a guard about the noise.  ''We shot a hostage,'' the
guard told her. It was not until the airplane ride home that she found out what
had happened.  On that same night, the commotion stirred by the capture of Mr.
Belk had alerted guards to the first of three escape attempts by Malcolm Kalp.
He tried again, he said, in May and again in June.

Steven M. Lauterbach, a general services officer, told of an escape attempt in
January 1980.  Some of the marines said they decided, after the election of
Ronald Reagan as President that if they were not freed by Feb. 12, 1981, time
enough, they thought, to let the new President secure their freedom, they would
try to escape, even though they realized the effort would probably not succeed.

''I don't want to sound John Wayne-ish,'' said Sergeant Lopez, ''but it wasn't
going to be a breakout. It was going to be a kamikaze mission.''

Sgt. John McKeel, another marine, said the attempt would have involved about
half a dozen hostages, using handmade weapons. ''We'd mixed detergent and
kerosene, razor blades and pins and things of that sort,'' he said.

Did he think it would have worked?  ''No,'' Sergeant McKeel muttered.  ''I doubt
that I could have gotten out of the country alive,'' said Joseph Hall, the Army
warrant officer, ''but it had gotten to the point where I was seriously thinking
about it.''

In the opinion of a Foreign Service officer who asked not to be identified, the
attempted escapes were not serious efforts, but rather appeared to be part of
the need of some hostages to offer resistance.

''There were many such attempts - most phony,'' he said. ''People knew damn well
they weren't going anyplace. It was a gesture. It had to do with the military
notion that somehow they had an obligation to give their name, rank and serial
number and escape if they possibly can, and harass the enemy. And with that kind
of mentality, they did all kinds of what I would call idle gestures.''

There were at least two apparent suicide attempts, according to the Foreign
Service officer and Col. Thomas Schaefer and Frederick Kupke. All three refused
to disclose the identities of those who tried to kill themselves. A fourth
hostage, Steven W. Kirtley, a Marine corporal, said he had witnessed one of the
attempts, by a roommate. He declined to identify the roommate or to say what had
happened other than that guards had called an ambulance.

''I know it for a fact,'' said the Foreign Service officer, ''but I won't go
into details of how I know it.'' He said one case involved a wrist slashing in
February 1980. ''I'm not sure just what he was trying to do at that point,'' he
said.

''The other case, the man fully intended to kill himself,'' he added. He
declined to say how.  After the suicide attempts, the captors took away all of
the hostages' shoes, belts and razors, and replaced drinking glasses and plates
with plastic.

Both the suicide attempts and the escape attempts presented delicate problems
for the Iranian captors.
pick up IRAN III-B

''One of the leaders, Hussein, told us point-blank what their problem was,'' the
Foreign Service officer said. ''They couldn't shoot us. We were their stock in
trade. And they couldn't do us much harm. We were gradually learning that. Of
course at that point we didn't know.''

''The Imam's instructions,'' he went on, ''were specific that our health had to
be protected. They worked very hard at that. They were inept, but they certainly
worked at it. So they had quite a problem in keeping us under control. And
according to Hussein, they thought they had to intimidate us, had to show us who
was boss.''

The earlier mock executions and other cruelties inflicted on the hostages thus
might have been part of this tactical intimidation effort at controlling
hostages whom the captors were under strict orders not to harm.

There were at least two other reasons for the harsh treatment accorded some
hostages, the Foreign Service officer suggested.  ''There were a few that were
treated much worse than the others because there was good reason for the
students to think they were C.I.A. or spies or something else,'' he said. ''But
many had a psychological need to bring trouble on themselves.''

As the days dragged on, the hostages became more resourceful in frustrating
their captors' efforts to prevent them from communicating with one another.

''We had the pony express going through the head,'' said Sergeant Lopez. ''We
would leave notes in the toilet paper rolls, under the toilet, in the sink,
behind the mirror, under a loose tile. We snatched a thumb tack off a wall one
time and we were sticking them underneath a little end table they had in the
head. And we had a telegraph system, knocking through the walls. And we also had
the system where when you knocked on the door and talked to one of the guards,
you talked loud enough so that everyone in the hallway could hear you and you
used little acronyms and jargon the Iranians would half understand but everyone
else would catch it.''

Sergeant Sickmann said that, inexplicably, one of the books the hostages were
allowed to read contained instructions for a tapping code, in which letters were
arranged in a horizontal grid so that 1-1 was the letter A, 1-2 the letter B.
And they would use that to communicate between rooms.

Messages from outside were generally welcome - but erratic.  ''Letters I write
were thrown away and letters they received for me were thrown away,'' said Duane
Gillette, the naval petty officer.  There was often mail from strangers,
Americans who simply wanted to let the hostages know their country was thinking
of them, and Mr.  Gillette remembered with affection a letter he had received
from a child in New York. ''There was Tom Daley,'' he said. ''He is in fourth
grade. But he came out and said I think we ought to bomb these bastards. 'Bomb'
was misspelled. ''Bastards' was misspelled. It brought tears to my eyes it was
so good.''

After the unsuccessful rescue attempt in April, in what seemed to be a gloating
gesture, several hostages were shown color photographs in Time and Newsweek of
the wrecked helicopters and the charred bodies of members of the rescue team.
Some hostages were allowed to read the stories, others were permitted to look
only at the illustrations.

Generally, however, the Iranians tried to keep the hostages ignorant of world
events, especially those relating to the hostage situation. On rare occasions,
the hostages were given copies of the news magazines, crudely censored with many
pages torn out. But sometimes the censors would forget to cut out the table of
contents from a magazine. Some of the hostages learned of the former Shah's
death that way.

Hints of the failed rescue mission reached the hostages at the various sites to
which they had been moved.  The first word came about six weeks after the
mission when a letter arrived from a schoolchild. ''We're sorry the rescue
failed,'' it read. ''We hope they try it again.''

Miss Koob and Miss Swift got a censored copy of Time or Newsweek in which the
article about the raid had been torn out but was, inexplicably, stuffed inside
the rear cover.

Jerry Miele, who worked in the communications section of the embassy, was
cleaning the embassy library, probably sometime in August, he thinks, when he
found what he called ''an American Socialist newspaper'' that mentioned the
failed rescue. Later, in a letter from a young American girl, he said, he
learned that eight Americans had died in the attempt.

Sergeant Lopez recalled that ''someone in Europe had written to Gary Lee, who
was one of my cellmates, saying something to the effect that so far eight had
died, but many more were willing to give our lives to save you.''

''So,'' he went on, ''we figured it was more or less a rescue attempt. We
weren't quite sure. We didn't really find out all the details until we were
released.''

Someone in the Boston area, who never identified himself, began sending Mr.
Keough, whose hometown is Waltham, Mass., the sports page from a local
newspaper.

''Every day the sports page went out and it would come in in clusters,'' Mr.
Keough said. ''Sometimes on the back of the sport pages would be news. Sometimes
it would be the comics. The Doonesbury comic of Dec. 28, 1979, let me know that
this had become a subject of widespread discussion in the U.S. Garry Trudeau is
an astute political commentator and just reading that cartoon strip about
Iranian students let me know the extent to which this was being handled in the
U.S. On the back of the sports pages we would see an advertisement for one of
the channels running a TV show, tucked in there was a statement about the recent
rescue attempt. We would pick up news that way. The Aug. 14 issue of Sports
Illustrated, tucked in that was the announcement that the game had been
interrupted with the anouncement that the Shah had died in Egypt.''

Last December, Mr. Keough said, Algerian diplomats brought him a Christmas
package from his wife that contained underwear, socks and three books. The
captors withheld a book on the Presidential election in the United States, but
they let Mr. Keough have a book of crossword puzzles and a copy of the 1981
World Almanac, which, to the delight of the hostages, contained a summary of the
major news events of 1980.

''That sort of thing was taking place all the time,'' Mr. Keough said.
''Information was coming through. You cannot suppress a group of strong
Americans who are an intelligent group.''

Miss Koob found out about the Canadian-assisted escape of a group of the
hostages toward the end of her stay in Iran. A ''compassionate'' guard brought a
magazine account of the incident to Miss Koob and told her, she said, that he
hoped it would help keep her spirits up. It was ''the most incredibly beautiful
thing I've read in my whole life,'' she said.

LETTERS from relatives and even, in some cases, strangers also provided news on
their situation. Usually, the information from relatives was guarded, as if they
sensed that direct reports on the hostages would be blocked by the captors.

''Letters were getting through with one-liners stuck in the middle of this big,
long thing about Aunt Thelma's apple pie recipe,'' said Sergeant Lopez.

Gary Lee, the administrative officer, said his wife, Patricia, had let him know
about the death of the Shah by reporting that a nonexistent ''Uncle Shaw'' had
died. Donald Cooke, a vice consul, said he understood the rescue effort had
failed after he asked his family to send him a set of ''Curtis LeMay stoneware''
and they replied, ''We sent the stoneware, but you didn't get it. It got all
broken.'' In the Vietnam War, Curtis E. LeMay, an Air Force general, advocated
bombing America's enemies ''back to the Stone Age.''

Some of the hostages discovered that Richard Queen had been sent home when Mr.
Morefield's wife, Dorothea, wrote that Mr. Queen was suffering with multiple
sclerosis. They wondered how Mrs. Morefield could know that.

''We put two and two together,'' said Sergeant Sickmann, ''and figured that he
had gotten out, and had an interview on television, and that's what Mrs.
Morefield was trying to tell us.

''She didn't come right out and say it,'' he continued, ''because they hated
whenever someone wrote and gave us information like that.''

While unaware of Mr. Queen's release, Miss Koob and Miss Swift realized that
something had changed when the amount of food they had been preparing was cut
back. They had taken over the cooking for six people after their captors had
difficulty doing so, burning food and the like. Then, all of a sudden, they
found themselves cooking for only five.

At first, they had no idea for whom they were cooking; they eventually found out
by reading notes hidden in a wastepaper basket.  Or occasionally the guards
would allow a note on the tray, signed by ''the boys in the backroom'' and
asking for more salad or some other item,

The Shah died July 27. Quite a while later, Michael Metrinko, who worked in the
political section of the embassy, remembers, he read about it ''from a line in
Sporting News - something about a horse race.'' At first, he said, the
realization ''raised our hopes, till we found that he had died quite a while
back. And if he's dead, what we we doing here?''

Barry Rosen, the embassy's press attache, said that the controversial decision
to admit the Shah to the United States had dominated the conversations of
hostages for months. ''It was killing us,'' he said. ''We were eating ourselves
alive. Why? Why? What were we doing here?''

The embassy, he said, had sent ample warning to the State Department on the
likely consequences of admitting the Shah. He said he and other hostages had
doubted the propriety of the decision.

The depth of the anti-Shah, anti-American feelings of their captors impressed
the hostages. In those long middle months of their captivity, they had time to
study the people who had seized them, to differentiate among the various levels
of command, even to confer nicknames upon their guards.

''Some were old enough to be graduate students working on their fourth or fifth
degrees,'' Mr. Keough said.  But many of them seemed to be genuine students. ''I
don't think the terms 'student' and 'terrorist' are necessarily mutually
exclusive,'' said Colonel Scott.

The Foreign Service officer who asked not to be identified said the students had
told him of being trained in the summer at Palestine Liberation Organization
camps on how to handle hostages. He said they might even have had a manual on
the subject.

''It was something we assumed,'' he said, ''because they couldn't possibly have
thought up all those things by themselves. They had some kind of instruction,
some kind of guide, something more than their training, which they admitted
to.''

Many of the militants were incompetent gunslingers, he said. Guns often roared
in the compound, and, while many hostages feared being shot accidentally, they
could not resist joking about it. ''We'd laugh and say, 'There goes another
toe,' '' he said. ''They were playing around with the firearms and didn't have
good training. They ended up by having accidents. I know for a fact that one
student was shot in the foot or the leg in the Mushroom Inn.''

Charles Jones also had a low opinion of the captors. ''The majority of the
so-called students were young unemployed kids,'' he said, noting that
unemployment among the young in Iran was 70 percent. ''Many of them call
themselves students because they have no better names to call themselves.''

John Limbert said two interrogations he underwent persuaded him that his captors
were incompetent. In the first, he was blindfolded; in the second, the
interrogator had a bag over his head. ''I don't think they had any idea how an
embassy actually works,'' he said.  ''It was so amateurish you couldn't believe
it. It was silly, blindalley stuff.''

He recalled one captor's interrogation: ''He asked me, 'Did you meet with Hassan
so-and-so?' and I said, 'I don't know Hassan so-andso, and we argued for 15
minutes.''

''He said, 'You're lying,' and I said, 'How do you know?' ''It was this kind of
searching question that went on and on,'' he said sarcastically.  The women
prisoners felt that they had fared better than most of the men and, said Miss
Koob, the probable explanation was that their captors' Islamic beliefs demanded
different treatment for women.

She divided her captors into three groups.  First, she said, were students -
elite, very conservative students, 16 to 22 years of age, men and women, who had
been picked from the various universities around town. They were the guards.

The second group, all male, ranged in age from the mid-20's to the early 30's.
They were administrators. ''They all said, 'We're all equal, we have no bosses,'
'' Miss Koob said. ''But they plainly did.''

The third group was the interrogators. They were highly trained and motivated,
she said. There was, for instance, Hamid, known as Tooth because of a gap in his
front teeth; he said he had studied computer science at Berkeley and he spoke
fluent English.

The ''chief terrorist'', said Mr. Blucker, was named Ahmed. Another was called
Pretty Boy, another Plowboy, another Bozo the Clown, remembered Mr. Morefield.
''They were all, I think, committed revolutionaries,'' he said.

Mr. Kennedy thought the nicknames were a bad idea because, he said, they made
some of the guards angry. ''A polite approach is the way I was brought up in
life,'' he said. ''I didn't kowtow. I didn't grovel. I treated them like you
treat a waiter.''

Some guards were compassionate, said Duane Gillette, particularly those who had
been in prison themselves. But even these were careful not to let others see
them being friendly, he said. ''To speak out against the treatment would have
allowed the other militants to turn against that student and his life would have
been in jeopardy,'' he said.

Some guards achieved an off-and-on rapport with the hostages.  Sergeant
Sickmann, a high school football star, had beaten one of them repeatedly in arm
wrestling, and one night in June, the guard challenged the sergeant to a real
wrestling match, with two hostages and four guards as spectators. Sergeant
Sickmann threw the guard across the room. ''They had to take him to the hospital
and he came back with a sling on his arm,'' the sergeant said.

Other guards would argue with their captives. Mr. Limbert, the political
officer, told about it. ''One of them said to me, 'Why is America the greatest
enemy of mankind?' That's where the conversation would start. Then I'd say, 'No
wonder you don't go to school. You know everything. You know that the U.S.
causes droughts in India and floods in Bangladesh. I envy you, you have such
simple solutions. My 8-year-old son thinks better than you do.' ''

Other guards used their captives as tutors. ''We helped them study for their
exams,'' said Miss Koob. ''We helped them with their English. One girl was
learning English for medical purposes and was studying the names of bones.''

Other guards tried to stir dissension among the hostages, Sergeant Sickmann
said. First they would favor one of his roommates, Sergeant Gallegos, by
delivering letters from home, then they would favor him. ''But we'd sit down and
talk it out,'' he said, ''and say this is just what they're trying to do.
Because we knew there were people writing to us.'' The attempt failed, he said;
all letters were shared.

''It was like they had read that this is the way hostages are treated in
Solzhenitsyn, treat them in random ways,'' said Mr.  Limbert. ''It was like they
had taken a course, Hostages 101, and they were doing it badly. I'd have given
them a C-minus.''

Miss Swift remembers that ''the students were quite willing to die for what they
believed and during the first four or five days they repeatedly told me they
were going to be martyrs because the United States was going to come in
militarily and rescue us.''

For many hostages, the final months of captivity were a time to think and talk
about the meaning of the experience, about President Carter's handling of the
crisis and about the Shah, who, in a sense, had gotten them all into it.

Moorhead Kennedy regarded the Shah as ''an awful man,'' and said the United
States had shown incredibly bad judgment in its involvement with him. He did not
criticize Mr. Carter, however, and spelled out what appeared to be the
Administration's continuing predicament:

''I didn't think you should negotiate with people who had seized an embassy.
Maybe that means death for hostages. But you don't talk to terrorists. At least
you don't for a while. But, of course, in the end you do.''

Duane Gillette, the Navy petty officer, put the problem another way: ''If I die,
would I be dying for America - or because of America?''

As for Mr. Carter, Mr. Gillette said that, whatever mistakes were made, he
respected the former President for having had the ''courage'' to go to Germany
and ''face us.''

Charles Jones was less sanguine: ''Carter came to Germany to explain to us what
he was trying to do and what was on his mind at the time. He was a sincere man,
but it was all above him.''

Comdr. Donald Sharer of the Navy, like many of the military men among the
hostages, said that government policy was not theirs to formulate.

''We realize that America could not let the lives of 50 people jeopardize the
principles in the lives of 200 million others, and we talked about it quite a
bit,'' the commander said. But he added: ''Every once in a while, we'd say,
'Well, God bless it, I wish they'd nuke this place.' ''

Kathryn Koob said that in general she sympathized with the aims if not the means
of the Iranian revolution. ''I had no quarrel with the 24-year-old girl who sat
with tears in her eyes and talked about the need for education for the young
girls of Iran,'' she said, adding:

''I think the Shah made a lot of mistakes. If he personally was not cruel there
was a great deal of cruelty done during his reign. I would like to see some sort
of system set up so that leaders of countries are held accountable for their
actions.''
pick up Iran IV

After 11 months of captivity in which mob denunciations of the United States had
become routine, the hostages suddenly heard a most outlandish sound waft into
their cells one day: a stirring band recording of the quintessentially American
march, ''Stars and Stripes Forever.''

''Three cheers for the red, white and blue'' was being played through the
streets, not for the benefit of the hostages but to stir Iranians to patriotic
heights in the new and sudden war that had erupted with Iraq's invasion in late
September.

Immediately, Moorhead Kennedy deduced the meaning of the familiar martial music.
''We figured Iran must be involved in a local war of some sort, probably with
Iraq,'' Mr. Kennedy recalled. ''The guards didn't react to all the war sounds in
a way that threatened us, so we knew we weren't involved.''

Frederick Kupke listened in fascination to the Sousa music and then tried to
decipher the chants of the new street demonstrations outside - rallying cries
that reminded him of nothing so much as a familiar football cheer: ''Get tough,
Big Red! Get tough!''

While Mr. Kennedy had no certain confirmation until a letter arrived weeks later
from his wife, Louisa, hostages closer to the war action saw tracer bullets
shooting through the air as they peered through the tiny windows of their cells.

''We could feel some of the concussions,'' Sergeant Sickmann remembered. ''There
was shelling and blackouts and stuff like that.  They were telling us this was
just their practice, that they were practicing for war.''

Captain Needham, an Air Force officer, leaped happily to the conclusion that a
nighttime bombing was the work of the United States.

''Not knowing the planes were Iraqi,'' he said, ''that these were not American
planes, we put our candles in our windows and said, 'Here we are. Come and get
us. Help put a hole in the wall so we can escape.' ''

As it became clear the trouble was with the Iraqis, hostages dared to hint at
bias in discussing the new war with their captors, Sergeant Sickmann said. ''We
would sit there and have discussions about how they were getting their ass beat,
and they would say no, no, they were just preparing for an attack.''

Michael Metrinko, the embassy political officer, could not resist defining a
lesson for his captors, contending that the Iranians' preoccupation with holding
the hostages had left them vulnerable to outside attack.

''I took great joy in telling them all the people who had been killed had been
killed because of their stupidity in taking the American embassy,'' he related,
''that if the American Government had relations with Iran, Iraq would never have
attacked because they would have been afraid.''

From their cells, the Americans could sense the sudden shift of Iranian
attention. Richard Morefield, a former artillery officer, heard the Iraqi bombs
land in Teheran and overheard guards discussing casualties. Even more, he saw
increasing evidence of American trade sanctions against Teheran as food and
kerosene became limited and long blackout periods were ordered, as much to save
energy, it seemed to him, as to wage war.

''It was working,'' he said of the American countermeasures. ''I was sure of
this.'' Such stirrings of fresh anticipation fed into the final month of the
Presidential elections going on back home, an event marked well by both hostages
and captors. The Iranians began predicting President Carter's defeat and saying
it would mean freedom for the Americans.

''They would come in and say, yeah, Carter has to do something before the
election to get us out that would make him look good in office,'' Sergeant
Sickmann recounted, annoyed at the notion that domestic politics might intrude
into a life-and-death issue. He said he was hoping instead that the President
would come over and ''blow the country apart.''

Each day of the far-off campaigning was echoed in the jail cells of Iran by some
of the same questions about President Carter's dilemma that fascinated political
analysts back in America.

''We kept telling them that he didn't have to do anything,'' Sergeant Sickmann
said. ''And they said, 'Oh no, no. It will be for sure, he will do something.'
''

For the hostages, the only certainty of such talk was that they had better steel
themselves for the likelihood of another siege of hope and disappointment
coinciding with the first anniversary of their captivity.

Soon after the vote was cast in the United States, guards in Iran gleefully
appeared to announce the defeat of ''the great Satan Carter.'' Moorhead Kennedy
recalled that his main reaction had been a new sort of worry, that the change in
administrations in Washington might require restarting the entire negotiating
process with the Iranians.

By this time, at the beginning of their second year of imprisonment, the
sporadic talk by some hostages of a breakout attempt began to interest such an
earlier skeptic as Colonel Scott, the embassy military attache. He did not think
an escape could work, but he indulged the talk nevertheless because he decided
he could not wait ''forever.'' Accordingly, he and other hostages began to
discuss an attempt at breaking out sometime after the beginning of Ronald
Reagan's administration.

Fear was not a factor in such talk after the experience of the mock firing
squad, he said. ''You can just get so scared, you get angry,'' he explained,
''and once you get angry it sustains you through many sorts of stress.''

In retrospect, incidents of resistance were recounted with pride by the
repatriated Americans.  ''When they attempted to give me the story about how
religious they were, I would tell them they were a bunch of criminals,'' Michael
Metrinko said, recalling that some of his worst confinement was suffered in the
final months because of his resistant attitude.

''I was being punished by the guards for my inability to establish a polite
rapport,'' he said, telling of a final stretch of 17 days straight in a
''special punishment cell'' with no light, heat, bedding or books.

''I was keeping warm by constantly jogging in the cell,'' he said.  ''There
wasn't enough room to walk.'' As Christmas approached, the hostages suddenly
were gathered from their different points of jail-like confinement and put in
comfortable surroundings they considered more reminiscent of the Shah's era. It
was as if they were being reconditioned for freedom, but, even as the Carter
Administration worked furiously to end the ordeal, again the captives guarded
against certain conclusion.

For their second Christmas in captivity, some of the hostages boycotted the
church service and rejected their jailors' gift of candy.  ''I refused at that
point to be used for propaganda purposes any more,'' Mr. Kennedy said, recalling
the final three-week period of hunkering down amid endless rumors of approaching
freedom.

On Jan. 19, a familiar figure from the opening weeks of captivity, ''Mary the
terrorist,'' reappeared. With her was a man who instructed some of the hostages
that ''candidates'' for freedom were about to go on television tape. The
implication was clear that kind comments from the Americans would hasten their
release.

''Myself, I felt I'm not going to help this guy,'' Sergeant Lopez remembered.
''I'm not going to say anything just to get out.'' He did not cooperate. ''We
figured it was just another dog-and-pony show to get the interview from us, to
build up America's hopes and dash them again.''

Sgt. Gregory Persinger, on the other hand, decided freedom depended on the
interview, in which he said he had not been mistreated by the Iranians.  ''I was
not forced,'' he said. ''You either do it or not, you're not going to be
released. Let's say we were under pressure.''

Master Sgt. Regis Ragan, 38, said he had told the Iranian television workers,
''I have nothing to say to you people.'' They coaxed him to say ''the treatment
is good, the food is good,'' but he continued to say nothing and eventually, he
said, he was taken aside for special attention.

''They physically abused me,'' he said.  ''They hit me in the face and told me I
was going back into that room to make a statement.  I told them I had nothing to
say to them.''

They called him obscene names, he said, ''and they threw me around.'' The rumors
of freedom heightened about 5 P.M. on Jan. 19 when Navy Commander Sharer was
told he was a ''candidate'' for freedom he recalled replying: ''I haven't
believed you the last 10 months, why should I start believing you now?''

''Well, you're going to be talking to 300 newsmen,'' the Iranian replied, as if
ever conscious of the media aspects of the event.  Robert Blucker said that by
this point, after months of forced moves all around Iran, the band of hostages
had bags of string, glasses and other handy materials. ''We were like the
vagabonds who live on the sidewalks of New York,'' he said, describing his
unsuccessful demand to take two bagloads with him to freedom. He got out with
nothing much beyond a souvenir blindfold, and he did not fully believe the
promised freedom that night until one of the people involved in final medical
checks told him, ''We're the Algerians.''

The career diplomats, in particular, were heartened at the sight of neutral
mediators in their midst. Richard Morefield finally believed freedom was at hand
''when I saw the Algerians.''

''My impression was that they were true professionals and hard as nails,'' he
said.  At the height of the final confusion and doubt, an Iranian appeared with
a simple, clear message as remembered by Commander Sharer in an interview with
The Norfolk (Va.) Virginian-Pilot.

''O.K., it's time,'' the hostages were told.  ''Everybody's going home.''
''There wasn't any cheering,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''We just did it.'' They were
''stacked like cordwood'' in buses and rushed out to the waiting airplane. They
were hurried through what some took to be a token gauntlet of final
vituperation, the words sounding almost like a sticks-and-stones jingle to some
of the hostages.

''Bad, bad, America's bad,'' the Americans heard in the blur and din of
departure.  ''Bad, bad America.'' ''I chimed in right with them, 'Bad, bad
Iran.' '' Commander Sharer said, recounting his final hustle to freedom.
Hurried along, Kathryn Koob took a last glance at Iran and the Iranians.  ''I'm
sure there were some among them who thought we should never have gone home,''
she said.  ''But I think that for most of them they were pretty glad to see us
go.''

Inside the aircraft, the Americans, some still doubting freedom was in the
offing, shouted greetings after 14 months of captivity.  ''When we heard the
plane engines kicking in we knew we were going home,'' said Sergeant Persinger.
''I got inside that airplane,'' Commander Sharer said, beaming at the
recollection, ''and some of the marines were already in there. I love those
marines and I started giving college yells and cheers like I was on a football
field and scoring a touchdown, and we were happy from then on.''

Others, visualizing all three dimensions of their captivity, would not yield to
the moment until the Algerians turned the pilot's conversation onto the cabin
speakers and let the control tower note the precise instant that the plane,
dubbed Freedom One, was passing from Iranian airspace and jurisdiction -from
captivity to freedom.

''It brought tears to the eyes,'' Duane Gillette said. ''It was beautiful.'' In
the air, the Americans, the walls between them gone, quickly began piecing
together their common lives, filling in blanks, particularly the tantalizing
ones of daily routine.

''Everybody was asking questions,'' Sergeant Sickmann said of that flight from
Iran. ''We'd recognize everybody's voices but we would ask questions, like, you
know, 'what were you guys playing that night when I heard all that racket?' ''

The source of the racket of rolled dice, the counted moves, the oohs and ahs, it
turned out, was Parcheesi.  And that strange game of flopping sounds? It was
hostage basketball, played with rolled-up socks tossed toward a cardboard hoop.

As the Americans returned and dispersed across the nation, crowds of compatriots
seemed to be waiting almost enviously to hear of the discoveries made by the
battered mission from Iran.

''I found out I was not afraid of being shot,'' Michael Metrinko told the people
back home in Pennsylvania.  ''Of other things, yes, but not of dying.'' And of
his country? ''I discovered I love it more than ever.''

''I am amazed, surprised and elated at the America that we've come home to,''
Colonel Scott declared in coming home.  ''It's not the same America that I left
17 months ago.  It's a new America and I think no greater gift could be given to
a professional soldier by his country than the gift of unity that I have seen
since I've been back in America.''

The former hostages groped to describe the elation of fresh liberation,
comparing it to an almost organic state.  ''The feeling of freedom,'' said Jerry
Miele, a Foreign Service communications officer. ''That's it. Freedom. You don't
know what that is till you've come out and you are free. It changes your insides
and you are alive again.''

This reconstruction of the 14 1/2-month ordeal of the American hostages in Iran
is based on detailed interviews by The New York Times with 20 hostages plus
public statements and other accounts by the hostages and their families.

The writers of the four segments presented here were, respectively, Robert D.
McFadden, Joseph B. Treaster, Maurice Carroll and Francis X. Clines.

The reporting for the article was done by B. Drummond Ayres Jr., Josh Barbanel,
James Barron, John M. Crewdson, Karen De Witt, Clyde Haberman, Robin Herman,
Donald Janson, Robert Lindsey, Iver Peterson, Timothy M. Phelps, William M.
Robbins, Lynn Rosellini, Nathaniel Sheppard Jr., William K. Stevens, A.O.
Sulzberger Jr., Matthew L. Wald and Carolyn Weaver. Illustrations are by Saul
Lambert.

Twenty hostages were interviewed by The New York Times for this article and
information was obtained from four others at recent news conferences. In
addition, the article draws on accounts provided by 14 hostages to other news
organizations. They were: William E. Belk, The State of Columbia, S.C.; Jerry J.
Miele and Master Sgt. Regis Ragan, The Tribune-Review of Greensburg, Pa.; Cpl.
Steven W. Kirtley, The Democrat of Little Rock, Ark.; Donald R. Hohman, The
Sacramento Bee; Sgt. James M. Lopez, CBS News; Sgt. William Gallegos and
Elizabeth Montagne, NBC News; Donald A. Sharer, The Virginian-Pilot of Norfolk,
Va., and Robert A. Engelmann, Donald Cooke, Sgt. Paul E.  Lewis, Sgt. John D.
McKeel Jr. and Capt. Paul M. Needham Jr., various news wire services. Richard I.
Queen, who was released last summer, was interviewed by CBS News after the
others were freed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing of Iranian protesters Drawing of hostages and
captors (Page A11) Drawing of hostages (Page A12) Map of Iran (Page A13) 5
Photos of Iran (Page A13) Cartoon of hostages and captors (Page A14) Drawing of
hostages and captors (Page A14) Drawiong of hostages (Page A15)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TIMES SQ. PLANS TIED TO PROGRAM REAGAN OPPOSES

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 387 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


The Urban Development Action Grant program, which the Reagan Administration said
today it would try to eliminate, is important to New York City and its plans to
revive the Times Square area.

A grant of $22.5 million under the Federal program has been sought to help in
the construction of the Portman Hotel on Times Square, a $261.5 million project.

But Mayor Koch said in New York City last night after his return from Washington
- where he was among 12 Mayors who met with President Reagan - that the Portman
Hotel would be built with or without the Federal grant. The hotel is planned on
the west side of Times Square between 45th and 46th Streets.

''I believe that property in that area is going up and they will find a way to
build that hotel,'' the Mayor said.

Also Relying on Program

The other big project relying on funds from the urban grant program is the
development of the South Street Seaport in lower Manhattan, but it apparently
would not be affected, a New York City official said, because its $20 million
Federal grant has already been approved.

The official, Julian Spirer, who is director of the city's Washington office,
said, ''This does not appear to present a risk to the South Street Seaport
because any new action is likely to be prospective.''

In other matters that were discussed today, Mr. Koch said there were indications
that the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act was in trouble. New York and
other cities have relied upon the Ceta program to pay the salaries of some
public employees.

Mr. Koch said Mr. Reagan was receptive to two of his suggestions.  One would set
up a pilot program in 10 cities, including New York, in which businesses would
be permitted to pay less than the minimum wage in return for employing
youngsters regarded as otherwise unemployable.

The other involved Vietnam War veterans. Mr. Koch, reading from notes, said:
''At lunch, the President said that he was disturbed at reading that the Vietnam
veterans were upset that no one was paying attention to them. I said, 'Why don't
you declare Sunday as a holiday to honor Vietnam veterans?' He said, 'I'm going
to put that in my head.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NORMAND POIRIER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 112 words


Normand Poirier, an assistant editor of Newsday and a magazine writer, died
Sunday at Beth Israel Medical Center after a long illness. He was 53 years old
and lived in Manhattan.

A graduate of Cornell University, Mr. Poirier joined The New York Post in 1959
and later wrote for The Saturday Evening Post, Life and Esquire. One of his
Esquire articles was among the first reports on atrocities in the Vietnam War.
He joined Newsday in 1977.

Surviving are his mother, Marie Therese of Holden, Mass., and three brothers,
Conrad and Francois, both of Holden, and Jean of Frederick, Md.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHASING AWAY THE DEMONS OF THE OLD YEAR;
by Moira Hodgson

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


This year, as Chinatown prepares for the celebration of the Year of the Rooster,
4679 to be exact, I am reminded of the Chinese New Years I spent in Vietnam
during the late 50's. My father was in the British embassy and our servants were
Chinese refugees, part of a large immigrant population that had settled in
Saigon. Each Chinese New Year our house was ritually cleared of evil spirits, a
ceremony practiced by Chinese refugees all over South East Asia.

On the eve of Chinese New Year, which falls sometime between Jan.  20 and
Feb.20, a delegation led by a huge papier mache dragon, would arrive to chase
away demons. In New York's Chinatown, a similar procession on a larger scale is
held each year down Mott street sponsored by and catering to businesses and
restaurants. Sadly, the smaller ceremonies, such as the ones I saw, are rare
now, and I wonder if they exist at all anymore in Vietnam.

During the days before the New Year, our house was transformed, cleaned from top
to bottom and decked with orange trees and special hangings, symbols of long
life and good luck, which symbolized the New Year.  Debts were cleared,
resolutions made, presents bought with the same last-minute frenzy that strikes
us at Christmas. For five days food was prepared and we watched as the cook made
elaborate dishes and scolded us for stealing the occasional rice cake, dumpling
or sweet cookie.

Most anxiously we waited for the time when, we were told, a dragon was coming to
dance in front of a house, and chase away the evil spirits. I had been troubled
by a demon who lived underneath my bed and looked forward to its demise. Each
night I had to leap from the bedside carpet onto the sheets without, if
possible, bringing down the mosquito netting, to avoid being caught by the leg
by the dragon and pulled under.

The house we lived in was tall, thin and gabled like a Charles Addams house. It
was three stories high and painted white and green.  Our meals were cooked in
blackened pots in an outdoor kitchen. The smell of charcoal drifted over the
back quarters, and its taste permeated everything, including the water which was
always boiled.  There were rats in the back the size of cats, but they never
bothered anyone. During one big New Year's cleanup, as though to enter into the
spirit of things, one of the rats ran down the garden path and out of the gate.
The coolie, whose bearing was similar to that of an English butler, walked
forward and politely shut the gate, which was wrought iron, after it.

The top floor of the house consisted only of a guest room and bathroom, with a
small front balcony where we stood to watch the ceremony. The house was decked
with red paper banners with good luck symbols and we wore silver medallions
around our necks that read ''Good Luck'' in Chinese letters.

A small group, led by a dragon in a clumsy lumbering dance, marched through the
front gate and gathered below. Joss sticks and images of gods on rice paper were
burned. The noise was considerable, enough to frighten away the most
recaltritant of evil spirits: clashing cymbals, banging drums and exploding
firecrackers that set off an angry and impatient howling from the Alsatian dogs
tied up next door.

Inside the glowing white, red and green dragon head, with its flared nostrils,
livid bulging eyes and ferocious teeth, lurked a man whose job was to climb up a
pole to the top balcony and take the piastres in red and gold packets and the
lettuce tied to sticks that we held out with breathless anticipation.

The climb was precarious. The pole waved dangerously and with considerable
difficulty and to much applause, the beast lowered its head and manipulated its
mouth around the money, giving a hurried final pluck to the lettuce leaves. The
house was now clear for the year.  Or was it?

The guest occupying this room had just arrived in the Far East from London for
the first time. That evening, after the dragon ceremony, he and my parents left
for an opulent New Year's banquet.  The menu had been thoughtfully translated
from Chinese to French and then, for their benefit, to English. Dinner began
with ''outworks,'' which included ''jumped shrimp'' and ''pork mouthfuls.''
After the prolific and delicious dinner, at which much rice wine had been
consumed, he went to sleep in the mosquito-covered guest bed above which whirred
a large and effective ceiling fan. The next morning he appeared at breakfast
looking weak and pale. He had been awakened in the middle of the night in a most
alarming way. A bat had been caught in the fan. My own demon, however, was gone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing of rooster

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARINE CORPS JURY GETS GARWOOD CASE;
Ex-Vietnam Prisoner Is Accused of Collaborating With Enemy - He Has Pleaded
Insanity

BYLINE: By Wendell Rawls Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 4


The case against Pfc. Robert R.  Garwood of the Marine Corps, accused of
collaborating with the enemy in Vietnam, was given to a jury of five Marine
officers today after two and a half months of trial testimony from fellow
prisoners of war in Vietnam and half a dozen psychiatrist.

After deliberating all day, the jury retired at 6 P.M. with plans to begin work
tomorrow morning at 8 o'clock.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, is accused of collaborating with the Vietcong and
the North Vietnamese while a prisoner of war and of assaulting a fellow prisoner
by hitting him in the ribs.

The court-martial is the first jury trial of a Vietnam prisoner of war, although
one prisoner was acquitted of desertion by a military judge in 1971.

Private Garwood was captured by the Vietnamese in September 1965, two weeks
before he was scheduled to be transferred from Southeast Asia. He was released
by the North Vietnamese in March 1979. He is accused of violating military law
and the military code of conduct, part of which covers soldiers' behavior when
they are taken prisoner, in the period from 1967 to 1969.

Initially, he was also charged with desertion, soliciting American troops to
throw down their weapons and desert, and physically and verbally abusing fellow
prisoners. Those charges were dismissed last week by the trial judge, Col. R. E.
Switzer. The judge also limited to about 18 months the period of imprisonment
for which Private Garwood could be held responsible for criminal acts.
Uses Brainwashing as Defense

While conceding that he committed many of the acts, Private Garwood has centered
his defense on a plea of insanity, contending that through torture and
deprivation he became a victim of coercive persuation, usually known as
brainwashing, that left him so mentallly diseased that he had no knowledge of
the criminality of his actions.

In closing arguments of the long and complex court-martial, John C. Lowe, the
chief defense lawyer, said that the marine, who was a 19-year-old Jeep driver
when he was captured, was tortured into insantity by the Vietcong and began to
"identify with the enemy."

The Government prosecutor, Maj. Werner Hellmer of the Marines, scoffed at the
insanity plea, calling it "a smoke screen."

"If he was suffering from all these diseases and suicide attempts, that man
today would be a raving lunatic," Maj. Werner Hellmer said, pointing to the
private sitting ramrod-stiff and expressionless at the defense table.
Warns on Losing 'Common Sense'

"Don't let the experts take away your common sense," the prosecutor urged the
panel of five marine officers, all veterans of the Vietnam war.

The chief defense counsel told the jury that the Government was required to
prove that the defendant was capable of appreciating the criminality of his
conduct.

"We don't have to prove he is mentally ill beyond a reasonable doubt," said Mr.
Lowe, a civilian from Charlottesville, Va., "but we did it."

Then, in a final plea, he added, A not-guilty verdict would simply give him a
toehold in the face of a cliff he will have to climb in search of some measure
of mental health and humanity."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of chimney sweeps

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


International
Poland's labor troubles worsened as negotiations between the Government and
strike leaders broke off in a southern province.  The independent national union
told all its chapters to be ready to begin sit-ins if force was used to break
the walkout.  The province is the only region where strikes were continuing, but
other areas where negotiations were still under way remained tense.  (Page A1,
Column 1.)
Information on two Americans in Iran was reported by the State Department. It
said that Mohi Sobhani, an Iranian-born American citizen held since Sept. 6 on
spy charges, had telephoned a brother to report he had been freed.  The
department also said it had learned that a hearing had been held for Cynthia B.
Dwyer, who has been imprisoned since May 5, and that "a disposition" of her case
was expected about Monday. (A1:1-3)
India raised a nuclear challenge to Washington over what New Delhi regards as
uncalled for delays in releasing nuclear fuel under a purchasing accord.  Indian
officials said they had authorized the reprocessing of spent fuels into much
more powerful and hazardous plutonium oxide.(A6:3.)
Opposition to neutron bombs was suggested by a West German spokesman. Asked
whether West Germany's willingness to deploy the enhanced-radiation weapons
still existed, as it did in 1978, the spokesman replied with a question: "On
what basis?  The earlier basis no longer exists." (A21:1-3)
Spain's King foiled Basque dissenters who were protesting his first visit to the
troubled north in his five-year-old reign.  As King Juan Carlos rose to address
Basque legislators in Guernica, a score of separatists started singing a Basque
nationalist song.  The King smiled at the singers, who stood only a few feet
away, and amicably urged them to sing louder. (A3: 4-6)
Energy
Refined oil costs are rising much faster than the Reagan Administration
predicted last week when it decontrolled petroleum prices, and analysts say that
evidence is mounting that they will rise even further. Many specialists predict
that heating oil prices could increase to as much as $1.40 a gallon by spring,
and the problem is generating expressions of anger, confusion and doubt.
(A1:2.)
Deep cuts in synthetic fuels projects are planned by the Reagan Administration,
according to a document drafted by the Federal budget office.  It calls for the
elimination of five huge projects and a reduction by $5.3 billion, or about
one-third, in the Government's financial support for the new Synthetic Fuel
Corporation.  The plan also calls for cutting funds for solar energy research
and for halting all Federal support for alcohol fuels.  (A1:3-4)
National
President Reagan faced resistance in Congress to his request for a $50 billion
increase in the Federal debt ceiling.  Senate Democratic leaders indicated to
Mr.Reagan, who visited Capital Hill, that the Repulicans must take the
leadership in the controversial action.  In the House, only about 100 of the 192
Republicans were considered backers of the proposed increase. (A1:6.) Severe
cuts in many programs are proposed in a preliminary list prepared by the Reagan
Administration.  The plan calls for reductions in such social programs as food
stamps, meals for poor schoolchildren, jobs for the unemployed and compensation
for workers who have been laid off.  It would also defer or eliminate several
space projects, terminate urban development grants and cut in half the aid for
the arts and humanities. (A20: 1-2)
President Reagan is going to the people over the heads of Congress tonight in an
effort to gain momentum for the economic program that is to be the keystone of
his Administration.  His televised speech is set for 9 PM (A20:1-2.)
The case against a Marine accused of collaborating with the enemy while he was a
prisoner of war in Vietnam was given to a jury of five marine officers after two
and a half months of trial testimony.  The defendant, Pfc. Robert R. Garwood,
has pleaded insanity induced by brainwashing. (A10:1.)
Metropolitan
G.M. is paring New York operations. The leading American auto maker announced it
was transferring two major subsidiaries from the city to Detroit, dealing a
sharp and unexpected blow to Mayor Koch's efforts to keep jobs in New York.  The
move will involved about 700 of the 1,100 employees who work in the 50-story
General Motors building in midtown Manhattan - or nearly two-thirds of the
total.  (A1:6.)
A judicial-executive conflict resumed as the chief administrative judge of the
New York State courts accused Mayor Koch of making "a scapegoat" of the
judiciary by suggesting that the state's strict gun-control law had not worked
well because cases moved too slowly in the courts. (A1:5.)
A judge cited an inadequate salary in announcing his resignation.  Judge
Willliam Hughes Mulligan, whose salary is $70,900 a year, said he was stepping
down from the Federal appeals court in Manhattan, which is one of the nation's
major tribunals.  He said that he would join a private law firm to obtain more
security for his family.  (B1:5-6)
Jean S. Harris defended herself in her seventh day of testimony and final day of
cross-examination at her murder trail in Westchester County Court.  She denied
angrily that she had intended to kill Dr. Herman Tarnower and then herself
because, as the prosecutor put it, "if you couldn't have him, nobody else
would." (A1:4-5)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

A MARINE COURT FINDS GARWOOD HELPED FOE AS A VIETNAM P.O.W.

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 5


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps was found guilty today of
collaborating with the enemy and assaulting a fellow soldier while a prisoner of
war in Vietnam 14 years ago.

A jury of five Marine Corps officers deliberated two days before returning the
conviction. Private Garwood is the only Vietnam prisoner of war to be tried by
court-martial on a collaboration charge, and his conviction is the first on such
a charge in the armed services since 10 prisoners of the Korean War were
convicted 25 years ago.

A hearing on any extenuating and mitigating circumstances in the Garwood case
will be convened in the next few days and the same jury will decide on a
sentence. The maximum penalty is life imprisonment because the court-martial
judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, ruled out the death penalty. The assault conviction
carries a maximum sentence of six months.

The findings of the court-martial are automatically appealed to the Judge
Advocate General at Camp Lejeune for review, from there to the Commanding
General of the base, Maj. Gen. David Barker, and finally to the Naval Court of
Military Review. Then, if he wishes, Private Garwood may petition the Court of
Military Appeals.

Sources close to the defense lawyers said that ''prejudicial statements'' by the
trial judge would be an important part of their appeal and that subpoenas of
reporters to whom the judge granted interviews might be forthcoming.

The thin-haired 34-year-old marine, whose defense was based on a plea of
insanity, stood motionless and expressionless while the verdict was read in the
cramped courtroom. Donna Long, the woman with whom he lived, wept.

Within minutes after the verdict was announced, marines were shouting from
nearby barracks: ''He got what he deserved!''

Some Callers Protested Verdict

Yet, within the first hour after the verdict, the base public affairs office
received seven telephone calls from men and women, all protesting the verdict.

Private Garwood was allowed to leave the court while reporters and his friends
were held back. He left the building immediately and was unavailable for
comment.

''He is disappointed,'' said his attorney, John C. Lowe of Charlottesville, Va.,
a civilian. ''That is a natural reaction. We were all disappointed.''

The prosecution lawyers, both Marine Corps officers, refused comment.  Mr. Lowe
said ''a couple of days'' would be needed to prepare for the sentencing
procedure, where witnesses can be called for the defendant and for the
Government.

Under military law, conviction requires agreement by two-thirds of the jurors
and the vote is not made public.  About half an hour before the jurors notified
the court that a verdict had been reached, Private Garwood, his lawyers and
friends were jokingly casting an imaginary movie, ''The Robert Garwood Story.''
It was one of the few times the forlorn soldier had been seen to laugh.

Latest P.O.W. to Return

Private Garwood is the prisoner of war most recently returned from Vietnam. He
came home in March 1979, two months after he passed a note to a Finn who was in
Hanoi. The note said: ''I am an American.  Are you interested?''

It could be said that Private Garwood's life was blighted from the beginning. He
was born on April Fool's Day, 1946. His mother abandoned him when he was 4 years
old and his father had other wives.

As a youngster, he ran away from home twice and worked as a migrant laborer
before his father had him declared a juvenile delinquent and placed in a
detention home, from which the Marine Corps recruited him in 1963.

He went to Vietnam in 1965 and, at 19 years of age, was a jeep driver when he
was captured by Vietcong near Da Nang. He was not seen again by Americans until
1967 when other prisoners of war were taken to a jungle camp where he was being
held.

Several of those prisoners came here as witnesses against him.  They vividly
described the life of pain, torture, hunger and disease in jungle prison camps.

Accused of Walking 'Like Them'

These former prisoners said that Private Garwood was living with the Vietnamese
camp guards and, in the words of Gustave A. Mehrer of the Army, ''He was
squatting like them, walking like them and giggling like them. In my opinion he
was a white Vietnamese.''

Others testified that the marine carried a weapon, guarded them, helped the
Vietnamese interrogate and indoctrinate them, and informed on his fellow
soldiers.

Private Garwood did not deny the charges that he lived with his captors and
sometimes carried a weapon.  The defense lawyers maintained that their client
had for the better part of two years suffered the same torture and deprivation
as the other prisoners and that his mental condition had deteriorated further
from the experience before the other prisoners saw him.

Mr. Lowe said his client ''was driven mad by this coercive persuasion.'' ''He
adapted his behavior to that demanded by his captors,'' Mr.  Lowe said. ''It was
a matter of survival. He was incapable of appreciating the criminality of his
acts.''

Identification With Captors Seen

Coercive persuasion, more commonly known as brainwashing, produces such mental
disorders as disassociative reaction, which involves identification with one's
captors. It also produces post-traumatic stress disorder, defense psychiatrists
testified. All three defense psychiatrists said they were certain that the young
marine did not have the mental capacity to appreciate the criminality of his
acts or even have knowledge of them.

However, Maj. Werner Hellmer, the Marine Corps prosecutor, said that Private
Garwood committed the acts and that his insanity plea ''is the only game in
town'' for him.

Anxiety for Ideals and Traditions

While the issues of duty, duress and mental disease dominated the words in the
courtroom in the two and a half months of the trial, other issues were larger in
the minds of the officers and enlisted men on this post.

Behind the contention of the prosecutor that the defendant ''did all those
things,'' was his steady implication that Private Garwood had fallen far short
of the ideals and traditions of Marine Corps manhood.

Private Garwood has been asked not to return to more than one local tavern. And
two enlisted men mopping corridors were heard discussing the trial, saying,
''They ought to shoot him.''

Training officers say that that reaction is typical, that young infantrymen
believe that Private Garwood disgraced the uniform.  On the other hand, there is
much talk on the post and in the restaurants along the highway that the
prosecution of Private Garwood was unnecessary in light of the refusal of the
Government to bring to trial other prisoners of war, including several officers,
for cooperating with the enemy in a war the country would like to forget.

''He didn't do much worse than 500 others did,'' said one restaurateur. ''Why
couldn't they discharge him and forget about him?''

Age of Recruits an Issue

Some older noncommissioned officers express two thoughts most often. First, they
says that the code of conduct establishes an unrealistic standard for teen-age
servicemen, especially since, after boot camp, virtually no training is given in
methods to withstand torture.

Second, they seem to think that Private Garwood is not the standard by which
other marines should be judged; that he was mentally ill upon entering the
corps.Some of the latter considerations entered into the tactics of Mr. Lowe,
who was acutely aware of the legal precedent that an acquittal would establish
here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption in The Times yesterday misidentified Donna Long, who left
court with Pfc. Robert R. Garwood, the marine found guilty of aiding the enemy
in Vietnam. She lives with him.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert R. Garwoodand Donna Long (page B7)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-GOV. GRASSO OF CONNECTICUT DEAD OF CANCER

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3116 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, Feb. 5


Former Gov. Ella T. Grasso of Connecticut, the first woman to be elected
governor in her own right in the United States, died here today. She was 61
years old.

Mrs. Grasso, who fell ill with cancer halfway through her second term, was
pronounced dead at 6:03 P.M. at Hartford Hospital.  After surgery for the
removal of her ovaries and radiation treatments failed to stop the spread of
cancer, Mrs. Grasso announced last Dec. 4 that she would resign on New Year's
Eve, and she was succeeded by William A. O'Neill, the Lieutenant Governor.

Successor Issues Statement

In a statement tonight, Governor O'Neill said: ''We in Connecticut have been
most fortunate to have known, worked with and been the beneficiaries of all her
good works, throughout her lifetime. She will not be replaced, because she is
irreplaceable, nor will she ever be forgotten. My own personal heart is
breaking.''

A statement by former President Jimmy Carter praised her ''truly outstanding
service to the people of Connecticut, the Democratic Party and the nation.''

When she was elected Governor in 1974, Mrs. Grasso drew national attention as
being in the vanguard of a new era in politics. But her popularity in
Connecticut was as a protector of the status quo who ran the state with
frugality and without an income tax.

For many voters, her election marked the ascent to political power not of women
but of Americans of Italian descent.  ''All my friends in the women's movement
get angry at me for saying this,'' Mrs. Grasso said during her first term as
Governor, ''but I never thought that being a woman gave me any special political
problems. It was only when my friends from the foreign press, in New York, kept
coming here and writing about me as a woman candidate that I began to think I
was doing something unusual.''

Although she was the first woman to be elected governor who was not the wife or
widow of a governor, her political path was not unusual.  And while she did not
seek to change the nature or the direction of government, she was a pioneer, in
the mid-1970's, in giving the public access to officials and records, and in
leading the state's efforts to help the elderly and the retarded.

First elected to public office in 1954, Mrs. Grasso was an old hand at operating
within the Democratic Party and the established political system long before she
became Governor.

A Traditionalist in Hartford

For two terms in the United States House of Representatives, Mrs.  Grasso was an
advocate of liberal social programs and the spending of money to stimulate the
economy, but in Hartford she was a traditionalist.

''That became more obvious and conspicuous in her as Governor,'' said Joseph J.
Fauliso, who was president pro tem of the State Senate during her tenure. Her
philosphy, Mr. Fauliso said, was remarkable for being ''tenacious in the
retention of values.''

Moderate though she was, she left her mark on state government. As a State
Representative from her native Windsor Locks, she was a moving force in the
successful drive to simplify state operations by eliminating an entire layer of
government - the counties - a goal she adopted in her days in the League of
Women Voters.In the late 1950's, she was one of the architects of a new State
Constitution, which took effect in 1960.

As Governor, she created a stronger Department of Public Utilities Control,
championed a ''sunshine'' law that opened many functions of government to public
scrutiny, and reorganized the executive branch to make it more efficient.

A Period of Economic Growth

She also kept state spending low, in part by holding increases in welfare
benefits well below the rate of inflation, limiting aid to the cities and, in a
memorable political blunder in 1975, by laying off 500 state workers just before
Christmas.

Partly because of a favorable tax structure, Connecticut enjoyed relatively low
unemployment and healthy economic growth under her stewardship. Austere in her
personal use of state money, she scrapped the Governor's limousine in favor of a
standard cruiser of the state police, and later a high-mileage compact car.

In a state in which more than half the voters are Roman Catholic, Mrs. Grasso
also left a mark of conservatism on the government, choosing, for example, to
prohibit the state financing of abortions under Medicaid. ''I do not wish to be
a party to killing the children of the poor,'' she said, a formulation that
dismayed feminists.

She also consistently opposed the extension of legalized gambling, an important
source of state revenue.  One disappointment to those who saw her primarily as a
woman was the small number of women she appointed to high positions. Her
appointments, in fact, also alienated old-line politicians. Her explanation, in
an interview, was that ''people expect skills.''

Question of 'Modern Politics'

''Purely political appointments of persons with no credit other than party
affiliation are no longer part of our modern politics,'' she said.

An aura of personal concern served Mrs. Grasso well in two natural disasters
during her governorship.  In February 1978, when austerity moves had lowered her
popularity, a paralyzing snowstorm hit the state. Mrs. Grasso rushed to the
State Armory in Hartford, walking the last mile after her car had bogged down in
the snow, and ordered that the whole state be ''closed'' for three days, with
cars banned from the roads while the snowplows did their work.

On that occasion, and again when a tornado struck Windsor and Windsor Locks in
October 1979, Mrs. Grasso appeared on television and appealed for cooperation to
alleviate the hardship. The image of a compassionate Governor toiling long hours
during the disaster did much to enhance her popularity.

Perhaps to remind herself of the importance of the snowstorm in defining her
relationship with the people of the state, Mrs. Grasso framed and kept at her
desk an aerial photograph taken at the time.  It was of a message written in
footprints in the virgin snow on an open field. It said ''Help - Ella.''

A legislative aide from her Washington years remembered that when a constituent
came in with a personal problem, ''you almost got the impression you were
talking to your mother, someone who was generally concerned about the little
things that were happening to you: Were you out of a job? Was your family
O.K.?''

But with her appointees she was tough, and often profane, and her staff
sometimes gleefully recounted colorful tongue-lashings administered to
upper-level state employees.

She was born Ella Rosa Giovianna Oliva Tambussi on May 10, 1919, to Giacomo and
Maria Oliva Tambussi, who were immigrants from the Italian Piedmont.

As Governor, Mrs. Grasso referred often to the hardships of her childhood, to
make current difficulties seems small by comparison.  Once, when a crowd of
young reporters questioned her sharply about how people in Connecticut could
endure the gasoline shortage of the summer of 1979, she replied: ''You see, it's
easier for me than it is for you. I was a child of the Depression.''

Mrs. Grasso came from a family of modest circumstances in the tightly knit
Italian community of Windsor Locks, an old mill town.  Her mother was ''a great
reader,'' and her father, a baker, ''pretended he could read and write,'' Mrs.
Grasso once told an interviewer. ''It took me years to learn that 'youse' is not
the plural form of 'you,' '' she said.

Elected to Phi Beta Kappa

Her diction, however, was flawless, with an almost patrician inflection,
acquired after years in exclusive schools, which she attended on scholarships.
Mrs. Grasso attended the Chaffee School, a girls' preparatory school in Windsor
Locks that later merged with the Loomis School, a similar institution for boys.
The Chaffee yearbook predicted that she would be the first woman to be mayor of
Windsor Locks.

She went on to Mount Holyoke College, majoring in sociology and economics and
being elected to Phi Beta Kappa in her junior year. To supplement her
scholarship, she worked as a baby sitter and a laboratory instructor in
statistics. She graduated magna cum laude in 1940 with a bachelor of arts degree
and received her master's in 1942.

Later that year, she married Thomas Grasso, a teacher and later school principal
in East Hartford. For three summers early in their marriage, they owned and
operated the New Colony Movie Theater in Old Lyme, on the shore of Long Island
Sound. She sold the tickets in the box office and he collected them at the door.


Role in League of Women Voters

Mr. Grasso, who retired while Mrs. Grasso was Governor, frequently escorted his
wife to her political appearances.  During World War II, Mrs. Grasso became the
state's assistant director of research for the Federal War Manpower Commission.
In 1943, she joined the League of Women Voters, and as a member, she said, she
became acquainted with the issues facing the state.

''I think that is why I went into government, because I realized early on that
if I was concerned with problems, the best way of getting them solved was to be
part of the decision-making process,'' she said.

She went to work for the Democratic organization, led by the late John M.
Bailey. With his blessing, she was elected to the state's House of
Representatives in 1952 and again in 1954, when she was made assistant leader of
the badly outnumbered Democrats.

Was Guided by Bailey

In the House she became a protegee of Mr. Bailey. According to politicians who
knew them both, Mr. Bailey saw in Mrs. Grasso a bright, aggressive yet
personable figure of tremendous appeal to voters as a woman and as a member of a
rising ethnic group challenging the political supremacy of the incumbent Irish.

After four years in the House, backing such projects as the elimination of
counties, reorganization of the court system and development of a state office
of mental retardation, Mrs. Grasso was shepherded by Mr. Bailey to the
Democratic National Committee, where she served for two years, and then back to
Connecticut as Secretary of the State, traditionally a woman's post.

Mrs. Grasso turned the office into a ''people's lobby'' for private citizens
with problems. Soon she was garnering more votes than the Governors who ran at
the top of the ticket.

In the 12 years she spent in the Secretary's post, Mrs. Grasso was also active
in party affairs, reportedly sometimes writing Mr.  Bailey's speeches. She was a
delegate to the Democratic National Convention in 1968, where she pushed for a
platform plank against the Vietnam War. Mrs. Grasso walked out of the convention
hall in Chicago to protest what was viewed as police brutality against antiwar
demonstrators.

In 1970, again with the backing of Mr. Bailey, she ran for Congress from the
Sixth District, when the incumbent, Thomas J. Meskill, ran for Governor. Despite
a general defeat for the Democrats in Connecticut that year, she won.

It was a job she took with some reluctance because it disrupted her personal
life. For two terms in Congress she flew home every weekend to her husband and
two children, James and Susane, who lived at home. Both children later became
teachers.

But Mrs. Grasso's introduction to Washington was not typical of the women
entering the House of Representatives in that period.  ''For most of them, it
was their first elective office,'' said a legislative assistant to Mrs. Grasso.
''They were coming into politics either as a result of the feminist movement,
or, for the Democrats, opposition to Vietnam. It was their baptism into
politics, but for her it was merely a continuation of something that had been
going on for 20 years.''

The aide added: ''She was very much the old-school politician.'' In the House in
Washington, her main concern was the economic decline of New Britain, Bristol,
Torrington and the other aging industrial cities of her district. She voted for
economic-stimulus bills, and as a member of the Education and Labor Committee
she helped draft the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.

But according to colleagues who knew her at the time, Mrs. Grasso was frustrated
by the unwieldiness of the House. She returned to Connecticut and sought John
Bailey's help in obtaining the nomination to run for Governor in 1974.

Finding a Winner

In choosing Mrs. Grasso, Mr. Bailey felt he had found a winner. And with Mr.
Bailey's help, Mrs. Grasso reduced her main rival, Robert K. Killian, to being a
candidate for Lieutenant Governor.

The campaign against the Republican candidate, Representative Robert H. Steele,
had some ugly aspects.  Supporters of Mr. Steele printed bumper stickers reading
''Connecticut Can't Afford a Governess,'' and he tried unsuccessfully to paint
Mrs. Grasso as a closet advocate of a state income tax, anathema in Connecticut.

She in turn campaigned on the contention that the Meskill administration had
been lax in supervision of the electric utilities, which had overcharged
consumers $19 million in three years, the Public Utilities Commission found.

Found the Cupboard Bare

Mrs. Grasso won the election with almost 60 percent of the vote, but faced
serious problems on assuming office. She looked into the state's cupboard and
pronounced it bare. In a harsh budget, she broke a promise that she would pass
all revenue-sharing aid through to the towns, and cut the welfare budget and
laid off state employees.

She also earned the enmity of state employees by trying to extend their
workweek. That bruising fight ended in compromise, but she lost in a battle to
abolish the State Gaming Commission and to merge the War Veterans Fund with the
General Fund.

Mr. Bailey died early in Mrs. Grasso's term as Governor, depriving her of a
valuable ally in the battle to control the Democratic majority in the General
Assembly.

She cut travel by state employees and told them to use postcards instead of
letters, and she even returned $7,000 of her $42,000-ayear salary. But her
frugality in government programs, including welfare and education, earned her
the hostility of many legislators.

Staff members argued that there was little choice. ''Who would not have loved to
do all the good things, build all the buildings, start all the programs,'' said
Aaron Ment, her legal adviser in the first term. But the mood of the state -
with which she was always in tune, supplemented by frequent ''office hours''
around the state - was not for spending.

Some Frustrating Fights

There were frustrating political fights, too. In 1974, her campaign manager was
Mr. O'Neill, an East Hampton restaurateur who would succeed her as Governor but
who at the time was assistant minority leader of the House. After the election
she made him party chairman, but in the summer of 1976 she decided someone else
could do it better, and sought his ouster.

She failed, in a demonstration of the power of small towns and suburbs in
controlling the Democratic Party. It was a difficult time politically for the
Governor, whose continuing opposition to tax reform prompted some liberal
Democrats to explore alternative candidates.

Perhaps in a gesture of reconciliation, she left the choice of Lieutenant
Governor to the Democratic convention, which picked her old friend and then
enemy, Mr. O'Neill. Meanwhile, the current Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Killian,
sought the nomination for Governor and a bitter primary campaign followed.

But despite the political troubles, she trounced her opponents in the primary
and in the November 1978 election. She argued that she had kept the state
solvent without recourse to an income tax, and even made progress in some areas
not requiring money. For example, she made Connecticut a leader in the public
disclosure of officials' assets and campaign financing, and opening the meetings
and records of government agencies.

By her second term, Mrs. Grasso had also acquired a national reputation.
Periodically, she was mentioned as a potential Vice Presidential candidate.

The 29 other state governors of her party elected her chairman of the Democratic
Governors Conference in July 1979 and she helped swing that organization to an
endorsement of President Carter for renomination, during a time when polls
showed that Democrats nationwide, and especially in Connecicut, favored Senator
Edward M.  Kennedy.

Her campaigning for President Carter, however, was curtailed by her illness.
With Mrs. Grasso at her bedside at the time of her death, according to a
spokesman for Hartford Hospital, James Battaglio, were her husband, her son and
her daughter.

A funeral service for Mrs. Grasso, whose body will lie in state in the Capitol
from 11 A.M. Sunday until 11 A.M. Monday, will be held at St. Joseph's Cathedral
in Hartford at noon on Monday.

Governor O'Neill said he had ordered that all flags be flown at half staff until
the interment and that state flags remain at half staff for 30 days. The date
and site of interment were not specified.

----

Carter Expresses 'Sadness'

ATLANTA, Feb. 5 (AP) - Former President Jimmy Carter's transition office issued
the following statement from Mr. Carter tonight on the death of Mrs. Grasso:

''I join the people of the State of Connecticut in expressing my sadness at the
death of Gov. Ella Grasso. Governor Grasso had a long history of truly
outstanding service to the people of Connecticut, the Democratic Party and the
nation.

''Ella Grasso represented all that is good and promising about politics and
public service. As one of the most prominent women in this country, she had
great strength, skill and, when required, toughness.

''At the same time, she was as loving and compassionate a person as I have
known. Her devotion to the less fortunate members of our society was untiring.

''She faced death with the same courage she faced life.  ''Ella was my close
friend and had my deepest respect and admiration. I will miss her dearly.''

Statement Issued by Carey

ALBANY, Feb. 5 (AP) - Governor Carey, in a statement issued tonight by his
office, praised Mrs. Grasso as a ''determined and devoted'' governor.

Mr. Carey's statement said that ''Governor Grasso was guided by a single
principle - to work for the people and to serve them with all her heart, mind
and spirit. That the people of Connecticut loved her in return was unquestioned.
She never lost an election, serving as a Congresswoman, Secretary of State and
finally Governor.''

''I worked with Governor Grasso in the Conference of Northeast Governors,'' Mr.
Carey said, ''and I knew her to be determined and devoted to the people she
served. I know I speak for New Yorkers when I say our neighbor to the east shall
be missed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ella T. Garsso photo of Ella T. Grasso (page
B5)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-BLOC NATIONS SAID TOP PLEDGE ARMS TO SALVADOR REBELS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 923 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5


Indications that the Soviet Union and Cuba agreed last year to deliver tons of
weapons to Marxist-led guerrillas in El Salvador are contained in secret
documents reportedly captured from the insurgents by Salvadoran security forces.

The documents, which are considered authentic by United States intelligence
agencies, say that the weapons were to come from stockpiles of American arms
seized in Vietnam and Ethiopia.

Copies of the documents obtained by The New York Times include a report on a
trip by a senior Salvadoran guerrilla to the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Ethiopia and
Eastern European capitals where party officials apparently agreed to provide
arms, uniforms and other military equipment for up to 10,000 guerrillas.

In the last two months many of the guerrilla arms captured by El Salvador's
armed forces have been American-made rifles, mortars, and machine guns. There
have also been Chinese-made weapons and a variety of small arms available
through commercial channels.

Haig Cites 'the Cuban Proxy'

United States officials said they did not have information that showed that the
arms and supplies described in the report had reached the guerrillas, who opened
an unsuccessful but large-scale offensive last month. But State Department and
Pentagon sources have said that there has been a flow of arms to the guerrillas
in recent months that is believed to be coming, in part, from Cuba.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said at his first news conference last
week that the Soviet Union had been involved in ''unprecedented risk-taking'' in
support of revolutionary movements in Latin America and Africa, employing what
he called ''the Cuban proxy,'' such as Cuban troops sent to Angola and Ethiopia.

The documents reported captured in El Salvador by security forces last month
describe how the highest levels of the Communist leadership in Eastern Europe
and in Vietnam approved collaboration with the Salvadoran guerrillas.

Talks in Vietnam Reported

In one document, which appears to have been written in Havana, the Salvadoran
emissary reports to his comrades in El Salvador on a visit to Hanoi from June 9
to 15 last year during which he was received by Le Duan, secretary general of
the Vietnamese Communist Party, Xuan Thuy, vice president of the National
Assembly, and Lieut. Gen. Tran Van Quang, Deputy Minister of National Defense.

The guerrilla, who is believed to be Shafik Handal, secretary general of the
Salvadoran Communist Party, reported that the Vietnamese agreed to supply 60
tons of arms and ammunition, mainly from weapons abandoned by United States and
South Vietnamese forces.  The list included 1,620 M-16 automatic rifles, 162
M-30 and 36 M-60 machine guns, 48 mortars, 12 antitank rocket launchers, 1.5
million rounds of ammunition and 11,000 mortar rounds.

On a visit to Ethiopia from July 3 to 6, the report said, the guerrilla met with
Lieut. Col. Haile Mariam Mengistu, president of the ruling Marxist Revolutionary
Council, and was promised 150 Thompson submachine guns, 1,500 M-1 rifles, 1,000
M-14 rifles and over 600,000 rounds of ammunition. The Ethiopian armed forces
were supplied by the United States with most of their equipment before the
overthrow of Emperor Haile Selassie by revolutionary officers in 1974 opened the
way to Soviet military influence.

According to the report, the Salvadoran also visited Bulgaria, where he was
received by Dimitur Stanishev, a secretary of the Communist Party Central
Committee, who offered 300 German-made submachine guns with 200,000 rounds and
10 machine guns with 50,000 rounds.

Czechs Said to Offer Arms

In Cechoslovakia, he reported, he met with Vasil Bilak, second secretary of the
Communist Party's Central Committee, who offered some Czech arms that he said
would be transported in East German ships to Cuba.

In Hungary, the report said, the Salvadoran emissary was received by Janos
Kadar, secretary general of the Socialist Workers' Party, and Andras Gyenes,
identified as secretary for international relations of the political bureau of
the party. The report said the Hungarians offered radio equipment, medical kits,
and 10,000 pairs of boots and uniforms.

In some cases, the report, which was typed in Spanish, spells the names of the
officials who were interviewed phonetically or refers to them by the Spanish
version of their first name.

In East Germany, the report said, the emissary was received by Erich Honecker,
the party chief and President, and by Hermann Axen, a member of the party's
political bureau and the party secretary for international relations. The report
said they promised about $1 million in financial aid through a ''committee of
solidarity'' with the Salvadoran revolution but no arms.

Two Visits to Moscow

According to the report, the emissary twice visited Moscow, first on June 2
before going to Vietnam and again in July before heading for Havana. The main
topic, according to the report, was how to transport the arms to El Salvador.
Meetings were held with Karen N.  Brutents, a deputy chief of the Soviet Central
Committee's department of international relations, and with Mikhail F.
Kudachkin, who is in charge of relations with Latin America.

The report said the officials had agreed, at the second round of meetings, to
give military training to 30 young Salvadoran Communists who were studying in
the Soviet Union. But the Salvadoran complained that he had left Moscow without
a firm decision on whether the arms were to be shipped by sea or by air.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


International
Washington assured NATO members that the Reagan Administration would make no
decision on the possible production of the neutron bomb without ''thorough,
prior consultations'' with the allies, according to Administration officials.
They said that Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. had advised the allies
in messages to disregard comments about the enhanced radiation bombs made by
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger because they did not represent an
official position. (Page A1, Column 1.)
Soviet criticism of President Reagan and his foreign policy continued in
Moscow's press. In an unusually sarcastic commentary, the Communist Party
newspaper Pravda asserted that Mr. Reagan suffered from ''the childhood ailments
of power.'' (A3:1-3.)
Soviet-bloc aid to Salvadoran rebels was indicated in secret documents, captured
from the Marxist-led guerrillas, that are considered authentic by Washington.
The documents suggest that the Soviet Union and Cuba agreed last year to deliver
tons of weapons to the guerrillas from stores of United States arms seized in
Vietnam and Ethiopia. (A1:3.)
A 10-day general strike that gripped the southern manufacturing city of
Bielsko-Biala, Poland ended when the Government agreed to accept the
resignations of the provincial Governor and three deputies. The agreement that
called off the strike was reached after an hour and 45 minutes of talks that
were mediated by the Roman Catholic Church. It was the first time that the
church had become involved in bargaining. (A1:2-4.)
An American in Teheran was tricked by two revolutionary guards into taking part
last year in a fictitious plot to free the 52 American hostages, according to an
Iranian newspaper account of espionage charges made by a prosecutor. The
American, Cynthia B. Dwyer, a freelance journalist, was said to have denied the
charges Wednesday in a Teheran court. (A6:4-6.)
A dispute among Iranians intensified as 23 members of Parliament sought an open
debate on the ''doubts and questions'' that have arisen over the accords that
led to the release of the American hostages. The request was published in two
newspapers that back President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, who has questioned whether
Iran achieved all it sought in the accords. (A6:4-6.)
National
President Reagan exhorted Americans to support sweeping spending and tax cuts to
revive the economy. In a televised speech from the White House, Mr. Reagan said
that the nation was ''in the worst economic mess since the Great Depression''
because ''over the years, we have let economic forces run out of control.''
(A1:6.)
Budget cuts of $40 billion to $50 billion in the 1982 fiscal year are sought by
the Reagan Administration. The budget office has called for limits or reductions
in virtually every major Federal endeavor except the military. The cutbacks
would affect not only domestic social programs, but also subsidies, loan
programs and other forms of direct and indirect aid favored by labor and
business groups.  (A1:4-5.)
The first Reagan victory in Congress was marked as the House voted, 305 to 104,
to increase the Federal debt limit by $50 billion to $985 billion. Democrats
withheld their votes until a majority of Republicans supported the politically
sensitive but financially necessary measure. (A13:1-2.)
A conviction of collaboration with the enemy was issued against Pfc.  Robert R.
Garwood of the Marine Corps by a jury of five officers. It was the only such
finding against a prisoner of war in Vietnam and the first in the military since
the Korean War. Private Garwood faces a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
(A1:1.)
The cost of the influx of refugees from the Caribbean was put at about $532
million by Federal officials. Congress appropriated $734.4 million for
processing and resettling the refugees through next Sept. 30. The officials said
they should be able to keep within that budget if they are not faced with a new
wave of arrivals beyond the 125,000 Cubans and 12,400 Haitians who came last
year. (A9:1.)
Detroit's deepening financial problems were outlined by Mayor Coleman A. Young.
In an annual message, he said that the automotive city would have a budget
deficit of up to $130 million in the current fiscal year ending June 30 and a
likely deficit of $100 million in the following year. Mayor Young acknowledged
that tax increases and wage freezes were likely to be announced two months from
now.  (A8:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Ella T. Grasso died of cancer at the age of 61. Mrs. Grasso, the former Governor
of Connecticut who fell ill midway through her second term, was the first woman
to elected Govenor in her own right in the country. She managed the state with
frugality and without an income tax. (A1:2.)
The unsolved 1952 slayings of two men on a hunting trip in Orange County, N.Y.,
was reopened with the arrest of a 54-year-old Newburgh man. His sister,
officials said, broke a 28-year vow of silence to turn him in. (A1:5-6.)
The biggest theater boom in years is being enjoyed by Broadway despite sharply
higher ticket prices. Attendance so far this season is up 24 percent over last
year - almost double what it was seven years ago - and gross receipts are up 39
percent. The boom has surprised producers and theater owners, who offer guesses,
but no clear answers, for the reasons. (A1:2-4.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


PLEASE USE********;
State Dept. Comments on Report On Arming of Salvadoran Rebels

WASHINGTON, Feb. 6 (AP) - The State Department acknowledged today that it had
received captured documents reporting large-scale Sovietbloc support for leftist
guerrillas in El Salvador but said the documents' authenticity was not yet
confirmed.

The department spokesman, William J. Dyess, refused to discuss the contents of
the documents. He added, however, that a New York Times account of them was
essentially accurate.

The Times said in today's issue that the Soviet Union and Cuba agreed last year
to deliver tons of weapons to the guerrillas from stockpiles of American arms
taken over by Vietnam and Ethiopia. The account was based on secret documents
captured from El Salvador's Marxist-led guerrillas. It said United States
intelligence agencies considered the documents authentic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'EACH EXECUCTION DOUBLES THE KILLING'

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

Noting Mayor Koch's advocacy of capital punishment, I submit views which may not
have been considered before: Having witnessed executions in war and peace,
including the last one in California as an official witness - from which I made
the accompanying drawing - I feel that capital punishment is one of the most
tragic acts of civil-ized humans in our time, regardless of the crime or the
concept of deterrence.

Having covered World War II, Korea and Vietnam, I find that my most searing
memory was witnessing the execution of three enemy soldiers.

Having covered the major American criminal trials, I've been made aware of
forces molding the criminal, e.g., Manson: reared, educated, disciplined in our
prison system since boyhood, no father, mother often absent; or Spenkelink: at
12 discovered his alcoholic father a suicide, turned to crime two years later -
I witnessed his execution.

Aware of the argument that capital punishment protects society and of the
counter-argument that it does not deter, that it even breeds more homicide, I
question both. But I do not question the fact that each execution doubles the
killing.

Unable to understand justice that would repeat killing, I hope that the Mayor
and New Yorkers will consider these views.
HOWARD BRODIE, New York, Feb. 1, 1981.

The writer is an artist-journalist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Cautioned on Latin America

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: DAVOS, Switzerland, Feb. 6


Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria said today that ''demonstrative support''
for dictatorships in Latin America by the Reagan Administration could have
serious effects on relations between the United States and Europe. Speaking at
an international management conference, Dr. Kreisky said that American backing
for dictatorships could provoke anti-American feelings in Europe worse than
those caused by the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 32 words


A picture caption in The Times yesterday misidentified Donna Long, who left
court with Pfc. Robert R. Garwood, the marine found guilty of aiding the enemy
in Vietnam. She lives with him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 672 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 32.  1. A devastating freeze in the vineyards pictured above, threatens to
wipe out most of the 1981 grape crop in (California/France/Italy/New
York/Spain).

2. To avoid embarrassing a visiting dignitary, the Reagan Administration asked
Congress to delay publication of a report on human rights violations around the
world. Who is the visiting dignitary?

3. In his speech to the nation on the economy, President Reagan displayed a
dollar bill and then some coins to demonstrate that the l960 dollar's purchasing
power had shrunk to (36/54/ 69) cents after 20 years of inflation.

4. Frank Perdue, the largest seller of premium-priced poultry in the New York
area, may have gone afoul of the law, according to a suit filed by the Justice
Department. Explain.

5. Even before its release, the single ''Walking on Thin Ice,'' has generated a
lot of interest. Who are the song's vocalist and backup musician?

6. Banking circles and boxing circles were rocked by some astonishing charges.
Explain.  7. Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps, who was found guilty of
collaborating with the enemy and assaulting a fellow soldier, is the only
Vietnam prisoner of war to be tried by courtmartial. True or false?

8. Mohi Sobhani is the 53d American in recent weeks, according to the State
Department, to share what experience?  9. Bobby Jones of the Philadelphia 76ers
is making a name for himself as a sixth man on a five-man basketball team. What
is the purpose of the sixth man?

10. A New York State Assembly task force issued a report about something at
Tonawanda, a city near Buffalo. What does it disclose?  11. New Yorkers are
paying up to $25 a ticket to see the four-hour, 54-year-old silent film that is
breaking records at the Radio City Music Hall. What film is it and who directed
it?

12. Secretary of Education T.H. Bell revoked some regulations that he said were
''harsh, inflexible, burdensome, unworkable and incredibly costly.'' What
regulations are they?

13. There are more than (8.5/10.2/ 11.5) million children of oneparent families
in the United States.  14. In an emergency session, the foreign ministers of the
Organization of American States met to consider border conflict between two
member nations. What nations are they?

15. A 54-year old man from Newburgh, N.Y., was indicted for slaying two squirrel
hunters in the wooded hills of Orange County. Why was the arrest unusual?

the Federal Government, but a disaster by local residents. Explain.  17. Many
New York lawyers say they are raising their fees because changes in a state law
have made their work more complex and timeconsuming. What law is it?

18. A country that calls itself the world's largest diamond cutting center has
been hit be a recession in that industry. What country is it?

19. As a sign of a new policy in Central America, Secretary of State Alexander
M. Haig Jr. has relieved Robert E. White of his duties. What post did Mr. White
hold?

20. Two Olympic gold medalists were on opposing teams Wednesday night. Who are
they and what are their teams?  21. The chief administrative judge of the New
York State courts accused Mayor Koch of making ''a scapegoat'' of the judiciary.
What was at issue?

22. Balancing the Federal budget is much (less/more) important than a large tax
cut to the American public, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News
poll.

23. Gro Harlem Brundtland, a Norwegian physician, has taken a new job. What is
her new post?  Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of vineyards Map of midwest

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MARY PEABODY, 89, RIGHTS ACTIVIST, DIES

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


Mary Parkman Peabody, the mother of former Gov. Endicott Peabody of
Massachusetts and a prominent civil-rights and antiwar activist of the 1960's,
died of heart failure yesterday at Cambridge Hospital in Cambridge, Mass., where
she resided. She was 89 years old.

A tall, slender, big-boned woman, Mrs. Peabody was always interested in
community work and social causes, but lived a relatively sheltered life as a
mother of five children and the wife of the Protestant Episcopal Bishop of
Central New York for many years.

But in March 1964, at the age of 72, she left the comforts of home in Boston's
Back Bay and, at the behest of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and his
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, went to St. Augustine, Fla., the
nation's oldest city, and led a sitin by blacks and whites at the racially
segregated dining room of a motel.

With the local police standing by with tear gas, electric cattle prods and
leashed police dogs, Mrs. Peabody and 116 other activists were arrested on
trespassing charges and taken to jail.

''We need some old people in this thing,'' she declared as she was taken away.
''We are just what they say we are - do-gooders.''

Governor Not Surprised

As word flashed across the country that the mother of the Governor of
Massachusetts had been locked up, frantic telephone calls were placed by the St.
Augustine police to the State Houses in Tallahassee and Boston.

Governor Peabody, a Democrat who served one two-year term beginning in 1963, was
not surprised.  ''I can only express admiration for her courage, sincerity and
determination,'' the Governor told a news conference.  Mrs. Peabody had called
him in the morning before her arrest.  ''He told me to do anything I thought was
right.'' the white-haired woman said afterward, standing erect in sensible shoes
and a simple print dress. ''Oh, glory, I've said it so many times already: We
are not just Northerners. We are part of the U.S.A.''

''Really,'' she added, in her best Brahmin accent, ''it was quite an attractive
jail. It was clean and whitewashed, and there were the loveliest yellow and
orange flowers planted along the sidewalks. Next door in the other cell there
were 50 Negro women. Our food was passed to us under the bars. There weren't
enough utensils, so we ate our hominy grits with our fingers. But we managed
nicely.''

Mother of Marietta Tree

In addition to the former Massachusetts Governor, Mrs. Peabody was the mother of
Marietta Tree, who served as the United States delegate to the United Nations
Trusteeship Council in 1964 and 1965. Mrs.  Tree's daughter is the Pulitzer
Prize-winning author, Frances FitzGerald.

Mrs. Peabody belonged, by birth and marriage, to two of Boston's wealthiest and
most socially prominent families. She was born in her Back Bay home on July 24,
1891, the daughter of Henry Parkman, a businessman, and Frances Parker Parkman.
She attended Miss Porter's School in Farmington, Conn., and, on an
around-the-world cruise after her graduation, met the Rev. Malcolm E. Peabody,
who at the time was a missionary in the Philippines. They were married in 1916.

Mr. Peabody later served as pastor of Grace Church in Lawrence, Mass., during
World War I, and at St. Paul's Church in Chestnut Hill, Pa., until 1937. From
then until his retirement in the late 1950's, he was the Protestant Episcopal
Bishop of Central New York, with seats in Utica and Syracuse.

An Antiwar Activist

Mrs. Peabody served a variety of community and social organizations prior to the
1960's. After her arrest and jailing in Florida, however, she became active in
antiwar protests during the Vietnam War and marched on a number of occasions in
protests against nuclear weapons in the 1960's and 1970's.

Since the death of her husband about a decade ago, she had lived alone in
Cambridge. She was known to friends as a woman of deeply independent spirit and
strength of character. Her interests ranged from politics to humanities, and in
later years she studied Greek and Russian.

In addition to Endicott Peabody and Mrs. Tree, Mrs. Peabody is survived by three
children, George Peabody, a Washington management consultant; Samuel Peabody, a
New York City businessman, and Malcolm Peabody Jr., a Washington businessman; a
brother, Francis Parkman of Boston; eight grandchildren and two
great-grandchildren.

A funeral will be held at noon Monday at All Saints Church in Brookline, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mary Peabody

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND THE WORLD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2529 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


After less than three weeks in office, the Reagan Administration finds itself in
a political confrontation with the Soviet Union and facing potential crises in
Poland and El Salvador even before it has had time to put together a
comprehensive program for dealing with the dozens of other foreign policy
problems demanding answers.

What about China and Taiwan? Should Israel and Egypt be pressed to negotiate on
Palestinian autonomy? When should arms control talks with the Russians be
resumed? What can be done about Afghanistan? How should Namibia and South Africa
be dealt with? What about Iran, now that the hostages are home? The list is
long.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has tried to take charge of the foreign
policy machinery only to discover how slowly the system can move. He has had to
deal with budget cutters threatening America's ability to use foreign aid as a
policy tool; he has had to argue with agricultural interests that want to end
the grain curbs against Moscow even as Soviet troops remain on alert around
Poland, and he has had to try to insure that the Administration speaks with one
voice.

There has been little foreign policy comment from the White House, which has
been preoccupied with getting its economic recovery program started. President
Reagan, in his few remarks on foreign affairs, has demonstrated a lack of
expertise.

Priority Given to Tough Talk

The Reagan Administration's perception of the world military balance as moving
dangerously in the direction of the Soviet Union has given priority to tough
talk about building up defenses and standing up to the Russians, the like of
which has not been heard in Washington since John F. Kennedy came to office 20
years ago, worried about a ''missile gap,'' wars of national liberation and
Cuban subversion.

There has been considerable discussion in diplomatic circles about a new cold
war, but that seems to be an exaggeration for the moment.  Anatoly F. Dobrynin,
the Soviet Ambassador, may have been deprived of his parking privileges in the
State Department basement, but he was highly visible a week later sitting next
to Mr. Haig at a Washington Press Club dinner.

Despite the polemical exchanges, highlighted by Mr. Reagan's charge that the
Russians reserve the right to ''commit any crime'' to advance their goals, both
sides seem to want to leave the way open for eventual discussions.

For diplomats and journalists looking for a checklist of priorities and goals,
it has been frustrating. Mr. Reagan has so far produced nothing like Jimmy
Carter's blueprint of 1977: a Panama Canal treaty, Middle East negotiations, a
strategic arms limitation treaty, a Rhodesian settlement and normalization of
relations with Cuba, Vietnam and China. Instead, this Administration, as it
struggles with the issues, has produced certain attitudes that will presumably
affect substance.

Administration's Likely Views

From listening to Mr. Haig and his top aides, these points can be made with some
authority about the Reagan Administration:

- It will openly criticize Soviet behavior around the world. It wants to insure
that Moscow understands that it cannot have ''business as usual'' unless it
subscribes to a international code of conduct, as yet undefined.

- It regards human rights as a proper subject for diplomatic discourse, but the
emphasis will be on the violations committed by terrorists and Washington's
adversaries, not by countries friendly to the United States, such as South
Korea.

- It will seek to avoid public disputes with allies by consulting intensively on
all problems and trying to confine disagreements to diplomatic channels.

- It has no fascination for developing countries, which Mr. Haig has referred to
as ''the so-called third world.'' Those that cooperate with the United States
will be rewarded wherever possible, as when tanks were sold to Morocco recently.
Soviet penetration of Africa and Asia will not be regarded as inconsequential.

Despite its acerbic exchanges with the Russians in its first week in office, the
Reagan Administration has moved cautiously. It deliberately avoided being drawn
into the emotional outpouring against Iran in the days after the hostages'
return.

Minimum Revenge Toward Iran

Recognizing that long-term American interests favored keeping the door open to
future contacts with Iran, the Administration limited itself to the minimum
retribution. It said it would not sell arms to Iran, a decision dictated as much
by a desire to remain neutral in the Iran-Iraq war as by the rough treatment of
the hostages. It also advised caution in future trade.

Yet Mr. Reagan, in his most considered foreign policy remarks, ruled out
''revenge'' although he was ambiguous about what the United States might do in a
similar situation elsewhere.

The Administration's main concerns have focused on the continuing tensions
surrounding Poland and El Salvador. Both involve the risk of military
involvement, the first by the Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact forces if the
Polish situation disintegrates internally; the second, if guerrillas backed by
the Soviet Union and Cuba step up efforts to oust the moderate junta now in
power.

In both cases, the Administration deeply hopes that the crises can be avoided
but has gone ahead with contingency planning in case they cannot. It is already
clear that a Soviet move into Poland would create a breakdown in East-West
relations, with even such countries as France imposing an economic boycott on
the Russians. Mr. Haig's first message to Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko
repeated the West's warning about the dire consequences to East-West relations
if there is intervention in Poland, and the Secretary of State sent copies to
all the allies.

Bogged Down in Salvador

In El Salvador, the hope is that increased American aid will allow the army to
prevail. There is already concern on Capitol Hill that the United States might
be drawn into ''another Vietnam,'' this time close to home. A French diplomat
worried the other night that the United States would become as bogged down in El
Salvador as the Russians seem to be in Afghanistan.

In keeping with the Administration's caution, it has not disclosed exactly what
it would do if the crises exploded in Poland or in El Salvador.

The Reagan Administration seems to lack a senior conceptual thinker in foreign
policy. Neither Mr. Haig nor Richard V. Allen, the White House national security
adviser, seems comfortable developing broad schemes. They seem more at home with
pragmatic decisionmaking.

Nevertheless, they bring to their positions certain ideas, and they have
inherited certain realities, that will inevitably influence policy. Following
are summaries of some of the basic problems the Administration must deal with in
three major areas.

Soviet Union
The Administration sees the Soviet Union as dangerous, untrustworthy and
antagonistic to Western interests. But it recognizes that it must deal with the
Russians. The problem is when to talk and what to say. There seems little
interest at the moment in reviving the cultural exchange agreements that were
suspended or canceled when Moscow intervened in Afghanistan, but there seems to
be a recognition that American public opinion, American strategic interests, and
allied concerns all compel resumption of certain arms control negotiations.

Last week the Administration said it ''strongly supported'' the decision by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in December 1979 to go ahead with the
deployment in Europe of 572 new American missiles, while at the same time
pursuing negotiations with the Russians on reducing each side's missiles in
Europe.

The European allies have always put considerable stress on seeking arms control
arrangements with the Russians. With the second strategic arms limitation treaty
virtually dead, the negotiations on theater nuclear forces have become even more
important in European eyes, even though the chances for an early agreement seem
slim.

The Reagan Administration, despite its opposition to the second strategic arms
accord, is publicly committed to resuming the quest for a ''real'' strategic
arms agreement, and one of the studies now under way in the State and Defense
Departments is about how to approach such negotiations - whether to try, for
instance, to amend the second treaty or to begin negotiating a new one.

Mr. Haig said at his confirmation hearings that strategic arms limitation was
''an urgent and important task'' but that ''we acquire breakthroughs in
negotiations with the Soviet Union in arms control only when they perceive that
the alternative facing them is a willingness on the part of the United States to
match or better what they are willing to deploy.''

Both he and Mr. Reagan have repreatedly stressed that there can be no arms
control negotiations without reference to Soviet actions elsewhere - the
so-called linkage theory.

Thus, if the Polish crisis worsens, there is no chance of any arms control
negotiations, officials assert. But even if Poland remains relatively calm, the
Administration must decide on a timetable for probing Soviet intentions; it is
unclear what it would link to such talks to make them possible.

China
Given the Administration's stated antipathy toward the Soviet Union, it would
seem logical to expect it to move rapidly toward a closer relationship with
Peking, Moscow's main adversary, in order to build on the framework erected by
the Carter Administration when it formally normalized relations on Jan. 1, 1979.

If Mr. Carter had been re-elected, it is fairly certain that his Administration
would have moved toward a much closer military arrangement with Peking to offset
the Russians in Afghanistan and elsewhere, despite concerns by some in the State
Department that this might damage relations with Moscow.

But such a policy by this Administration has been hampered by Mr.  Reagan's
preference for what Peking considers a two-China policy.  The President's
campaign statements indicated that he believed the United States should have a
more official relationship with Taiwan, which since 1979 has had only unofficial
links with the United States.

Those campaign statements produced two sets of responses. Taiwan was
enthusiastic and has been lobbying privately and publicly for more access to
official circles in Washington and for the right to buy the F-16 jet, an
advanced fighter that the Unites States has refused to sell to the Nationalist
Chinese.

Peking, however, was angered by the statements. State Department experts believe
that Peking is considering curbs on its growing contacts with the United States
if the Adminstration does not stop talking about Taiwan and if it fails to
follow the path charted by the Carter Administration.

In particular, China wants the Administration to declare the normalization
communique of 1979 to be the basis of relations, and not the Taiwan Act passed
by Congress. China would also like a sign that the Administration is interested
in building on the security links with China that were begun in the previous
Administration.

The Administration affirmed, in a little-noticed statement last week, that it
would live up to the normalization agreement, but it did not commit itself on
security arrangements. Some American officials believe that Peking was probably
pleased by the cordial Washington welcome recently given to the South Korean
President, Chun Doo Hwan, and the pledges by Mr. Reagan to keep 39,000 American
troops in South Korea and to maintain security ties in East Asia.  Indirectly,
that increases stability in an area threatened by a growing Soviet military
presence.

Mr. Haig said in his confirmation hearings that ''the challenge of this decade''
for the United States is to provide Peking with the incentive to maintain good
relations with Washington while not provoking the Russians to the point that
East-West relations are permanently damaged.

Middle East
There are two aspects to this problem that demand answers. The first, the direct
result of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, concerns the American security
role in the Persian Gulf area. The Carter Administration, while talking of the
dire threats to world security, moved very gingerly. It refused to offer
Pakistan more than what amounted to symbolic aid and would not give an ironclad
security guarantee for fear of antagonizing India.

Mr. Reagan has talked of having an American military presence in the region, but
as Mr. Haig said at his confirmation hearings, it is difficult to find a country
that would accept a permanent garrison of American troops. Any that might, such
as Israel, would taint those forces in the eyes of the rest of the region. The
key countries in the area are Iran, Saudi Arabia and Iraq, and the United States
has diplomatic relations only with the Saudis.

Any long-term policy must consider ways of increasing American influence in the
region, but experts are quick to point out that at the recent conference of
Islamic nations in Taif, Saudi Arabia, the emphasis was not on ridding
Afghanistan of Soviet troops, but on the traditional concern of ending Israeli
domination over the West Bank and Jerusalem.

Mr. Haig, aware that Israeli elections are to be held this summer, is in no rush
to plunge into the complexities of the EgyptianIsraeli negotiations on
Palestinian autonomy. He seems to think it is better to wait until after the
elections, when it is likely that the Labor Party, which is believed to be more
flexible than Menachem Begin's governing Likud, will be restored to power. But
as so often happens in the Middle East, the best laid plans may come to naught.

President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt is pressing to come to Washington in the next
month or so, and that means that Mr. Begin cannot be far behind. This will force
the Reagan Administration to begin to develop a negotiating strategy for the
region. So far it seems to have given surprisingly low priority to that task.

Until there is some progress toward resolving the Palestinian problem - meaning,
at the minimum, self-rule in the West Bank - there will continue to be problems
in dealing with Iraq and to a growing extent, Saudi Arabia. Relations with the
Saudis may be further strained if another dispute arises in Congress on whether
to supply them with additional equipment for the F-15's that were sold to them
after a grueling fight in 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alexander Haig (Page 16) Photo of President
Reagan (Page 16)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEAR OF CRIME IS CREATING TEAR GAS BOOM ON COAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 7


In California these days, strangers can be found any night of the week clustered
around instructors who tell them, ''Aim for the eyes.'' Employers are offering
enrollment in the classes as a new kind of fringe benefit. At dinner parties,
people who used to spend all evening discussing the high cost of real estate
here are comparing notes on their respective brands of tear gas.

Going to tear gas-class is the latest fad.  Changes in state laws made it easier
to obtain a license to carry tear gas for self-defense. Then, when a heavily
publicized murder and assault case here last fall increased fears of crime, it
touched off a boom in demand for tear gas and a proliferation of the schools
that issue the permits to carry it.

Some State Department of Justice officials estimate that this year as many as
one million Californians, mostly women, will attend the two-hour classes
necessary for them to obtain a state permit to carry tear gas. Last year, only
55,000 took the classes.

Trend Causes Concern

The rapidity with which people are arming themselves with tear gas worries a
number of law enforcement officials. Some officials say that they expect the
disabling spray to be used increasingly by criminals bent on robbery, rape or
assault.

Others say that the huge profits that can be made in tear gas sales are
attracting unreliable suppliers who are exploiting the public's fear of crime
with exaggerated claims about its effectiveness and, in some states, perhaps
selling products that can cause serious injury, including blindness.

Off-duty policemen have been recruited to teach most of the classes in
California, and many instructors have discovered that the work provides
surprising financial rewards.

Brandt Peterson, president of On-Guard Personal Security Systems, one of the
state's largest purveyors of tear gas, said, ''A good instructor who works at it
can make $6,000 a week.'' The concern operates classes that now train about
2,000 people a week,

'A Growth Industry'

''What's happened is almost unbelievable, it just keeps getting bigger,'' said
Mr. Peterson, a 39-year-old former Marine Corps major and Vietnam veteran. Mr.
Peterson said he had looked for a second career after he retired from the
service and stumbled into what he called ''a growth industry that you can't
comprehend.''

Residents of a number of other states, such as Oregon, Michigan and Florida, are
also buying tear gas in large quantities for personal use. But, according to
specialists in the security business, California has experienced by far the
greatest interest in tear gas and now has at least 100 schools offering courses
in its use.

Private use of tear gas, illegal in New York and most Eastern states, has been
legal in California since 1977. But until last year, residents had to endure
cumbersome licensing procedures. In 1980, the rules were changed so that the
operators of training schools that obtained state licenses for instruction were
given authority to issue the permits directly.

Last fall, newspapers and broadcasters began bringing increasing attention to
what some called a ''crime wave,'' and operators of the schools said they were
soon swamped with applicants.

State Runs Out of Forms

The Calilfornia Justice Department, which issues the permits to schools, has
repeatedly run out of the forms in recent weeks. Many school operators said that
the number of their graduates would have been much larger if they had had more
permit forms.

Here in Los Angeles, at least a half-dozen classes with 20 to 30 people are held
most evenings. Scores of companies have paid the tuition for the classes for
their employees as a fringe benefit, and many companies have paid for the
employees' initial supply of tear gas as well. It is common these days for
church and social clubs to plan meetings around a program of tear gas
instruction.

The tuition fee typically ranges from $10 for members of groups to $22 or more
for individuals. The cost of a canister of tear gas, which resembles a
purse-sized canister of spray cologne, and usually contains about 20 one-second
squirts of material, ranges from about $7 to $13.

''This has all happened in the last three or four months,'' said Don Feil, a
police lieutenant in suburban Torrance, who moonlights with other officers at a
school they operate called Tear Gas Specialists.

''What's happened is that due to the publicity over crime, a large number of
persons are concerned with their safety, and it's had a snowballing effect,''
Lieutenant Feil said. ''People hear about it from their friends and want to
learn about it because it gives them a weapon with which they can fight back an
attacker without taking on any financial or moral liability if they use it.

'It Builds Self-Confidence'

''I've noticed among the people we've taught that a lot of it is
psychological,'' he added. ''It builds self-confidence. People feel good and
have a sense of security if they have to be out at night.''

About 70 percent of the students, he said, are women, ''and we get all ages,
from the minimum age of 18 to over 80.'' Tear gas is effective only if it comes
in contact with an assailant's eyes, but if it does, ''it's as good as a .44
magnum in a combat situation,'' Mr. Peterson said. ''It won't kill him, but it
will incapacitate him'' from about 40 minutes to two hours. ''And after it wears
off, the person who has been sprayed is as good as new,'' he added.

Mr. Peterson said that he was increasingly troubled by the quality of some of
the training schools and tear gas that have emerged to meet the demand. He
asserted that one tear gas product marketed in the Southeast ''may work well,
but it can totally blind a person for life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PREMISES AND PROMISES;
Marine Corps Honor And Garwood Guilt

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


Cases against other former prisoners of war suspected of cooperating with Hanoi
had been dropped, it often seemed, for the sake of not reviving bitter memories
of an unpopular war. But in one case the Marine Corps would not forgive and
forget.

Last week, after a 12-week trial, five Marine Corps officers, all Vietnam
veterans, found Pfc. Robert R. Garwood guilty of collaborating with the enemy
and of assaulting a fellow prisoner. The court martial conviction, at Camp
Lejeune, N.C., was the first of its kind in 25 years and could mean life
imprisonment for the defendant.

Private Garwood was a 19-year-old jeep driver when he was captured in 1965, two
weeks before his tour in the war zone would have been up; he didn't leave
Vietnam until March 1979. Instead of abiding by the Code of Military Conduct, he
was said to have acted as interpreter during political indoctrination classes,
joined in interrogations of American prisoners and, from time to time, guarded
them. One former prisoner testified that Private Garwood came to be generally
regarded as a ''white Vietnamese.''

Attorney John C. Lowe, a civilian, said his client was mentally unstable before
entering the corps and had been brainwashed by the North Vietnamese. ''He
adapted his behavior to that demanded by his captors,'' Mr. Lowe said. ''It was
a matter of survival.'' Some of the half dozen psychiatrists who testified
supported Mr. Lowe's diagnosis; others didn't. The prosecutor, a Marine major,
argued that the insanity plea was ''a smoke screen.''

Under military judicial procedures, further hearings are due before sentencing.
The court martial judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, already had ruled out the death
penalty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIEWS A PORTFOLIO FROM AROUND THE NATION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 154 words


CARTOON CAPTIONS
with human rights cartoon

Chuck Ayers The Akron Beacon Journal
with Poland cartoon
Ranan Lurie Die Welt King Features Syndicate
with Central America cartoon
Dennis Renault The Sacramento Bee
with Stockman cartoon

Charles Powell The News and Observer Los Angeles Times Syndicate
Views
A portfolio from around the nation

with Reanult's Central America cartoon
''If our military advisers aren't successful, we bomb Hanoi and mine Haiphong;
then we defoliate Danang and Hue and we set up strategic hamlets here around

Saigon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoons

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR GUERILLAS HAVE NEITHER WON-NOR LOST

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


When El Salvador's long-awaited leftist offensive faltered soon after it was
launched last month, not even the United States-backed junta claimed that the
guerrillas had been defeated.  They had failed to injure the armed forces or to
spark a nationwide strike and popular insurrection, but the rebels seemed no
closer to surrender.

The leftist forces withdrew to the mountains and began regrouping.  If they fail
in their next push, their leaders said privately, they hope at least to win a
place at the bargaining table. And if there are no negotiations, they will
revert to ''prolonged popular war.'' Washington seemed to agree that the
guerrillas remain a threat. It renewed military aid to the junta last month,
arguing that the guerrillas were receiving arms from Cuba and Nicaragua. For the
first time in three years, the United States sent ''lethal'' equipment, notably
helicopter gunships and automatic rifles for the expanding army. A small cadre
of American advisers was also on the scene.

Last weekend, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. dismissed the Carter
Administration's controversial Ambassador, Robert E.  White, who had blamed
Salvadoran security forces for much of the political violence that took 10,000
lives last year. Frederic L.  Chapin, a diplomat and senior Pentagon official,
was appointed charge d'affaires. Not since the 1960's has the United States been
so involved in trying to defeat a Marxist-led insurgency in Latin America. But
in contrast to the isolated groups of middle-class radicals active then in
Brazil, Uruguay and Bolivia, El Salvador's armed left has peasant and worker
roots, thus posing a different challenge.

More even than the guerrillas who fought in Cuba and Nicaragua, El Salvador's
left is dominated by Marxists committed to proletarian revolution and supported
by peasant movements and labor unions.  However, the Marxist orthodoxy that gave
them the discipline to survive repression has also condemned them to frequent
internal disputes over ideology, alienating potential middle-class allies.

The guerrillas acted first in 1972, after the military used fraud to block the
election of a reformist coalition led by Christian Democrats that also included
Social Democrats and a Communist front.  The Communists opposed armed revolution
then, but their secretary general, Salvador Cayetano Carpio, quit to organize
the Popular Forces of Liberation. Disillusioned young Roman Catholics such as
Ana Guadalupe Martinez, a medical student who became a guerrilla comandante,
drifted into the People's Revolutionary Army headed by Joaquin Villalobos. They
kidnapped politicians and business executives for ransom to buy weapons. Later,
they built peasant movements on the foundation of ''Christian communities''
formed by radical priests.

The two guerrilla groups argued over Marxist-Leninist versus Trotskyist theory,
and a split in the People's Revolutionary Army in 1975 produced the Armed Forces
of National Resistance. By 1977, however, when the election of the coalition of
Christian Democrats, Social Democrats and Communists was again blocked by fraud,
the guerrillas had formed ''mass movements'' of peasant, labor and student
groups that adopted ''destabilizing'' tactics -strikes, ''invasions'' of private
farms, church and embassy occupations and street protests.

Communists Switch to Violence

Failing to dismantle the guerrilla groups, the military Government turned
against the front organizations. Stepped-up repression prompted the Archbishop
of San Salvador, Msgr. Oscar Arnulfo Romero (later assassinated by rightist
gunmen) to denounce the regime and call for social reform. When Nicaragua's
Sandinist rebels ousted the Somoza regime in July 1979, El Salvador's guerrillas
began preparing for a similar revolution. But they were caught off guard that
October, when Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero was replaced by a five-man junta
committed to sweeping reforms and free elections.

Conservative army officers, however, blocked the reforms and leftists and
liberals quit the Government. A year ago, the Moscowline Communist Party finally
agreed to support armed revolution and, encouraged by Cuba, the guerrillas tried
to unify the left. Last week, United States intelligence agencies authenticated
documents purporting to show that Shafik Handal, present secretary general of
the Salvador Communist Party, had been promised weapons in Vietnam, Ethiopia and
Eastern Europe and training and transport of the arms by the Soviet Union.

Last year yet another group, the Revolutionary Party of Central American
Workers, appeared; not until December did the five factions join in the
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front. They also organized a Democratic
Revolutionary Front with Social Democrats, dissident Christian Democrats and
other non-Marxists, hoping for middle-class support at home and money and help
in Latin America and Western Europe. Late last year, the guerrillas and
non-Marxist allies, such as Guillermo Manuel Ungo, a Social Democrat who had
served briefly as a junta member, agreed on a platform that included provisions
for private business, guaranteed religious freedom and a nonaligned foreign
policy.

But when they launched their ''final'' offensive on Jan. 10, they still had not
agreed on membership of a provisional junta to rule if they won. Fearing that
the Salvadoran Army would soon receive strong support, they rushed to act before
President Reagan's inauguration.  But they were clearly unprepared. According to
United States officials, stepped-up arms shipments began arriving from Cuba in
early December, but the weapons were not effectively distributed.  Furthermore,
they apparently miscalculated the impact on peasants of land reforms decreed by
the junta in March. There was no popular uprising.

Viewing their failure as more political than military, the guerrillas called for
negotiations with the United States on a political solution. But the mood in
Washington had changed dramatically and prospects for dialogue now seem remote.
If there are no negotiations, the guerrillas promise a new offensive which, even
if crushed, would bring more bloodshed. A new setback could threaten the
guerrillas' precarious unity, making eventual political settlement more
difficult. And rebel activity would almost certainly be matched by military
repression making governing difficult for the civilian-military junta.

Sympathetic Latin Americans, including the Governments of Mexico, Panama,
Ecuador and the Dominican Republic and Social Democratic parties in Venezuela
and Costa Rica, have been pressing the guerrillas to negotiate directly with the
junta. They have quietly offered to act as mediators. And they are trying to
persuade the Reagan Administration that the left must somehow be accommodated -
rather than eliminated - before crippled El Salvador can get to its feet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of members of opposition in El Salvador

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUT OF ONE FRYING PAN, NONALIGNED GATHER ANEW

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Twenty years after it was first scored as a sort of harmonic theme for chamber
ensemble, the nonaligned movement has evolved into a dissonant and even
cacaphonous piece for a swollen orchestra with augmented brass. With nearly 100
foreign ministers gathering to offer their own interpretations tomorrow, the
result is certain to sound more like John Cage or Spike Jones than Beethoven.

While seldom cohesive, the movement has been particularly fractious since Cuba
assumed the chairmanship a year and a half ago.  Originally planned for Havana,
this week's assembly was shifted to New Delhi in deference to the aversion of
many members for Fidel Castro's Moscow-aligned nonalignment.

The Indians have circulated moderately worded working papers, seeking to limit
the fallout of inevitable confrontations. But already last week during
preparatory talks on a draft declaration, disputes erupted over the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, Cambodian representation, Arab calls for the expulsion
of Egypt and the war between Iran and Iraq.
Burma Was the Only Defector

The differences among the 94 full members are striking. There are members with
tens of thousands of Soviet, Cuban or French troops on their soil. The
Philippines has United States military bases and is designated an ''observer''
but otherwise has full rights of participation. The organization includes
wealthy oil-producing states, impoverished nations, tiny island republics and
teeming giants.

Despite the differences, though, the club has suffered only one defection -
Burma - largely because its members recognize its basic function as a debating
club in which issues can be aired with no danger of any policy being formulated,
let alone implemented. The affirmation that nonalignment exists or is possible
is viewed as sufficiently worthwhile. As Babhani Sen Gupta, an Indian specialist
on Soviet affairs and international relations, wrote recently, ''The firmest
part of the code is that the club shall not break up. Quarrel as much as
necessary, but end up with the Cheshire cat's smile of compromise.''
Blocs Within the Nonaligned

As Mr. Sen Gupta envisions this week's discussions, ''The nonaligned will of
course cry out for a world of peace and understanding, rebuke the superpowers
for rekindling the ebbing embers of cold war ... But they will ignore how the
nonaligned themselves have been arming to the teeth, how they invade one
another's territory, lend bases to the superpowers for largesse generously
given.

''It does not matter that OPEC, which consists almost entirely of nonaligned
countries, has been draining out the last drop of blood from the arteries of the
poorest members of the club,'' Mr. Sen Gupta continued. ''It does not matter if
several nonaligned countries in Africa are afflicted with prolonged famine and
the nonaligned do nothing to help. It matters even less that collective
self-reliance remains a nonemotive slogan and trade and economic relations among
the nonaligned tend to shrink.''

But if fictive solidarity is ultimately proclaimed, unavoidable clashes will
still erupt to delineate emerging blocs. The most serious issue concerns the
Soviet intervention and continuing fighting in Afghanistan, just 500 miles away.
The 42-nation Islamic Conference, the largest grouping within the nonaligned,
has demanded the withdrawal of Soviet forces. At the same time, some diplomats
have been looking for United Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, who is
coming officially to commemorate the 20th year of the nonaligned movement, to
initiate talks between Shah Mohammad Dost, Foreign Minister of the Soviet-backed
Afghan regime, and Agha Shahi, his Pakistani counterpart. (Mr. Waldheim has
already tentatively selected Javier Perez de Cuellar of Peru, his Under
Secretary for Political Affairs, to preside over any talks. They were requested
in January by Pakistan, which is burdened with more than one million Afghan
refugees. Afghan guerrillas, however, fear a sellout unless they are included in
negotiations. Backing the guerrillas, Iran, another Afghan neighbor, refused
last week to talk to the ''puppet regime'' in Kabul - or to Iraq.)

Another likely consequence of the Afghan conflict is the tactical retreat of the
Cuban and Vietnamese-led bloc, which at Havana in 1979 sought to advance the
Leninist formulation that world socialism, with its Muscovite vanguard, was the
natural ally of the nonaligned. A dying Marshal Tito led an impassioned attack
and succeeded in diluting the draft. That was just a month before Noor Mohammad
Taraki, the Afghan President who had supported Cuba, was killed after a palace
shootout. Two months later, 85,000 Soviet troops invaded and Mr. Taraki's
successor and presumed killer, Hafizullah Amin, was himself dead. The Afghan
events did not help Havana and diplomats expect that it will permit the Indians
to play the dominant role this week.

The faction that coalesced around the Cuban draft remains the largest after the
Islamic group, however, and it may be the most disciplined. It includes about 15
countries, including Vietnam, Afghanistan, Angola, Mozambique and Ethiopia. A
pro-Western grouping includes Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and some Latin
American countries. Another group that has emerged recently is comprised of
larger, richer, scientifically advancing states, such as India, Brazil,
Argentina, Nigeria and Indonesia.

None of these groupings are mutually exclusive, and states often side with
different blocs on different issues. For example, on the Islamic demand that
Egypt be expelled for its dealings with Israel, African countries are likely to
support Egypt as a fellow member of the Organization of African Unity.

On Cambodia, or Kampuchea as it is known in international circles, the meeting
probably will, as it did in Havana, skirt the issue by admitting neither the
Vietnamese-supported Heng Samrin Government nor the old Pol Pot clique. On
Afghanistan, it will probably echo the Indian position, which essentially
condemns all bad people without naming them.

None of the diplomats assigned to monitor the convention expect it to take
unambiguous decisions on any major issue. Mr. Sen Gupta noted that, in light of
the spectacular growth of the nonaligned and the leniency with which entry is
granted, the movement ''may soon embrace the whole planet.'' Well, virtually the
whole planet. ''The superpowers,'' he said, ''will be left out, for, bless them,
they keep the unquiet rudderless club of the nonaligned floating.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Riding Tall

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


The kindest judgment on President Reagan's first gestures toward the Soviet
Union is to note that he has obviously spent most of his White House time
studying the American economy. The priority is right. No amount of nose-thumbing
at Moscow will do much harm if in the end Mr. Reagan tames inflation, stimulates
growth, improves the military and relieves dependence on foreign oil. No foreign
exertions will do much good if he fails.

Still, the Soviet connection obviously counts. And however distracted he may be,
the President should not be addressing the Kremlin in ways that sound
simultaneously belligerent and banal.

First there was the Dobrynin Diversion. Presumably to demonstrate the demise of
detente, the Soviet Ambassador (for 20 years!) in Washington was denied
garage-door access to the State Department and made to brave the front-door
traffic instead. No more secret approaches to Kissinger's lair; only open
antagonism, openly arrived at.

After the ridiculous came the sublime: hitting them with the Good Book. What
made him so sure, the President was asked, that the Soviet leaders want to
dominate the world? Well, he replied, they always speak of world revolution and
though their morality lets them cheat and lie, he can only believe them. When
asked to reflect again the next day, he added: ''They don't believe in
afterlife; they don't believe in a God or a religion; and the only morality they
recognize, therefore, is what will advance the cause of socialism.''

That a President old enough to remember the U-2, the Bay of Pigs, Vietnam and
Watergate would cite lying in some national interest as proof of a lust for
conquest is laughable. But it is fatuous for him also to proclaim a religious
test for diplomacy (Iranians believe in afterlife, Japanese don't). Surely Mr.
Reagan knows that selfinterest has no religion.

Quite probably, in this clumsy way, the President was trying to say something
important. The Soviet Union, whether from insecurity or intolerance, is
aggressive, and the Soviet political system is hateful to democrats. The Soviet
leaders ruthlessly dominate other nations, like Poland, and encourage
terrorists, like the P.L.O. They submit to none of the pressures the American
Government accepts from other nations or the scrutiny and restraint it gets at
home.

Americans, from Mr. Reagan down, are weary of the world's refusal to recognize
these distinctions between the superpowers. As they showed in cheering the
hostages, they plainly want to reassert the superiority of American values -
just as Jimmy Carter wanted to do with his human rights campaign. Though these
values no longer depend on belief in afterlife, they do turn on distinguishable
philosophies of life.

Honestly practiced and properly articulated, these values count for more than
nuclear bombs or secret agents. Weapons, once matched, lose their value even in
diplomacy. And plots, as in Iran, can be foiled by the weakest nations. Besides
arms, a truly strong diplomacy needs time and patience, which can come only from
the confidence that the values of a free society have an enduring and universal
appeal.

If that's what Mr. Reagan meant, let him learn to say it. And if that's what
Secretary of State Haig means by crusading for JudeoChristian values, let him
say it so Moslems, and atheists, will also understand.

And let the Reagan team move from there to the obvious corollary propositions.
As Ambassador Malcolm Toon testified after he lost even front-door access in
Moscow, the Soviet Union will never again let America achieve military
superiority; it is American economic and philosophic power that must be made to
count. And America will never again be so dominant that the challenges elsewhere
will be easily manageable, even without Soviet malevolence.

The task for this generation of Americans is to live, uneasily, with both an
imperialistic Soviet Union and a seething third world.  Interests will have to
be defended abroad. But superiority will be found only in what a proud people
achieves at home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THUNDER FROM THE RIGHT

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6742 words


OPENER
Peter Ross Range is a freelance writer based in Washington. By Peter Ross Range
carcely three hours after Ronald Reagan took the oath of office at his
Inauguration, Jesse A. Helms, the conservative Republican from North Carolina,
took the floor of the Senate to oppose confirmation of Caspar Weinberger as the
new President's Secretary of Defense.

Helms - tall, stoop-shouldered, owlish behind his horn-rimmed glasses -spoke for
40 minutes against the nomination, concluding: ''Mr. Weinberger is not ...
prepared to make the clean break with the very policies ... which have managed
our military and international decline.''

Weinberger was confirmed that day by a 97-2 vote, with only Helms and his new
Senate protege, John East, also from North Carolina, in opposition. The
dissenting vote was Jesse Helms's Inauguration Day signal that he would oppose
the new President he had helped elect on any deviation from the pure gospel of
conservativism that has been the Helms hallmark since he first entered the
Senate eight years ago. If Helms's views had not changed in those eight years,
many other things had. When he came to Washington eight years ago, the lanky
legislator was regarded as a political Quixote tilting at the windmills of
change. He thundered apocalyptic imprecations against everything from Big
Government to the alien forces he felt were threatening America with moral
decay, economic doom and military disaster. Even his supporters on the
conservative right called him, whimsically, ''our Horatius at the bridge.''
Helms compared him-self to the well-meaning Dutch boy who plugged the dike with
his thumb.  ''There have been a lot of holes to plug,'' said Helms at the end of
the 96th Congress in December.

Now, in the opening days of the 97th Congress, all that has changed. Helms
possesses the asset most honored in Washington: clout. The Republicans' majority
status in the Senate handed him the powerful post of chairman of the Agriculture
Committee, from which position he plans an all-out assault on the $11 billion
food-stamp program. Both his views and his new power have served to annoint him
as the spiritual leader of the new bloc of ultraconservatives in Congress who
are convinced that their day is only beginning to dawn.

''Conservatives used to believe their job was to lose as slowly as possible,''
says Howard Phillips, another Helms protege and founder of the Conservative
Caucus. ''I don't just want to slow the train down; I want to put it on another
track.''

The conservative rerouting of the political railroad has been in planning for at
least five years. Says Phillips, ''We knew if we followed (the plan), we would
be able to take over one house of Congress by 1980 ... but'' - and this shows
how doctrinaire the New Right is - ''we don't have the White House yet.'' Ronald
Reagan is not conservative enough.

The G.O.P. sweep in November elected l6 new Republican senators, giving the
party a majority in one branch of Congress for the first time since 1955. Yet it
is clear that a right-wing hard core of some 15 senators, led by Helms and
Senator James McClure of Idaho, will resist any modification of principle. They
are bound by broad agreement on the so-called ''profamily issues'' -
antiabortion, antiequal-rights amendment, antibusing, proprayer in the schools -
and a free-market conservatism on economic issues. They favor limited Government
spending on social programs but more for defense.  They share a hawkish view of
the world that favors a more assertive resistance to Soviet expansion and
accepts limited human-rights abuses in the interest of supporting staunch
military allies.

At least five of the freshman Republican senators are natural recruits to the
Helms-McClure faction; many others, such as Alfonse D'Amato of New York and Dan
Quayle of Indiana, are much closer to Helms than to such Republican liberals as
Charles Percy of Illinois or Charles Mathias of Maryland. They will often join
the right wing in issue-oriented coalitions, also supported by such incumbent
Republicans as Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and John Tower of Texas, who
have now assumed powerful committee chairmanships. On many votes, the Helms
faction can also count on sympathetic Southern Democrats, who have always felt
more comfortable voting with Republicans on military and social issues than with
the liberal leadership of their own party. Thus, the hard-core of ideo-logical
conservatives around Helms and McClure are the energizing nub of a powerful
coalition that can attempt to dominate domestic issues and fashion foreign
policy.

Paradoxically, this new alignment leaves President Reagan - the darling of the
conservatives for almost two decades - in the unusual position of possibly
facing a more damaging challenge to his leadership from the Republican right
wing than anything the Democratic liberals can muster at this time. Thus, while
only Helms and his North Carolina colleague would cast votes against an
important Reagan appointment on the new Administration's first day in office,
the potential for defiance from the right might dog President Reagan's efforts,
and those of the G.O.P., to expand on the November victory and build a new
political consensus in the nation.  The most interesting battles on the national
political stage in the coming year may be between a moderating Republican
President and the true-believ-ers on his right. It will surely test the
mediating skills of Tennessee's Howard Baker, the new Senate majority leader,
and G.O.P. whip Ted Stevens of Alaska to keep the Republicans' sixvote Senate
majority in working order.

Helms's senatorial colleagues admit that part of his power lies in his
freewheeling attitude toward mainstream Republicanism.  ''Sometimes it's an
asset that he is somewhat independent of the party,'' says Senator McClure.

This independence is partly explained by the unorthodox course of the l980
Republican campaign. The Republican National Committee worked brilliantly at
times to orchestrate party politics from the grass roots up. At the same time,
largely distinct from party efforts, a shadow campaign was being waged
nationally and locally by conservative groups. They were organized into an
effective alliance by television evangelists pushing moral issues, such as
right-tolife and prayer in the classroom, and by the men who have constructed an
extrapolitical network of computerized mailing lists to galvanize conservative
support nationally and lo-cally. By integrating these forces, a new conservative
coalition emerged that overcame historic regional differences, linking
Washington-haters in the Southern Bible Belt with the Middle Western Farm Belt
and the Sagebrush Rebellion of the West.

They received political guidance through the medium of a postman or a preacher
instead of a precinct captain. It worked like a well-oiled machine, but not as a
political machine with traditional party loyalties. This represented a historic
upheaval in American politics.

''There were two things that hit us,'' Democratic Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan of New York said after the election. ''First was money, money, money,
money. ... Then there was ... organization and technology. ... We are so far
behind that we ... are in danger of becoming the permanent minority party.''

Because of the New Right's relative independence of party - its hard-line
conservatives form a minority within the majority in the Senate - it can even
bypass (Continued onb Page 64)
First Jump
Barry Goldwater as an old-school elder statesman. This maverick style is what
permits the new conservatives to take such extreme positions, declaring holy
wars rather than working within the known rules of political pragmatism. A case
in point is their attitude toward the Family Protection Act, introduced last
year by Republican Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada. The bill condemned
homosexuals, prohibited information on contraception for unwed minors, attacked
''sex intermingling in sports and other school activities,'' removed Federal
laws concerning wife-and-child abuse and generally reinstated ''the traditional
role of women in society.'' Paul Weyrich, director of the Committee for the
Survival of a Free Congress, one of the right's most extreme yet best-organized
Washington-based direct-mail groups, called Laxalt's measure ''the most
significant battle of the age-old conflict between good and evil, between the
forces of God and forces against God.''

Ira Glasser, national director of the American Civil Liberties Union, labels
''the swift and sudden rise of the new evangelical groups ... a grave threat to
traditional civil liberties.'' Former Senator George McGovern, defeated by New
Right fund-raising and propaganda expertise, wrote before the election, ''Their
zealotry, self-righteousness and vindictiveness ... connote something radically
different from the authentic conservatism of, say, Robert Taft or Senator
Goldwater.''

While Barry Goldwater often votes with the New Right, he, too, regards some of
its religiously committed leaders with suspicion.  Like less dogmatic
conservatives, and indeed most other Republicans, Goldwater agrees with many New
Right goals: less social spending and heavier defense budgets, less Government
interference with business and more industrial freedom from environmental
restrictions, less school busing and fewer racial quotas in jobs and education.
Yet the aging Republican leader rejects the intransigence of the New Right.
''If they disagree with you one bit, you're a no-good S.O.B.'' After the
election, Goldwater asked acerbically: ''Who the hell is the New Right anyway?
Who is Paul Weyrich? He's not a leader of the Republican Party.''

Neither, for that matter, is Jesse Helms - in his heart. ''Helms and guys like
Thurmond and East, they are old Dixiecrats,'' points out one Western
conservative. ''He descends from the William Jennings Bryan wing of the
Democratic Party,'' says a Goldwaterite with ties to the Reagan-Bush ticket in
1980. ''On some things, he's not even a conservative. How can a conservative
even imagine passing laws on your private life - like abortion and prayer!''

Today ideological labels can be as misleading as party affiliation in
identifying loyalties. The conservative tide, running swift and strong,
comprises several splayed forces, all of whose power centers have some claim to
sharing in Reagan's triumph. There is the old Republican establishment, tied to
the G.O.P.'s traditional financial constituencies and shibboleths. Then there is
the Old Right, strongly anti-Communist and states' rights oriented, and the
neo-conservative wing, which prides itself on its intellectual leadership, and
which has attracted prominent Democrats like Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of
New York and Henry (Scoop) Jackson of Washington.

As majority leader, Howard Baker, a moderate, faces a difficult task balancing
the factions now taking shape in the new Senate. The heady, unaccustomed power
of majority control has sharpened differences between the hard-core Republican
conservatives -11 Westerners, four Southerners and one New Englander -and the
more moderate elements. Some 15 other Republicans are firmly conservative, but
less doctrinaire than the far right. They include the Armed Services Committee
chairman, John Tower, Virginia's John Warner, New Mexico's Pete Domenici and
Florida's freshman Senator Paula Hawkins, who opposes the equal-rights
amendment.

The small Republican liberal wing includes the new Foreign Relations Committee
chairman, Charles Percy, Oregon's dovish Mark Hatfield and the outspoken Senator
Lowell Weicker of Connecticut, who vehemently opposed Alexander Haig's
appointment as Secretary of State.

This leaves an unimposing middle ground of perhaps a dozen Senators for Baker
and Stevens to count on as a moderate base in any floor fight. This group
includes Robert Packwood of Oregon, Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, John Chafee of
Rhode Island and such newcomers as Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania and Warren
Rudman of New Hampshire.  Since Jesse Helms met Ronald Reagan in the early
1970's, he has ardently supported the Californian's Presidential aspirations.
Helms and his political sidekick Thomas F. Ellis, a North Carolina attorney,
helped revive Mr. Reagan's flagging 1976 bid for the nomination by orchestrating
his upset primary victory in their home state over Gerald Ford. In 1980, Helms
campaigned in 22 states for Mr. Reagan and other G.O.P. candidates, and his
unique political machine, the Congressional Club of North Carolina, raised an
astonishing $4 million nationwide for the Republican standard-bearer.

In person, Helms is a courtly charmer with the Southern gift of hyperbolic gab.
He calls the President's wife ''Miss Nancy'' and tells the homeliest page in a
Senate elevator that she is the finest beauty in the land. He drags total
strangers onto the reserved seats in the Senate subway and invites liberal
reporters to lunch in the Senate dining room. Helms has impeccable moral
credentials - the Rev. Jerry Falwell says, ''If I knew Senator Helms would take
care of my family, I could die happy.'' Although he controls a total of about 50
jobs on his personal staffs in Washington and Raleigh, neither office has a
black employee, despite North Carolina's 22 percent black population. Yet
Helms's staff is known for giving excellent and impartial constituent services.

''Jesse is sui generis,'' explains Democratic Senator William Proxmire of
Wisconsin, who opposes most of Helms's positions. ''I hate to compare anybody to
my predecessor, Joe McCarthy, but, in a sense, Jesse is like McCarthy. He is a
force unto himself.''

With the new expansion of the Senate's right wing, Helms is now a good deal more
than the one-man show he has been since coming to the Senate in 1972. Helms and
McClure, also elected in 1972, are the senior members of the Senate's New Right.
They were joined in 1974 by Paul Laxalt, former Governor of Nevada, who was
Ronald Reagan's campaign chairman; today he is considered President Reagan's
point man on Capitol Hill, where his influence rivals that of the majority
leader, Howard Baker.

Jake Garn, a conservative Mormon and former Mayor of Salt Lake City, was also
elected in 1974, to be joined two years later by Orrin Hatch, a youthful,
mirthless Mormon lawyer from Utah, new to politics. The Wyoming rancher Malcolm
Wallop, a polo-playing millionaire, and Harrison Schmitt, New Mexico's
astronaut-geologist, were elected in 1976, too, forming a small coterie of
conservative Westerners, whom McClure and Nebraska's Carl Curtis organized into
a conservative strategy group called the Senate Steering Committee, which meets
over lunch every Wednesday, usually in a Senate dining room. Because it refuses
to release a membership list, Democratic Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia
once bitterly labeled the committee a ''shadowy'' and ''mysterious'' body.
second jump

The ultraconservatives gained more senatorial ground in 1978.  William
Armstrong, a radio-station executive, was elected from Colorado; an Iowa
businessman, Roger Jepsen, and a New Hampshire airline pilot, Gordon Humphrey,
became the first Senators who won seats with the backing of the newly organized,
highly doctrinaire political-action committees. But 1980 was the breakthrough
year.

Aided by a Reagan bandwagon and a right-wing ''hit list,'' funded by such
organizations as the National Conservative Political Action Commit(known as
''Nickpack'') and Helms's Congressional Club, five New Right conservatives were
added to the Senate: John East is a college professor from eastern North
Carolina, whose election campaign was managed out of the Congressional Club's
offices. East is so conservative that Helms likes to joke that ''I'm now the
liberal Senator from North Carolina.'' Senate observers expect East, who never
held political public office before, to function almost as Helms's political
clone.

Jeremiah Denton of Alabama, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam, also ran at
Helms's urging. Helms spoke several times in Alabama and the Congressional Club
sent campaign funds. Denton had clearly established his conservative credentials
when he founded the antiadultery, antipornography Crusade for Decency. Denton
today is strategically placed on the Judiciary Committee, now chaired by Strom
Thurmond. Thurmond named Denton chairman of the newly created Subcommittee on
Security and Terrorism, the linear descendant of the Internal Security
Subcommittee Joseph McCarthy used for his Communist-hunting hearings in the
1950's. Denton vows he is not reviving the spirit of McCarthyism, but he is
buttressed on the right side of the committee bench by John East and Orrin
Hatch.  Steven Symms's victory over the liberal Frank Church in Idaho was one of
the most bitter battles of the 1980 elections. Even Jesse Helms described the
tactics used to bolster Symms's campaign as ''cuttin' and slashin'.'' During
four terms as a Congressman, Symms earned 100 percent ratings from several
conservative lobbying groups and 10 percent from the liberal Americans for
Democratic Action.  Symms was Helms's House counterpart in introducing the bill
for an antiabortion amendment.  Charles E. Grassley ousted the liberal John
Culver in Iowa in another vitriolic campaign that was heavily supported by the
National Conservative Political Action Committee. A farmer from the most
conservative part of the state, Grassley had spent six years in the House
compiling by far the most conservative record in the Iowa delegation. Following
in the footsteps of his predecessor, H.R.  Gross, for 26 years the leading
curmudgeon in the lower house, Grassley manifested a conservatism that even led
him to such diehard symbolic stands as voting against a Congressional pay raise.
Don Nickles, a prosperous small-town Oklahoma businessman, stepped into the
vacancy created by the retirement of Henry Bellmon to become, at 32, the
youngest member of the Senate. Nickles is a classic New Right creation. He
attended the conservative ''candidates' school'' run every six weeks in
Washington by Paul Weyrich's Committee for the Survival of a Free Congress.
Seizing upon the profamily issues of abortion, busing and prayer in the schools,
Nickles had Moral Majority support in a campaign that seemed to oppose almost
everything. During the primary campaign, The Tulsa World wrote: ''It is
difficult to tell whether Don Nickles is running against ... his Republican
opponent, Democratic President Jimmy Carter, the Federal Government or the
alphabet. 'I'm against the D.O.E., H.E.W., H.U.D., E.P.A. and OSHA,' Nickles
tells audiences.''

What distinguishes the New Right from the Old Right besides age is the tendency
of the younger conservatives to work as a group, drawing on their new network of
right-wing lobbies. They have introduced a new cohesion into conservative
politics.

The New Right's strength was first evident on the day Senate Republicans chose
their new leadership before Christmas. Moderates Baker and Stevens were
re-elected to the top leadership positions as expected. Then came the vote for
the third-ranking position, chairman of the Republican Conference, which
functions as the party's coordinating machine. The mainstream candidate was H.
John Heinz 3d, a wealthy Pennsylvanian, regarded as a moderate by most but as a
flaming liberal by party enemies on the right. The Steering Committee, the New
Right's high command in the Senate, put forward McClure and mobilized sufficient
support from other factions to defeat Heinz, 33-20. This gave the right wing,
only a few years ago an intramural debating society countable on one hand, a
solid foothold in the Senate leadership.

With the retirement of Carl Curtis in 1978, McClure had become the Steering
Committee's chairman and Helms its vice chairman. After McClure became
conference chairman in December, Helms took over the Steering Committee.
Although both are in their 50's, they are a decade or so older than most other
committee members. The group as a whole is marked by boundless activism and
determination to get things done, and its members intend nothing less than to
take over the Senate, the House and the White House.

''The New Right - and to an extent we're like Communists in this - feels victory
is inevitable,'' says Paul Weyrich.  In 1975, shortly after the 1974 midterm
elections, Jesse Helms formulated a plan in a speech to the American
Conservative Union Convention. First, he drew lessons from post-Watergate
Republican losses and 1974's abysmal 38 percent voter turnout. He targeted the
nonvoting 62 percent of the electorate as a kind of silent majority - he called
them ''the conservative majority'' - who had only to be politicized to put the
country into the hands of the right people.

He had flirted with the idea of founding a third party, but finally opted for
operating as a conservative movement affiliated with the Republican Party. In
his 1975 speech, Helms prescribed organizing the waiting conservative masses
district by district and inviting in groups ''not presently part of the
political process,'' a harbinger of such phenomena as the Moral Majority. As
Howard Phillips puts it: ''Since Washington tends to maximize the power of the
liberals, we had to move the battleground. ... We were shifting from the
politics of celebrities to the politics of issues.'' In short, let the
hopelessly liberal media focus on the nation's capital while the conservatives
mobilize voters in the heartland.
THIRD JUMP

Another development of the mid-1970's was the emergence of political-action
groups dedicated to replacing liberals with conservatives. The Conservative
Caucus, for instance, was born in a memorandum written to Jesse Helms by a
political aide, South Carolinian John Carbaugh. Howard Phillips, then working in
Helms's office, became its director.

At about the same time, two disillusioned young political organizers, John T.
(Terry) Dolan and Charles Black, approached Helms with a concept for a national
conservative campaign-financing organization. Helms sent a confidential memo to
key people on the right and Nickpack was born. In 1980, Nickpack was the
organizing force that helped defeat four liberal Democratic Senators: Birch
Bayh, John Culver, Frank Church and George McGovern. It was a moment of supreme
victory for the Quixote of the Carolina Piedmont.  Fighting the archenemy of
liberalism has been the crusade waged by Jesse Helms for all of his political
life. The son of a fire-andpolice chief with a third-grade education, Helms was
raised in tiny Monroe, N.C., 23 miles southeast of Charlotte. His first serious
political experience came during the notorious 1950 Senate election, generally
regarded as the dirtiest in North Carolina history. Helms, a young radio
newsman, did publicity for the conservative lawyer, Willis Smith, who ran
against Dr. Frank Porter Graham, president of the liberal University of North
Carolina.

In a four-week Democratic run-off campaign, still remembered in the state for
its hate literature and racist tone, Graham was portrayed as a Communist
sympathizer and an integrationist. One flier, signed by a ''Know the Truth
Committee,'' exhorted: ''WHITE PEOPLE WAKE UP!'' It conjured scenes of ''Negroes
working beside you, your wife and daughters in your mills and factories.'' It
announced, ''Frank Graham favors mingling of the races.'' The leaflet endorsed
Willis Smith: ''He will uphold the traditions of the South.''

The virulent campaign included newspaper ads playing to Southern paranoia (''The
South Under Attack'') and radio spots stirring racial fears (''Do you know that
28 percent of North Carolina's population is colored?''). ''The mob mood that
was built up in the final days of the campaign was not unlike that preceding a
lynching,'' wrote the political scientist Samuel Lubell in ''The Future of
American Politics.''

Graham lost by 18,000 votes, with at least 18 counties that had previously
supported him reversing their vote.  The election brought Helms together with
another smart young conservative, Tom Ellis, a Raleigh attorney, who today runs
the Congressional Club and acts as Helms's political alter ego.

Helms served as a Senate aide to Smith until the Senator died in office in 1953.
After several years as director of the North Carolina Bankers Association in
Raleigh and a term on the City Council, Helms bought a part interest in a
conservative Raleigh television station, becoming its first on-camera
editorialist. His fiveminute commentaries were called ''The Voice of Free
Enterprise in Raleigh-Durham.'' During the civil-rights era (Helms called it the
''civil-rights uproar''), Helms made a reputation for himself by opposing
everything the civil-rights movement stood for, leading what The Charlotte
Observer called ''the rear-guard action against racial equality.''

Helms's 2,700 editorials over the next 12 years made him a hero with
conservatives in the villages and farming communities. Helms's invective against
''restless Negroes'' and college students who indulged in ''riotous weekends at
beaches in Florida ... where orgies and mayhem are highly advertised'' was also
carried over the 70 stations of the Tobacco Radio Network and reprinted in more
than 50 small-town newspapers.

At a time when many Southern whites were outraged by the sight of young blacks
blocking streets in demonstrations and sitting in at lunch counters, Helms
encouraged resistance to change. Recurring themes in his editorials were the
pending apocalypse and the ''immorality'' of blacks. While the Southern white
constabulary was routinely mistreating and sometimes condoning the killing of
blacks, he contributed to further inflaming racial feelings by accusing the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. of ''holding himself above the law.'' ''Crime rates and
irresponsibility among Negroes are facts of life which must be faced,'' he said.

Editorials also appeared under Helms's byline in The Citizen, the magazine of
the Citizens Councils of America, based in Jackson, Miss., which called Helms
''our favorite media master.'' The November 1967 issue of The Citizen carried a
Helms commentary which attacked the civil-rights movement and outbreaks of
racial street violence by asking, ''Is survival possible when civilization
reverts to the law of the jungle? ... The question grows more ominous by the
day. The hour approaches when we must decide whether we will be ruled by sanity
or ruined by savagery.''

Race, however, was not Helms's sole preoccupation. As the ''voice of free
enterprise,'' he inveighed against labor unions, Social Security, Medicare, the
Rural Electrification Authority, the League of Women Voters, the 18-year-old
vote, Nixon's China opening, Kissinger's detente with Moscow, the United Nations
and farm subsidies. Although opposed to more than he favored, Helms once wrote
in support of private schools, so that ''political sociologists ...  would
forever be unable to dictate terms and procedures for the people of America
regarding their schools.''

None of this seemed to hurt Helms when he became a Republican convert in 1970
after 28 years as a Democrat, and forsook the airwaves for politics in 1972. ''I
saw it,'' he says, ''as a chance to carry the free-enterprise message across the
state.'' Helms won with 54 percent of the vote, possibly the first on-camera
personality to ride television into the Senate.

Besides benefiting from Richard Nixon's extraordinary 1972 coattails, Helms
successfully linked his opponent, Congressman Nick Galifianakis, the son of
Greek immigrants, with the unpopular Democratic Presidential nominee by erecting
several huge billboards that read, ''McGovernGalifianakis,'' the two names run
together as one. His slogan: ''Jesse Helms: He's one of us.'' During his first
term as Senator, Helms concentrated on the emotional issues of school
desegregation (''forced busing''), abortion, prayer in the schools (''voluntary
prayer'') and excessive Government spending. He made a career of losing on
principle -almost any 99-1 Senate vote since 1972 has Helms casting that sole
dissenting vote. The Raleigh News and Observer named him ''Senator No.''

Helms modeled himself on the late Alabama Senator James Allen by becoming a
master of parliamentary procedure and one of the Senate's most skillful
obstructionists. He spent more than 100 hours ''in the chair'' (presiding over
the Senate is considered an onerous chore by most senators) during each of his
first two years, becoming the first Republican to win two Golden Gavel awards.

Helms's 1978 re-election campaign was launched in 1976 by his close political
associate Thomas Ellis, who ran the North Carolina Congressional Club. Founded
after Helms's 1972 campaign as a fundraising device to pay off campaign debts,
the club has since shed ''North Carolina'' from its name and become an
impressive national political propaganda operation built around direct-mail
computerization, which enables conservatives to get their message to the voters
minus the critical filter of the mass media. It also generates enormous amounts
of money - $7 million for Helms's 1978 re-election race, the largest sum ever
spent for a Senate election, most of it from outside North Carolina.
Concentrating on television commercials, Helms outspent his weak Democratic
opponent by 30 to 1 and won with 56 percent of the vote. Even today, the
Congressional Club is operating at a high pitch, perhaps in preparation for the
1984 reelection campaign, when Helms is expected to face tough opposition from
popular Democratic Governor James Hunt.

In 1980, the Club enlisted John East, a conservative college professor who had
never held political office; he scored an upset victory in the Senate race over
the Democratic incumbent, Robert Morgan. East's campaign concentrated on
television commercials which dwelt relentlessly on such supposed Morgan sins as
the ''Panama Canal giveaway'' and the Senator's position on the Occupational
Health and Safety Act -stances which Morgan claimed on the floor of the Senate
were gross distortions of his record. The East campaign, which took some pains
to avoid showing that he was in a wheelchair, constantly featured an
eight-year-old photograph of his opponent, Morgan, with liberal Senators George
McGovern and Edward M. Kennedy.  It suggested by association that Morgan,
considered by many the most conservative Democrat Senator, was, in fact, a
liberal. East was elected by a squeaker margin of 6,700 votes.  Helms's role in
the Senate serves a number of political purposes.  ''If Helms stakes an
ultraconservative position,'' remarks one conservative Senator's aide, ''that
draws the whole spectrum to the right. Helms is like a kind of insurance. You
might have a burglar alarm that goes off too often. But at least it works when
you need it.''

Even Helms's ideological ally James McClure admits that, ''There are times when,
whether it's (liberal) Howard Metzenbaum or Jesse Helms, you wish they weren't
out there playing their own game. But you have to have the radicals of the left
and the right so you'll know where the center is.''

So one of Helms's obvious roles in the New Right is to set what the columnist
George Will calls ''the outer limit of conservative activism.'' Helms's hand is
also felt on foreign-policy issues, especially in Latin America and Africa.

It is in the third world that Helms sees creeping Communism presenting the
gravest peril to American survival. He unleashes his well-traveled aides, James
Lucier, John Carbaugh and Richard McCormack, as watchdogs of international
conservatism wherever he feels Western interests are threatened. This has meant
lending support to the white-minority regimes in South Africa, Namibia
(South-West Africa) and in Rhodesia before it became Zimbabwe. Helms calls them
''the only footholds we had left in Africa against Communism.'' Does he see
Zimbabwe as merely a pawn in the East-West game? ''Right,'' he replies. Latin
America, too? ''Right.'' Any hope today for Zimbabwe? ''We just talked Rhodesia
into
Page 84
the garbage dump. That country's gone.'' Helms created an international incident
in 1979 when he sent Carbaugh and Lucier to London to monitor the talks that led
to the transfer of power from Ian Smith's regime to the black leader Robert
Mugabe. Helms's aides were accused of disrupting the negotiations by trying to
give support to Smith and his black surrogate, Bishop Abel Muzorewa. Secretary
of State Cyrus Vance stormed to Capitol Hill to lodge a protest with Frank
Church, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (''the only time I've
ever seen Cy Vance truly angry,'' said one person present). Vance claimed that
the British had officially complained of interference by Lucier and Carbaugh,
which perhaps was an overstatement. Helms, though, was prepared: ''I called
Maggie Thatcher. She didn't know anything about it.''

''Jesse's got his own foreign policy,'' is how Wisconsin's William Proxmire sums
it up. Though Helms had virtually never been abroad before joining the Senate in
1972, and has never traveled with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee since
joining it two years ago, he is now in a position to make his anti-Communist
foreign-policy views felt. In the new Congress, he has been named chairman of
the Subcommittee for Hemispheric Affairs because, he says, ''If we don't start
getting things straight with our own hemisphere, starting with Canada, Mexico
and all the way south, our own stability is in jeopardy.''

Helms occasionally travels abroad at the expense of one of the four
''educational,'' tax-free institutes his aides have founded in Washington. Most
of these trips have been to conservative countries like Taiwan or to those with
right-wing military dictatorships, such as Brazil, Chile, Argentina and Uruguay.
During such visits, Helms operates independently of the American Embassy
''except for a courtesy call on the way out of town.'' He collects data in
support of the right-wing cause or to discredit such deposed - or assassinated -
socialists as Salvador Allende of Chile. ''He was a moral bum,'' says Helms.
''He ruined the country, its economy. He kept a mistress out at a country
place.''

Helms is known for having his own pipelines, independent of other members of the
Foreign Relations Committee, to hawkish dissenters at the Defense Department and
the C.I.A. who keep him abreast of creeping moderation in the national-security
establishment.  ''Sometimes the committee would meet in executive session for a
topsecret briefing,'' remembers one person present, ''and you could tell Helms
already knew the stuff. It was embarrassing.''

No matter what the issue, one is almost certain to find the hand of the far
right's Horatius stirring things up. ''He's the Ted Kennedy of the right,'' says
one detractor, who nonetheless admires his political skill. ''He gets into
everything.'' If the 1980 election was Jesse Helms's personal moment of triumph
after years as a senatorial lone wolf, and if the New Right generally saw it as
a turning point, 1981 has already had its disappointments. The unswerving
Helms-McClure faction was outraged when Ronald Reagan appointed a Cabinet that
only partially fulfilled conservative hopes. David Stockman at the Office of
Management and Budget, John Edwards as dismantler of the Department of Energy,
James Watt as an Interior Secretary who regards many environmentalists as
''obstructionists,'' General Haig at State and the Democratic neoconservative
Jeane Kirkpatrick at the United Nations -these were their kind of people. But
managerial wizard Weinberger at Defense, former Wall Street broker Donald Regan
at Treasury, especially Terrel Bell at Education, where he was making noises
about maybe not abolishing the department - these were disappointments.

The conservatives have ways (beyond opposing appointees) to hold Ronald Reagan's
feet to the fire. For example, Helms constantly invokes Mr. Reagan's name to
hold him to issues the new President may now want to avoid. On the day Helms
reintroduced his bill for a constitutional amendment banning abortion, he told a
cheering rightto-life assemblage, ''If I know Ronald Reagan, he's not backing
down. And, for what it's worth, neither is Jesse Helms.''

Mr. Reagan, who showed himself through his appointments to be a more pragmatic
compromiser than some conservatives had expected, may not see it this way.
''There isn't going to be an abortion amendment, and Helms knows it,'' explains
one activist in the Reagan-Bush campaign. ''You'd see lawlessness in this
country to make Prohibition look like a picnic.''

Sensing their slippage, Helms's forces fought back. Again there was talk of
running him for Vice President in 1984, a reminder to George Bush to eschew the
politics of his Eastern Establishment past. This Vice-Presidential threat is the
same tactic used to force Bush's endorsement of the hard-line 1980 party
platform, which Helms and his allies wrote, and about which Helms says he got
''99 percent of what I wanted.''

The New Right's anxiety in the formative days of the Reagan Administration may
ultimately be justified by events over the coming months as the White House
lines up priorities and attempts to chart a course for the nation. If the
records of Helms and other New Rightists are a guide, they will not be content
with political symbolism. They insist on basic changes on the critical domestic
and foreign-policy issues that have carried them to the Senate.

They are convinced that the political tide is still surging to the right, and
they are prepared and encouraged to use the 1982 and 1984 elections to test
their principles against the voices of moderation and compromise. Jesse Helms,
as always, has no doubts about it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jesse Helms and Charles Percy photo of Orrin
Hatch photo of Jeremiah Denton photo of James McClure photo of Jake Garn photo
of Steven Symms photo of John East photo of Gordon Humphrey photo of Malcolm
Wallop

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STRUGGLE OF WOMEN DIRECTORS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 97 words


In "The Struggle of Women Directors," you quote director Karen Arthur as having
said, "She (Jane Fonda) told the woman who had directed her in a documentaruy
... on Vietnam ... that women shouldn't direct."

I am that "woman who had directed her" and Jane Fonda never made any such
statement to me.  Nor did I ever make any such statement about ane Fonda to
anyone at anytime.  Francine Parker Los Angeles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Crime

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


Leaving the vein of fantasy that characterized ''Liars and Tyrants and People
Who Turn Blue,'' Barbara Paul has now, in FIRST GRAVEDIGGER (Doubleday, $8.95),
tried to paint the picture of a complete heel. He is an antiques agent working
for a respected Pittsburgh firm, and suddenly his boss makes it clear that he is
no longer welcome. Miss Paul has dreamed up a novel idea for the modus operandi
of a murder. The agent talks a sorry, suicidal friend into doing it for him and
then committing suicide. What are friends for?

As things turn out, the agent is nowhere near as good as he thinks he is, and he
gets himself into a lot of trouble. Step by step, Miss Paul shows how a rotten
apple can start to smell. At the end there is an ironic switch. But can one
believe in the retrogression that takes place? It is one of those bright ideas
that do not come off as well as the author intended. Nevertheless, Miss Paul is
a highly skillful writer, and ''First Gravedigger'' should keep readers turning
pages to the end.

The fourth of Charles Merrill Smith's Randollph books -REVEREND RANDOLLPH AND
THE HOLY TERROR (Putnam's, $10.95) - deals with multiple murder and other
things. The other things weaken the impact of the book as a murder mystery.
Randollph is the ex-pro football player now turned minister, and as the book
opens he has just married and been given a rich Chicago parish. A maniac starts
to knock off clerics: a minister, an evangelist, a Catholic priest, a rabbi.
Each had some secret of a sinful nature. The killer warns them, sending each a
poem. One day Randollph gets a poem in the mail, and his life is in danger.

But the murders seem to be secondary to other things on the author's mind. He is
anxious to acquaint the reader with the church - its administrative and other
problems, its way of dealing with them, fine points about religious doctrine,
etc. Mr. Smith reflects a liberal Protestant theology, and some of his points
are of interest.  But he has neglected his story for what in effect is a tract.
He also sets up clay pigeons in the form of religious fanatics and hypocrites,
and easily shoots them down.

Here are two adventure stories: SOLOMON'S SEAL by Hammond Innes (Knopf, $11.95)
and THE THIN LINE by Roy Doliner (Crown, $11.95).  Both take place in the Far
East. The veteran Mr. Innes brings an estate agent into a situation that takes
him from England to Australia. An ex-naval officer, he takes a berth on a
converted LST that ferries cargo to Pacific islands. There is a lot of sea stuff
in the book. Even more interesting is the part dealing with a stamp collection.
There is a romance, too. Mr. Innes, an old hand at this sort of thing, mixes up
a happy concoction.

''The Thin Line'' lacks this expert touch, and it is a souffle that sags. It
starts in the Vietnam of 1963 and is the story of Jack Sullivan, a C.I.A. agent
in charge of building a network to operate in China. His network gets broken, he
is ordered home and refuses to go. Instead he works on his own, lusting for
revenge. Now we come to a cocaine operation in which the C.I.A. is heavily
involved. There is much political wheeling and dealing, and the action
crisscrosses all over the world. This is an ambitious book that somehow fails to
coalesce. Too much talk, perhaps, or too many characters who are stereotypes
(and that includes the bitter, disillusioned hero).

Artificial insemination, genetic tinkering and cloning are subjects very much
with us in recent years, and Daniel M. Klein takes a look at the subject in
EMBRYO (Doubleday, $11.95). A gynecologist has remarkable success treating women
who are supposedly barren. But the offspring of those women tend to look alike
and act alike. The idea is timely, and Mr. Klein has researched his subject
well. But there unfortunately is a strain of Mad Scientist virus running through
the book, and at the end there is no surprise. But Mr. Klein writes well and
does raise a scary issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA'S MAJESTIC HUANG SHAN

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD; FOX BUTTERFIELD, who recently completed a tour of
duty as the Times's Peking bureau chief, is at work on a book about China.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


Since the eighth-century poet Li Po celebrated the phantasmagoric beauties of
Huang Shan, a mountain of oddly-shaped peaks, pines and clouds, the Chinese have
considered it one of the wonders of nature.

A pilgrimage to Huang Shan - the name means Yellow Mountain - has long been a
goal of many Asians, not just the Chinese. Ho Chi Minh went there to recuperate
for a month during the height of the American war in Vietnam. And last summer,
75-year-old Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, climbed Huang Shan.
Following Mr. Deng's visit, the Chinese authorities opened the mountain to
foreign visitors for the first time since the Cultural Revolution.

Over the years Chinese laborers have placed thousands of stone steps on two
paths leading to one summit, so the ascent can be physically more like climbing
the Washington Monument than tackling the Alps or the Rockies. But the Chinese
do not come here for hardship, danger or getting away from it all, as Americans
might.  Instead, they glory in the majesty of a mountain that suggests a
classical Chinese ink wash landscape painting sprung to life.  Huang Shan is
composed of granite that has been eroded, by the moist clouds that ring it, into
72 peaks of up to 8,694 feet. Many of the peaks appear to have been carved by a
mad or playful giant who then scattered them in seemingly improbable
combinations. And a number of the peaks, graceful pinnacles or grotesque
gargoyles, are surmounted by pine trees that have managed to root in the
granite.

Chinese travelers have added to Huang Shan's charm by imagining that some of the
rocks perched precariously atop the precipices resemble human or animal shapes.
On my ascent, with a delegation headed by Gov. Harry R. Hughes of Maryland, the
mists parted for a moment to reveal stone that the Chinese call ''Two Cats
Chasing a Mouse.'' Later, higher up, there appeared an old mandarin in full
court robes and high hat, watching a game of chess, the pieces spread across
other columns.

Near one summit climbers cross a narrow bridge of two stone slabs; the spot is
known as ''Now I Believe It,'' from an 18th-century traveler who is said to have
been skeptical of Huang Shan's reputation. From the bridge the mountain drops
more than 1,000 feet straight down, and there is a gap in the rocks that offers
a view of green-clad peaks emerging and disappearing in the fog.

For the foreign tourist a trip to Huang Shan has an added bonus: The route to
the mountain takes the visitor through a countryside of emerald-green rice
paddies, tea bushes dug into terraces climbing the hills and villages of old
mud-walled houses.

Huang Shan lies in the southern part of Anhui province, 650 miles south of
Peking and 250 miles southwest of Shanghai. There are no airports nearby, so
tourists frequently first take a seven-hour train ride from Shanghai to the
Yangtze River port of Wuhu, before the Communist victory in 1949 a treaty port
with a small colony of American missionaries. A large red brick missionary
hospital on a bluff still dominates the riverfront.

From Wuhu it is a six-hour drive south to Huang Shan through one of China's
least developed areas. Though this seems like an arduous journey there are few
other tourist itineraries that afford such an extensive and revealing glimpse of
the country's rural life.Virtually all farming is still done by the labor of
human beings and animals, from plowing the fields behind trundling water buffalo
to fertilizing the crops with buckets of night soil, to harvesting and
threshing. Of China's one billion people, 800 million still toil as peasants,
many of them in this way.

We spent our first night at Huang Shan in the Peach Brook Guesthouse, a small
two-story building perched on a steep slope amid pine trees and boiling mountain
streams. The guesthouse had comfortable rooms with twin beds, and small
bathrooms with primitive showers that yielded little water pressure or hot
water. When the clouds parted the next morning, the mountain loomed almost
perpendicular to us, with a delicate waterfall plunging down a thousand feet.

Climbers have their choice of tracks going up the front or back of the mountain.
The preferred method is ascending by one and descending by the other. For the
less adventuresome, a dirt road has been cut halfway up the route, leaving only
a steep three-hour climb up the stone steps to the North Sea Hotel on top.

The North Sea, which draws its name from what are thought of as the oceans of
clouds that inhabit the area, is a comfortable hostelry that can accommodate 300
guests, some of them in temporary barrackslike housing. The better rooms are
furnished with Western-style beds and desks, with lavatories and baths down the
hall.

Next door is a newly refurbished house, reserved for important visitors, that
was built in orange brick with an upturned tile roof; it was originally designed
for Madame Chiang Kai-shek.

The meals at the guesthouse were hardly standard mountain fare: dishes of tiny
savory Yangtze River shrimp, fried boneless pork, straw mushrooms and fresh
green beans, eel sauteed with fresh ginger, scallions and garlic, and a bowl of
rich turtle soup complete with large chunks of tortoise and pieces of shell - as
if proof were needed of its origin.

The bill for a night at the guesthouse was $10. The charge for breakfast, lunch
and dinner was about the same, though because we were part of an official
delegation the food was no doubt better than average.

All the food and supplies, the cement and wood used in building the structures,
and parts for a 200-foot television tower on the highest peak, have been carried
up the mountain on the backs of human beings.

On our way up and down we passed groups of porters, young men and women from
villages in the valley, straining under loads that appeared to weigh more than
they did. Seeing this tends to make amateur hikers feel guilty about everything
they eat or drink; it also roused the feeling that if a 15-year-old woman can
manage to make it to the top with 80 pounds of goods on her back, so can I.

A mandatory ritual for visitors is to observe sunrise over the clouds, with some
of the jagged peaks sticking through. The day we did it, a group of students
from Hong Kong serenaded us by singing ''Sunrise, Sunset'' from ''Fiddler on the
Roof.''
If You Go ... ...Prospective visitors may write to the China International
Travel Service in Hong Kong (China Travel Building, 77 Queen's Road Central) or
Peking (6 East Changan Avenue) for information on excursions to places such as
Huang Shan.

Pan American (212-973-4000) has weekly service to China each Wednesday from New
York and each Monday from San Francisco. Effective April 26 a third weekly
flight will leave New York each Saturday.  Travel time between New York and
Peking is 23 hours, with stops in Tokyo and Shanghai. One-way fares between New
York and Peking are $1,526 in first class, $1,050 in business class and $835 in
economy class.

CAAC (212-371-9898), the national airline of China, makes a weekly flight each
Thursday from New York. Its fares are the same as Pan Am's, which is its general
sales and ground-service agent in the United States.

Round-trip fares have not yet been offered; lower fares may be available through
group tour arrangements.  The best time to visit Huang Shan is early spring or
fall; summer tends to be hot and rainy, and there is some snow in winter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos map of China

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLAY'S THEME:LESBIANS WITH OUT APOLOGY

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 926 words


JANE CHAMBERS is a playwright who speaks for the cause of women in general and
lesbians in particular. Ask her which has been the greater obstacle in her life:
her gender or her sexuality, and she answers: ''That's easy - judgments are
based on seeing; one of the things about being gay that doesn't get in the way
is that, most of the time, you can't see it, but being a woman is something you
have to deal with every minute.''

Miss Chambers, a resident of Greenport, has been spending most of her evenings
of late at the Actors' Playhouse in Greenwich Village, where her play, ''Last
Summer at Bluefish Cove,'' which is billed as ''a lesbian love story,'' recently
opened.

The genesis for the fictitious Bluefish Cove is a place where Miss Chambers used
to rent a cottage near Orient Point; it is a summer haven for lesbians. A
heterosexual woman wanders in, naively. She has left her husband and is looking
for a retreat - and a friend. A lesbian, the only other ''single'' in a colony
of couples, invites her to a party. When the visitor arrives, eager to meet men,
the resort regulars are embarrassed by the intrusion of a ''straight'' stranger.
But she winds up having a love affair with the hostess, who is dying of cancer.

''The play came out of my feelings about a friend's death,'' Miss Chambers said.
Ironically, the most personally felt aspects of the play - the leading
character's death and the newcomer's identity crisis - were dismissed as
''lesbian soap opera'' by some critics.

By consensus, the critics responded most positively, least pejoratively to the
scenes of clever repartee. ''If the play turned into an entertaining evening of
theater, that's fine,'' Miss Chambers said. ''But it's silly to pretend I don't
recognize it's more than that. The testimonies I get afterward just
overwhelming.

''Gay people tell me they feel better about themselves, and straight people can
suddenly understand a son or a daughter who is gay. I didn't mean for the play
to do that, but I'm thrilled that it's helping people.''

''Growing up female in this country and wanting to be a playwright'' was perhaps
Miss Chambers's biggest frustration. ''When I went to college,'' she said,
''women were not allowed in the playwriting or directing courses unless there
were seats left over after the men signed up. It was insidiously clear that this
was not a field women were expected to excel in. We were steered into design and
acting.''

To this day, the reaction of producers to plays written by women, according to
Miss Chambers, goes something like this: '' 'But they're not about anything
important; they're only about women's issues' - as if having a baby is not as
important as Vietnam,'' she said.

''I've come out of many experiences, and I want to write about all of them,''
Miss Chambers said. ''I'm not a one-subject playwright, and there is no reason
to believe I will be categorized - at least I hope not.'' She mentioned some
dozen plays she has written, of which only two are about lesbians. Nor is she a
one-dimensional artist, having started out as a performer and now replacing an
ailing actress in her own play.

The question of whether film companies have expressed interest in ''Bluefish
Cove'' elicits from Miss Chambers the sort of agitated response that interview
subjects usually prefer to keep ''off the record.'' Here's one who insists it be
kept on.

''Two major studios felt that the play presented lesbianism too positively and
that the general audience is not ready for this,'' she said, ''They want us to
be unhappy and shoot ourselves.''

Which brings Miss Chambers to her mission of enlightening people about ''the gay
image'' in theater. As a member of the East End Gay Organization, which
originated on the Island and has, she maintains, ''the largest membership of any
gay organization in the United States,'' she often addresses just that issue -
on college campuses and as keynote speaker at club meetings and teachers'
associations.

''The Boys in the Band,'' the breakthrough play for male homosexuals, ''was
negative; the characters didn't like themselves,'' Miss Chambers declared.
''Maybe 'Bluefish Cove' '' - which has been referred to as ''The Girls in the
Sand'' - ''will open the door for lesbian characters,'' who, Miss Chambers says,
have been depicted as bizarre (''The Killing of Sister George'') or suicidal
(''The Children's Hour'') or simply nonexistent.

''None of the women in this play apologize for being lesbians,'' Miss Chambers
said. ''They accept it and go on to lead productive lives. I don't know why that
should be a threat to people.''

''Lesbians have been ignored,'' she added. ''People turn their heads the other
way as if to say, 'We know you exist, but we don't want to have to deal with
this, so let's all keep our mouths shut and we'll all pretend it's not there.'

''We are bonding together to gain a kind of strength that will enable us to move
out into society and be who we are, so everyone knows, and there'll be no
problem. As we become more comfortable with ourselves, the rest of the world
will become comfortable with us.  We've got a big battle to face in a way that
no other minority group does,'' she concluded, adding in considered
afterthought, ''except women.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jane Chambers and cast from play

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Theater;
MUSICAL ON CIVIL WAR: A GOOD CRY

BYLINE: By HASKEL FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 18, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


''SHENANDOAH,'' at An Evening Dinner Theater in 1978, was soggy with
sentimentality, the lyrics seemed simple to the point of idiocy and the music
was almost nonexistent. Now, having seen a new production at the same theater
and directed by Dallas Johann and starring Gary Marshal, one can see why it ran
for 1,050 performances on Broadway.

Based on the movie that starred James Stewart, ''Shenandoah'' is the story of
Charlie Anderson, a farmer in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia at the time of
the Civil War. Charlie is a widower and head of a family of six sons and one
daughter. Charlie is determined to keep his family out of the war, a decision
that ultimately costs him two sons and a daughter-in-law.

In its story construction, ''Shenandoah'' is designed to involve an audience
emotionally right down to the final curtain, which restores a missing son to
Charlie. It is also a show that could not help but find appeal in an America
still deeply scarred by Vietnam. However, in terms of musical history, it sits
more comfortably in the time of the big Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals, which
laced their emotional themes with dollops of thought. In other words, I cannot
say flatly that I found myself passionately involved with ''Shenandoah'' but I
did care enough to choke up several times.

Musically, ''Shenandoah'' is still basically a one-song show. That song is
''Freedom,'' performed with relish by James Tate as Gabriel, a slave child, and
Patricia Arnell as Anne, wife of one of Charlie's sons. This time around, I
found parts of Charlie's ''meditation'' stirring and ''The Only Home I Know,''
beautifully sung by John Danzer, a moving experience.

I doubt whether growing two years older since An Evening's 1978 production has
made me that much more sentimental; so I must credit the change in my reaction,
in part, to the staging of Dallas Johann.  Mr. Johann has chosen to believe the
book every step of the way and fill his stage with simple pictures and groupings
that often have the look of a primitive painting come to life.

A large share of the credit for the show's success must go to Gary Marshal as
Charlie Anderson. He comes to An Evening because of the recent fire at the M-G-M
Grand Hotel in Las Vegas, and he has a rich baritone voice that easily fills the
theater and dominates the stage. His Charlie Anderson is a totally creditable
character, a most believable patriarch of a large family. Even at odd moments
when I questioned the plotting or winced at a mawkish line, I always believed
Mr. Marshal.

I also like Patricia Arnell as Ann, and Faith Prince as the one Anderson
daughter, Jenny, a scrappy, aggressively romantic creature.  Noteworthy, too,
were Sean McGuirk as James, one of Charlie's sons; Erick Devine as a
warmongering minister, and J.J. Jepson as Sam, Jenny's shy suitor.

To sum up, I cannot list ''Shenandoah'' as one of my favorite musicals, but at
least I no longer dread seeing it. To me, the musical is too baldly constructed
and aimed for the heartstrings and tear ducts of an audience. Too much of its
score is second-rate rather than memorable or pleasurable. But thanks to Gary
Marshal and company, I can understand its success and remember it with some
affection. In fact, I can even recommend it to soft-hearted theatergoers who
like nothing more than a good cry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
''Shenandoah,'' music by Gary Geld, lyrics by Peter Udell, book by James Lee
Barrett, Mr. Udell and Phillip Rose. An Evening Dinner Theater, 11 Clearbrook
Road, Elmsford, N.Y. Through March 1. Box office 592-2222.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THIRD-WORLD PARLEY TO FACE DIVISIVE ISSUES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Feb. 8


Foreign ministers and senior officials from most of the 94 countries professing
nonalignment settled in today for a four-day conference during which they will
try to reconcile the movement's differences that have widened since the Soviet
military intervention in Afghanistan and the war between Iran and Iraq.

In the last four days, as the Indian hosts urged conciliation, advance teams
from more than 50 nations debated the language of a draft resolution that would
be acceptable to all members. They have thus far failed to achieve a consensus,
and these issues will confront the foreign ministers when the conference
officially opens tomorrow:

- Pakistan, acting on behalf of a the Islamic bloc, has proposed a resolution on
Afghanistan that reportedly does not mention the Soviet Union but calls for the
immediate withdrawal of foreign troops.  Afghanistan, with the support of the
Cubans and the Vietnamese, is trying to delete any reference to foreign
intervention.

- The Iranian delegation has said that it will ask that Iraq be suspended from
the movement. The issue is particularly sensitive, since at the nonaligned
conference in Havana in September 1979 Baghdad was chosen as the site for the
meeting next year of the movement's heads of state, and Iraq was also selected
to succeed Cuba as chairman. Iran has also said that it will call for the
expulsion of Egypt and Afghanistan from the movement.

- On Cambodia, the Cuban and Vietnamese blocs want the Hanoi-backed Heng Samrin
Government to be seated. Singapore, Malaysia and Pakistan have condemned that
Government and suggested an amendment deploring the continued presence of
Vietnamese forces in Cambodia. It now appears that the meeting here will repeat
the decision reached in Havana and not seat a Cambodian delegation.

The latest controversy involves a draft amendment submitted by India that says
the Indian Ocean should be made a ''zone of peace.'' The amendment specifically
condemns the use of Diego Garcia by the United States as a naval base. The
anti-Communist nations have attacked the language of the amendment, since there
is no mention of Soviet buildups on islands near Yemen and Ethiopia or of an
increase in the number of Soviet warships in the area.

There are also smaller points of contention, such as an amendment in which Malta
has attacked Libya for attempting to take possession of Malta's offshore oil
beds.

'Unity of the Movement'

In an interview on the eve of the opening session, Foreign Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao of India acknowledged that differences among the nonaligned
nations were apparent. He said, however, that he was confident that through ''a
balanced approach'' the delegates would maintain the ''unity of the movement.''

Some delegates saw such comments as the first of what they predicted would be
many appeals for harmony, and they said there would also probably be many
sentimental and nostalgic references to the formation of the movement 20 years
ago.

Kurt Waldheim, the Secretary General of the United Nations, will arrive in New
Delhi this week to join in commemorations of the first nonaligned summit meeting
in Belgrade, when 24 countries participated. Since then, the movement has grown
to the brink of amorphousness. There are countries like Afghanistan, which has
Soviet troops on its soil, and like Gabon, which has French troops. And there
are countries like the Philippines, a voting observer, which has United States
bases.

Puerto Rico Sends Delegation

In addition to 21 observer nations, there are several guest nations, most of
which are neutral but developed countries, such as Sweden, Portugal, Austria and
Finland. The list also includes a delegation representing the Socialist Party of
Puerto Rico.

As the membership has grown, the search for common ground has proved difficult,
but so far only one country, Burma, has quit what many delegates refer to as
''the nonaligned club.''

The meeting here is an example of the elasticity of the movement.  After the
Havana summit meeting, and after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan that
followed the Cuban meeting, many countries called for a special session on
Afghanistan.

Procedurally, a meeting between summit conferences would ordinarily be held in
the chairman's country, but in this case many members indicated that they would
not return to Havana because they found Cuba's status as a nonaligned country
suspect. In the search for consensus, however, the meeting was called. It was
not labeled as a session on Afghanistan, and India provided a generally more
acceptable venue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Foreign Minister Agha Shahi and P.V. Narasimba
Rao

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PROOF OF SOVIET-AIDED TERROR IS SCARCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


Officials with access to United States intelligence services say they have
little evidence to substantiate Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s
allegation that the Soviet Union trains, equips and provides funds for
international terrorists.

Soviet diplomats said that their Government had filed a note of protest to Mr.
Haig, denying that the Soviet Union engaged in terrorism and labeling Mr. Haig's
accusations a ''gross and malicious deception.''

Secretary Haig said on Jan. 28 in his first news conference that the Soviet
Union, as part of a ''conscious policy,'' undertook the ''training, funding and
equipping'' of international terrorists. He asserted that Moscow fostered,
supported and expanded that activity.

But officials in the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence
Agency and the State Department, asked to document those charges, said they were
unable to do so. ''There's just no real evidence for it,'' said an official.

Bloc Has Had Few Attacks

Mr. Haig also asserted that Soviet support for international terrorism was
''surprising'' because ''the Soviet Union itself has been victimized by it.''

Reports made public by the C.I.A. said that about 5 percent of the victims of
terrorism were nationals of the Soviet Union or its East European allies.
Relatively few terrorist attacks are known to have taken place inside the Soviet
bloc.

A recent study of 18 embassies under siege, written by Brian M.  Jenkins of the
Rand Corporation, a research institute, showed that no diplomatic posts of the
Soviet Union or its allies had been attacked and that only one embassy in a
Communist country had been invaded.  An anti-Castro Cuban kidnapped the Belgian
and French ambassadors at the French Embassy in Havana in 1973.

Specialists in terrorism outside the Government said it was important to
distingush between Soviet support for what the Communists call national
liberation movements, which the Soviet Union avowedly supports, and genuine
terrorism. The Soviet Union has admitted aiding its allies in Vietnam and the
Palestine Liberation Organization and has barely concealed its help to
Communists in Turkey.

Little Evidence Is Available

But those specialists said there was little evidence to show that the Soviet
Union had formed, trained or directed terrorist organizations such as the Red
Brigades in Italy or the Japanese Red Army. Those groups, the specialists said,
would most likely have appeared whether they had Russian help or not because
they were products of political forces within their own countries.

The specialists said, however, that some Russian help to terrorists might have
come from Libya, which has been the recipient of large shipments of Soviet arms
that later were sold or distributed to terrorists.

Some organizations that have carried out terrorist attacks, such as the P.L.O.,
have also sent people to the Soviet Union for training, the specialists said. A
Palestinian terrorist, Adnan Jaber, who is in prison in Israel, said last year
that he had been given six months training in the Soviet Union in weapons,
tactics and explosives.

He also said that similar training was conducted in Vietnam and North Korea,
both allies of the Soviet Union, and in China. The specialists in terrorism
reported that other training had been provided in Czechoslovakia for Italy's Red
Brigades and in North Korea for the Japanese Red Army.

Cuban Link Is Seen

Cuba is also thought to have trained terrorists for action in Latin America and
to have been a conduit through which weapons, either captured from the United
States in Vietnam or obtained from the Soviet Union, have been shipped to Latin
America.

The diplomatic note from the Soviet Union that was reflected in a dispatch
carried by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said that the Soviet Union had
supported measures to prevent air piracy. Another Tass dispatch said that the
Soviet Union had criticized the seizure of the Americans diplomats in Iran.

The note defended a Soviet right to assist national movements of independence.
The Tass dispatch said that Mr. Haig's reasoning would have made terrorists out
of George Washington and other early American leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WAR AND TAXES

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 88 words


To the Editor:

The new Administration has a wonderful idea about inflation and unemployment.
Our troubles, it tells us wisely, are the result of our attempt to conduct a war
in Vietnam without paying for it through taxation. The solution, therefore, is
to increase defense spending and to cut taxes by 30 percent.v.hy didn't we think
of that?  MARTIN PANZER New York, Feb. 4, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

By Red Smith;
The Mess At the Gate

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words


TWELVE horses were in the starting gate at Aqueduct when all of a sudden the
steed in the No. 11 stall broke through and stumbled. An instant later, all the
gates flew open and the whole field came out.  No. 11 slammed horses on both
sides of him. In a chain reaction, others interfered with others. Ultimately,
seven escaped from the tangle and completed the course in good enough order for
the stewards to regard them as starters. Ontrack and offtrack bets of $254,000
on the five others were refunded.

This happened in the sixth race Jan. 30, but it remains a topic of sometimes
bitter discussion in New York racing circles. The bitterness is largely a result
of timing. Not long before the foul-up at the gate, the New York Racing
Association turned the popular and experienced starter, George Cassidy, out to
pasture, and many who resented his being cashiered seized upon the tangled start
as evidence that retiring George was a costly mistake.

They blamed the mess on the relative inexperience of Cassidy's successor, Bob
Ewalt. This may be unfair.  It is a lamentable fact that the N.Y.R.A. has a
policy of getting rid of any employees who know anything about racing or
operating a race track. Among those who have departed in recent years are Pat
O'Brien, who had done everything from parking cars to presiding as steward; the
widely respected racing secretaries, Tommy Trotter and Kenny Noe; Good Sam
Kanchuger, the incomparable public relations director; Jimmy the Squirrel, man
of all work in the press box; the caterer, H.M. Stevens Inc.; Cassidy and Pat
Lynch, assistant to the president, who retired the other day.

In the circumstances, it is hardly surprising that Cassidy's departure was
regarded as a loss as great as the disappearance of Stevens's corned beef from
the clubhouse dining room. Witnesses to the mess at the starting gate quote from
the works of the philosopher-basketball coach, Al McGuire, who heard the crash
of a tray of dishes dropped by a busboy and observed that ''there's nothing so
expensive as cheap help.'' They jumped to the conclusion that when the No. 11
horse broke through, Ewalt got excited and hit the starter's button. It ain't
necessarily so.

Horses often break through while the gate is being loaded. Usually the starter
holds the field until the runaway is recaptured and all are in line again.

''This time,'' said James P. Heffernan, president of the N.Y.R.A., ''it was only
a split second after No. 11 broke through before all the gates opened. We ran a
test afterward, opened the 11 gate and all the other gates opened. However, we
have asked for a report from the United Starting Gate Corporation and we won't
say the gate malfunctioned until we get that.''

The messy start gave rise to an assortment of rumors - that the starter's salary
had been drastically reduced when Cassidy left; that the job was offered to four
other men before Ewalt accepted it, etc.

''Cassidy retired 10 years ago when he was 65,'' Heffernan said.  ''He stayed
on, drawing a pension from the N.Y.R.A. and a per diem salary from United. We
had McKenzie Management and Research survey our whole operation and the
starter's job was slotted in the $30,000-to-$50,000-a-year range. It's no longer
a per-diem arrangement.

''Five men applied for the job and it was offered to two senior members of
Cassidy's staff before Bob Ewalt. He is 38 years old, a Vietnam veteran, who has
been here as an assistant starter for 12 years and was in charge of schooling
horses from the gate at Aqueduct the last six or seven years. You know, besides
starting the races, the starter is responsible for schooling horses at the gate
and he supervises the work of a crew of 14.''

Heffernan said no horses or jockeys were hurt in the bad start but John Andrews,
an assistant starter who was trying to hold the 11 horse, suffered a broken
nose.

Resentment over the replacing of Cassidy was due in part to his wide personal
popularity and in part to his professional reputation.  For half a century, he
has taken millions of dollars worth of thoroughbreds into his care for a few
minutes seven, eight or nine times a day and sent the fields away in safe and
orderly starts. His work has always been distinguished for patience and good
humor.

At 75, he looks and acts much younger. He is an erect figure with broad
shoulders and flat waist, exquisitely tailored. His ruddy complexion gives him
an almost obscene appearance of health and he walks with a springy step, his
fine head of iron gray high.

George was, literally, born to the job of race starter. His father, Mars, owned
and trained thoroughbreds and trotters. The Iron Hill track in Maryland, now one
with Nineveh and Tyre, was having starter trouble in 1890 and Mars took over. In
1903, The Jockey Club asked him to move to New York, where he sent the fields
away until his death in 1929.

One day in 1927 at Saratoga, Mars was ill and George, his 22-yearold assistant,
was invited to fill in. In those days the jock who could get away links ahead of
his fellows was regarded as a master of his craft. George read the names of the
riders in the first race that day - Pony McAtee, Laverne Fator, Mack Garner,
Earl Sande and Jim Burke, five who could beat the barrier in their sleep.

Terrified, he closed his eyes as they walked toward the tape. (The starting gate
had not been invented.) George let them go, and the stewards couldn't believe
their binoculars. On the way to the post, the jocks had agreed that this Cassidy
kid was a nice guy who deserved a break. They sent themselves away in a perfect
start.

The armistice between riders and starter didn't endure, but by the time the
little burglars reverted to type, George was learning to hold his own. He seemed
always to have better luck than his eldest brother, Wendell. At one time all
three of Mars Cassidy's sons - Wendell, Marshall and George - were on their
father's crew. One day Wendell was assigned to stand behind a horse with a
bullwhip and urge the laggardly beast to start with the others.

The thong on the handle of the whip was around his wrist when Wendell fetched
the horse a stroke. The lash wrapped itself in a knot around the horse's tail.

''Wendell did the first furlong in a little better than 12,'' George used to say
proudly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George Cassidy

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. REPORT SAYS STATUS OF RIGHTS IMPROVED DURING '80

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


The State Department's annual survey of human rights reported today that
torture, disappearances, and inhuman treatment of prisoners had continued to
decline during the last year of the Carter Administration.

The report, prepared by the former Administration, said the improved situation
was particularly manifest in countries where human-rights violations came under
''intense international scrutiny and criticism.''

Under President Carter, United States officials frequently criticized foreign
governments for human-rights violations, and restrictions were placed by
Congress on United States military and economic aid to persistent violators.

President Reagan and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have said that the
new Administration would emphasize ''international terrorism'' as the most
serious human-rights violation.

Stronger Criticism of Moscow

The Soviet Union came under more serious criticism this year than in last year's
report, largely because of Moscow's intervention in Afghanistan and domestic
repression of dissidents.

''Soviet practices in Afghanistan which violated human rights have included the
reported use of lethal chemical weapons, 'trick' explosives, and indiscriminate
bombing and terrorizing of the Afghan population,'' the report said.

''Soviet authorities,'' it continued, ''have also stepped up repression at home,
in a crackdown on human rights activists as severe as any since the beginning of
the human rights movement over a decade ago.''

Vietnam was also singled out for persistent human rights violations, including
the existence of labor camps holding more than 50,000 political prisoners, and
the ''at times coerced departure of nearly 1 million Vietnamese'' over the last
five years.

The report said human rights were also adversely affected in Vietnam by
''increased conscription and the worsening of social and economic conditions''
as a consequence of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.

The publication of this year's report, which detailed conditions in 153 nations,
by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Committee on Foreign
Affairs was delayed for a week at the request of Mr. Haig to avoid public
criticism of South Korea during the visit here last week of President Chun Doo
Hwan.

On South Korea, the report said that ''after some improvement in the earlier
part of the year, the observance of civil and political rights in 1980 was
marked by deterioration.''

Under martial law declared on May 17, the report said that a sweeping
''purification'' of society launched by the Government had ''sharply restricted
the rights of politicians, journalists, scholars and others.''

The report said that the trial of Kim Dae Jung, South Korea's leading opposition
figure, whose death sentence has been commuted under international pressure by
President Chun, was conducted in a manner that ''seriously abridged the right to
effective counsel.''

Concern Over Latin America

In Latin America, where the Carter Administration's spotlight on human-rights
violations provoked the resentment of military rulers, this year's report showed
particular concern over the political violence in El Salvador and Guatemala, and
repression by the military in Bolivia after it overthrew a civilian Government.

El Salvador's military-backed Government has been unable to subdue a guerrilla
movement led by ''armed leftists who are responsible for a large number of
kidnappings for ransom and murder of Government officials, diplomats and
landowners'' or to control the ''abuses of death squads and other rightist
terrorist groups which include present or retired members of the military,''
said the report.

''Alarmed by reforms which attack the very basis of their domination, the armed
extreme right has declared its intention to bring down the Government and
reestablish the old order through violence perpetrated by its supporters, some
of whom are members of the security forces,'' the report said.

Bolivian Military Criticized

Bolivia's military regime, which seized power last July, ''ended the progress
that had been made in restoring constitutional democracy and destroyed the
favorable human rights climate'' that developed after an earlier military regime
left power in 1977, the report said.

In contrast, the report's summaries on Argentina and Chile, which had come under
heavy fire in previous reports, recorded improved human-rights situations, with
a reduction of disappearances of persons after arrest by security forces. In
Argentina, the report said there had been 28 cases of disappearances reported in
1980, compared with over 6,000 in the period from 1976 to 1979.

However, as in many other countries under permanent military rule by decree, the
report said that Argentina and Chile represented a general lack of progress
during 1980 ''toward respect for political and civil freedoms in the world,''
despite a decline in the most violent repression of human rights.

South Africa's system of separate racial development received extensive analysis
in the report, as well as South Africa's administration of the territory of
South-West Africa, known as Namibia.

Curbs on Press Reported

''Security laws were frequently used during 1980 to detain and convict persons
involved in school boycotts, labor strikes, and the activities of black
political organizations,'' said the report, which found that South African press
reporting on internal security matters and black protest was more restricted
than previously.

Liberia, where a military uprising led by non-commissioned officers overthrew
and killed President William Tolbert in April, 1980, was treated gently in the
report.

While noting the execution after ''hasty trials'' of 13 former high officials,
the report said the ''new Government came in with the expressed intention of
raising the standard of living of the people and ending corruption.''

The section on ''Israel and the Occupied Territories'' did not vary in any
significant way this year from earlier reports. It said that Arabs under Israel
rule ''tend to feel powerless and largely alienated'' but it said the Arab
minority within Israel has ''equal rights under the law'' and is free of
human-rights violations.

In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, which are under military rule, the
report noted that the establishment of 120 non-military settlements ''has
adversely affected the livelihood of some Arab residents'' particularly where
land and water rights have been transferred to the Jewish settlers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Afghan rebels

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Defense Asks Judge to Void Conviction

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 221 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 9


Defense lawyers, asserting that jurors ignored evidence that Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood of the Marines was mentally ill, asked a military judge today to throw
out their client's conviction for collaborating with the enemy in Vietnam.

The judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, recessed the hearing until 9 A.M.  tomorrow to
give prosecutors time to prepare a response to the defense motion. Private
Garwood was convicted last Thursday by a jury of five Marine officers on charges
of collaborating with the enemy in two of the 14 years he spent as a prisoner of
war in Vietnam. He was found not guilty of maltreatment but guilty of the lesser
charge of assaulting a fellow prisoner.

The panel is to hear more evidence this week before sentencing Private Garwood,
who could be given a life term.  His chief counsel, John Lowe, argued that the
Government bore the burden of proving Private Garwood was mentally capable of
distinguishing between right and wrong and said that half a dozen psychiatrists
who testified in the 12-week court-martial never presented any evidence to
refute defense claims that the 34-year-old Indiana native was driven insane by
torture and did not know his actions as a prisoner of war were wrong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A WEEK TO REMEMBER OUR VIETNAM VETERANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 271 words


To the Editor:

During the past few days, we, as a nation, made a great fuss over our returned
hostages. Thanks to the news media, they have been honored and have served as a
focus for our affection and respect.

In the not-so-distant past, hundreds of thousands of Americans were asked to
serve their country in Vietnam, and they served, even though the news media did
its powerful best to make them feel unimportant because they were taking part in
an unpopular war.

I believe that the news media bear a heavy responsibility in this situation. The
hurt those Americans suffered when they returned home was heightened by the
neglect they received at the hands of the media.

I would submit, however, that the media are in a position to do something about
that. If those who served in Vietnam knew that millions in this country care
about them, they will understand that the earlier silence did not reflect an
uncaring attitude; it meant merely that the way to express that concern was not
available.

Here is my suggestion: Let us designate the week of Washington's birthday, Feb.
16 through 20, as ''Remember Vietnam Veterans Week.'' With the help of the news
media, let us ask all those who want to participate to drive their cars with
their lights on, all day long.  When a Vietnam veteran sees a car with lights
shining, he will know that someone is saying, ''I care about you and I
appreciate what you have done for me.'' It will help those of us who care to
express that feeling.

It may not have the charm of a yellow ribbon, but perhaps we can dispel some
darkness.
JOHN B. HEWETT, Pennsburg, Pa., Feb. 2, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 HOSTAGES PASSED TIME WRITING, BUT ONLY ONE ACCOUNT EMERGED INTACT

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words


At least three of the former hostages devoted part of their 444 days in
captivity to writing about their plight, but apparently only one brought out an
account intact.

Sgt. Rodney V. Sickmann, a Marine security guard, emerged with a diary of about
200,000 words, running from Feb. 3, 1980, until three days before his release.
John E. Graves, a public affairs officer at the embassy, prepared a manuscript
in English of 70,000 to 80,000 words, and secretly kept an outline of his work,
in French, which he smuggled out in the waistband of his trousers and in his
underwear, according to Carl Brandt, Mr. Graves's literary agent.

Both Sergeant Sickmann and Mr. Graves were writing with the knowledge of their
captors. ''John's suspicion is that they were given paper and encouraged to
write because it would keep them quiet,'' said Mr. Brandt.

Col. Thomas E. Schaefer, an Air Force attache held in solitary confinement for
part of the 14 months, devised a code of pin pricks in the pages of his Bible to
keep his diary. The 50-year-old Vietnam veteran said that the pricks were so
small that even he could barely see them.

'Lied to Us Too Many Times'

As appears to have been the case with most of the hostages, Colonel Schaefer was
told to pack his belongings for the trip home, but his bundle was kept by his
captors.

Sergeant Sickmann said in an interview that ''the students lied to us too many
times.'' He also packed his Bible, toothbrush and a few other belongings in a
pillowcase, which he never saw again, but put his diary in a pocket of his
Marine camouflage pants. He carried out his roommates' family photos and other
belongings that way, too.

Mr. Graves's account, which he has been busy recreating over the last three
weeks and which he hopes to have published as a book, is being serialized by
Stern, a West German magazine. In the first installment, which appeared Feb. 5,
the 53-year-old diplomat recounts the fall of the embassy and conversations with
his captors.

According to his account, one militant told him: ''We aren't interested in the
Shah. That was just a curtain. The Shah is finished. We just needed him as a
banner, a slogan to get the crowds going.''

According to Mr. Graves, the militants told him that the purpose of the seizure
was to strengthen the Iranian revolution and export it to the rest of the
Islamic word, rally poor people around the world to the idea of revolution and
expose American ''manipulation'' in the emerging nations of the third world.

Discussed Politics With Captors

''We only planned to stay for three days,'' Mr. Graves quoted one militant as
saying. The militant added, in a reference to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, ''If
the Imam had not publicly supported us by then we would have gone home.''

Sergeant Sickmann's diary may also become a book. Excerpts are being syndicated
by Special Features, an affiliate of The New York Times Syndication Sales
Corporation.

The Sickmann diary also mentions ''discussions'' on politics with his captors,
but the 23-year-old marine adds that the students gave up in frustration because
they were unable to convince him that the United States had done any wrong.

The diary, which Sergeant Sickmann said was not written with publication in
mind, traces his experience and feelings day by day, first believing that
release was imminent and gradually coming to doubt that the crisis would ever
end. Sergeant Sickmann displays some doubt at the beginning of the diary that
the liberty of the deposed Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi is worth the hostages'
suffering but later he stiffens and says he hopes the United States will not
give in and will ''send in the B-52's.''

Weeks Spent Indoors

The diary makes clear that only after great delays, and often by chance, did the
hostages become aware of such crucial events as the Shah's departure from the
United States, the Shah's death, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the
failed rescue mission, the release of Richard I. Queen for health reasons and
the war between Iran and Iraq. It is also clear that the hostages did not know
they were the center of intense interest in the United States.

The diary also focuses on his treatment, referring often to long stretches in
windowless rooms and periods of weeks without being allowed outdoors. Another
cruelty, perhaps not intentional, was the frequent teasing of the hostages with
the idea that release was near. However, the diary makes clear that while the
hostages' diet and clothing were often neglected, instances of deliberate
physical abuse were rare after the beginning. Sergeant Sickmann also notes that
his relationship with the guards was sometimes friendly.

Sergeant Sickmann and his roommates gave the guards nicknames, including Santa
Claus, who brought them clothing, playing cards, soap, and other items they
requested; Mailman, who brought the mail; English Student, who was learning
English; Butler; Guardchief, and others.

In the last few days of captivity, Sergeant Sickmann said in an interview after
his return, a familiar pattern was repeated: ''Whenever they thought something
was up, treatment would get really good.''

Sergeant Sickmann was told by different militants in the last three days that he
would be going home in the near future, that week and on the 19th. When the
latter prediction was not fulfilled, he and his roommates decided not to get
their hopes up.

Consequently, when two guards entered the room to tell the hostages that they
were leaving, Sergeant Sickmann and his roommates responded with obscenities and
went back to their bridge game.

He did not think he was going home, he said, until he walked up the steps of the
plane and saw ''the Algerian doctors we had seen before, and the pretty faces of
the Algerian stewardesses.''

''It was more than I could believe,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS, ETC.;
AT DINNER PARTIES, THE DIVERSITY OF OPINION REMAINS A CONSTANT

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


WHEN it comes to the cosmic subjects discussed at dinner parties - the economy,
strategic arms negotiations, human rights, interest rates, the stock market -
differences in opinion aren't usually a matter of gender. There are men and
women conservatives, men and women liberals, men and women optimists and men and
women pessimists. There are also both men and women who don't really know what
they're talking about but enjoy listening to their own voices.

It's quite a different matter when the topics are on a more human scale, are
those that individuals can more easily relate to and that, for one reason or
another, touch on the emotions. Just bring up the Jean Harris trial, or Nancy
Reagan's clothes, as someone is bound to do at current dinner parties, and the
polarization starts as the fur begins to fly. It isn't always men on one side
and women on the other, but the chances of that happening rise dramatically.

Almost always, the criticism of Mrs. Reagan's clothes and style comes from
women. Many feminists, already unhappy over the First Lady's opposition to the
equal rights amendment, consider her obvious interest in, and enjoyment of,
fashion, an affirmation of superficiality. Liberals, who go along with freedom
of interest, even in fashion, draw the line at the cost. Social activists are
upset that redecorating has a seemingly higher priority than worthy causes on
the First Lady's immediate agenda, that the announcement of Mrs.  Reagan's
continued interest in foster grandparents came several weeks into the new
Administration.

There are, however, two groups of women, admittedly in the minority, who refrain
from criticism. The first, which often comes to her defense, consists of women
who also enjoy fashion, beautiful homes and parties; in short, women who live
lives very much like that of the pre-White House Mrs. Reagan.

The second group doesn't rush to her defense, but its members don't join the
fray. They are among the very few who admit that their opinion would probably be
colored by envy.

''Her problem is that she not only is the First Lady, but she seems to have
everything,'' said one woman. ''She's attractive, affluent, sophisticated,
happily married and blessed with loyal friends. I have to admit I get the
occasional twinge of envy, and that my reaction is often influenced by that. It
just doesn't seem fair; it would be easier to relate to her if everything
weren't so perfect.''

Men are more apt to defend Mrs. Reagan, on both esthetic and economic grounds.
Mrs. Reagan is a pretty woman who dresses well and is pleasant to look at, and
why not? That, in a small nutshell, is frequently the male position. The men,
more interested in economics than in esthetics, invariably bring up the number
of people employed in making dresses, decorating houses and providing party
services.  The catch line is constant - ''the money is circulating, it's good
for the economy.''

The trial of Jean S. Harris, who is accused of the murder of Dr.  Herman
Tarnower, evokes more passionate responses on either side, particularly from the
middle-aged, and the battle lines of gender are more distinctly drawn. Women,
while deploring the shooting, no matter how it happened, are inclined to be
influenced more than men by the Harris-Tarnower relationship.

There are two other hot topics of conversation at dinner tables these evenings.
The former hostages are one, and the discussion in this area includes whether
they should be described as heroes (although no one denigrates their behavior
during their captivity), whether the country should now be giving second
thoughts to the men who returned from Vietnam, and whether the agreement with
Iran should be honored in its entirety. This is at least a two-course
discussion, appetizer and entree, or entree and dessert, and there are as many
opinions as there are former hostages.

There is no diversity of opinion when it comes to real estate, which remains a
conversational imperative. There are merely the smug, who bought a house or
apartment when such things were still possible, and the miserable, who didn't.
But both the smug and the miserable agree on one thing - prices are crazy, wild
and incredible, and they've gone as far as they can go. For this week, anyway.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


By John Leonard
IDLE HANDS. By William O'Rourke. 435 pages. Delacorte. $12.95.

''IDLE HANDS'' purports to be the ''sexual memoirs'' of a young man from 1965,
when he is a 20-year-old virgin, until the Bicentennial, when he is an exhausted
31. Andy Orr - the name sounds like an undiscovered manuscript by Kierkegaard -
describes himself as short, average, lower-middle-class, Midwestern, lacking
''drama'' or ''glamour,'' possessed of ''the type of shyness I often mistake for
good taste,'' incapable of holding a grudge or of hitting ''anyone who is weaker
than I am,'' ''civilized'' although ''anti-intellectual,'' handicapped by his
''sincerity'' and very deprived.

Andy's problem, he thinks, is that he wants women and women don't want him, even
though he spends half of his time listening to them talk. We follow him around -
from Missouri to New Mexico to Cape Cod to New York City and back again - for
more than 400 pages, hoping to be dazzled into sentience, as if he were a Woody
Allen inside of whom a Jerzy Kosinski character is trying desperately to escape,
complete with a polo pony, a camera and a pair of skis.

High Level of Energy

In the course of his travels, he beds 15-year-olds, divorcees, television
journalists, prelaw students, clinical psychologists, magazine art directors,
playwrights and old friends. It is difficult to imagine how he finds the time or
summons the energy, since he is simultaneously toiling in a fish factory,
constructing Fiberglas stage sets, standing in line for unemployment
compensation, going to the movies and writing a couple of plays himself, one of
which is produced Off Broadway and sounds dreadful.

Each of his sexual encounters is recalled in excruciating detail, with the humor
held to a minimum as we wade through the flora and fauna and sink in the swamp
gas, as if Jean-Jacques Rousseau had joined Frank Harris in a search for Henry
Miller and found themselves trapped in a novel by an Upper West Side feminist.
Andy, indeed, is hard on feminists. It is his firm conviction that women enjoy
refusal. ''All empirical evidence,'' he tells us, ''keeps affirming the fact
that women consent: perhaps it is changed for the young going through puberty
now, but I was always in a state of wanting and women were in the position of
denying.''

By the time he tells us this, even Andy has to admit that ''I had spilled enough
sperm to fertilize every woman in the state of Rhode Island.'' He must have some
other problem.

In between the sexual encounters, which tend to emphasize fellatio, Andy forms
opinions. Andy has more opinions than a book reviewer. I wish these opinions had
been somehow amalgamated into the sexual encounters -show, please, do not tell -
and that they were as interesting as the opinions of, say, Stendhal.
Nevertheless, Andy sermonizes on Kansas, Vietnam, homosexuality, the women's
movement, memory, abortion, the postwar baby boom, the olfactory organ and
pantyhose (''sausage casing'').

Some of this sermonizing, and several of the sexual encounters, partake of
wisdom and hilarity. William O'Rourke, after all, is a shrewd and witty writer,
the author of one excellent nonfiction book, ''The Harrisburg 7 and the New
Catholic Left,'' and one previous novel, ''The Meekness of Isaac,'' which was
likeable and chilling at the same time. He can leap from poetry to derision in a
single paragraph. Cape Cod, he says, ''is rich in highly-trained observers,''
and so is ''Idle Hands.''

For instance: ''Women do elect object status when they first apply makeup.''
And: ''Monica saw more doctors yearly than many underdeveloped countries have.''
And: ''Men always boil more water than they need. Women boil just the right
amount.'' Moreover, his accounts of real work -working with one's hands - are
true and stinging. And he can be effortlessly funny, as in the screenplay he
proposes for a television series called ''The Adjustors,'' about a team of
insurance investigators dealing with a wayward bulldozer.

Other Thoughts

On the other hand we are asked to contemplate such thoughts as these: ''Regret
is an odd emotion, because it comes only upon reflection. Regret lacks
immediacy, and so its power seldom influences events when it could do some
good.'' This is making the obvious less obscure. Too many of the sex scenes read
like bad Philip Roth, and too many of the women involved - of every ethnic
group, as if Andy's bedroom were a foxhole in an old World War II movie - seem
lists of ingredients full of smart chit-chat instead of people with more than
one dimension.

Andy ultimately asks himself, after all these women, ''Whom had I influenced,
changed, enlarged? One calculation I hestiated to total.'' Yes, there doesn't
seem to be a total bar on his adding machine. And what, after 11 years of
rabbit-running, has he learned?  ''I've certainly learned that women are not
drawn by the fact that a man desires them.'' In other words, he has learned
nothing.

I take this to be Mr. O'Rourke's point. Andy is the ultimate tourist, passing
through the 1960's and 1970's with desire as his credit card, oddly detached
from serious politics and the threat of love, almost parasitic. In which case,
''Idle Hands'' is a morality tale. I certainly hope so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Widow of Ex-Marine Urges Mental Help for Garwood

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 156 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 11


A woman who says she loves Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps today
told a military jury that the convicted collaborator was ''a quiet, gentle
person'' who needed psychiatric help and should not be sentenced to prison.

Donna Long, widow of a former marine, testified in the first day of the
sentencing phase of Private Garwood's court-martial. The same panel of five
Marine officers that convicted him last week of collaboration with the enemy in
Vietnam and assaulting a fellow prisoner of war will set the sentence.

Mrs. Long described a relationship that began when she and her late husband,
Dale, befriended Private Garwood upon his return from Vietnam and that grew into
love after her husband's death 16 months ago in a traffic accident.

She told the jury that she wanted Private Garwood to have the psychiatric
treatment ''he should have had years ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. to Take 2,000 Vietnamese

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 40 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Feb. 11


About 2,800 Vietnamese refugees from Malaysia will be resettled in third
countries this month, a United States spokesman announced today. He said 2,000
would go to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 370 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 1981 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'AMERICAN POP' GROWN-UP ANIMATION

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 838 words


RALPH BAKSHI (''Fritz the Cat,'' ''Heavy Traffic,'' ''Coonskin'' and ''The Lord
of the Rings'') continues to push animation techniques to the outer limits more
frequently explored by film makers who call themselves avant-garde, but who
seldom are. His newest film, ''American Pop,'' is a dazzling display of talent,
nerve, ideas (old and new), passion and a marvelously free sensibility. The man
may well be a genius, though that sort of pronouncement will have to wait on
time.

''American Pop,'' which opens today at the Cinema 2 and Loews New York Twin
Theaters, is a Pop vision of American life since the turn of the century, seen
in the stories of four generations of one family of would-be American
musicmakers. Though the film is animated, it makes free use also of old
newsreels, still photographs and pencil sketches, as well as work in the manner
of dozens of recognizable artists from George Grosz and Reginald Hopper to Andy
Warhol, with passing references to Edward Hopper, Rockwell Kent and Norman
Rockwell, among others.

These references are not always successful, but the impulse to embrace so many
things so breathlessly creates an excitement within the film that is hard to
resist.

''American Pop'' looks like no other animated film ever made, except for Mr.
Bakshi's earlier works, nor does it sound like any other. It's rough and violent
and occasionally very moving, as well as cruelly funny. It begins with the story
of Zalmie, a Russian Jewish boy who, following a pogrom, comes to America with
his widowed mother in 1900. Young Zalmie wants desperately to succeed and seeks
fame and fortune in burlesque, where he meets and eventually marries a stripper
who can sing.

Zalmie's son, Benny, is a middling-to-good pianist and songwriter, whose music
reflects the 30's and 40's. Benny, before going overseas in World War II,
marries the daughter of a Mafia chief and leaves, on his death, a disenchanted
son. This boy, Tony, raised in suburban splendor on Long Island, breaks with the
family to become, first, a beat poet and then songwriter-in-residence to a Janis
Joplin kind of star of the 60's. When Tony dies, a junkie and a bum, the line
should stop there, but he, too, leaves an heir who, at long last, climbs to the
top as a punk-rock star.

I hope no one thinks I'm spoiling ''American Pop'' by giving the plot away. The
story is simply the device that gives Mr. Bakshi and his excellent screenwriter,
Ronni Kern, the excuse to explore approximately 80 years of life in America in
terms of the music it listened to. The soundtrack is dense with popular music
that need not be catalogued here. Though there were times when I wasn't at all
sure that the particular music being heard belonged to a particular period, the
music is terrifically effective - invigorating, ironic and not for a minute
sentimental. If anything, ''American Pop'' tries too hard to avoid a kind of
sentiment that the look of the picture occasionally seems to ask for.

I'm amazed at the success that Mr. Bakshi has in turning animated characters
into figures of real feelings. There's a quite extraordinary sequence in which
Tony, the beat poet, meets and seduces a small-town Kansas girl on the edge of a
cornfield. The film's penultimate sequence, about Tony, now a junkie-bum, and
his illegitimate son, Pete, is grimly funny, sad and scary.

Mr. Bakshi also makes witty use of the cliches of the American musical-film
genre, both by putting them into the film straight and by turning them inside
out. There were times when ''American Pop'' reminded me of ''Alexander's Ragtime
Band,'' one of those Darryl F. Zanuck-20th Century-Fox musicals of the 40's, but
one that had somehow been wickedly tampered with.

Mr. Bakshi tries to cover a lot of ground. How many other films have you seen
recently that managed to include World Wars I and II, the Korean War, Vietnam,
the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire, Kent State, Frank Sinatra, Eva Tanguay,
the Sex Pistols, Allen Ginsberg, Benny Goodman and the Prohibition gang wars
(though not necessarily in that order)?

His is a talent that won't be stopped. Vincent Canby

4 Generations in Music

AMERICAN POP, directed by Ralph Bakshi; written by Ronni Kern; animators:
Lillian Evans, Carl Bell, Craig Armstrong, Debbie Hayes, Steve Gordon, Brenda
Banks, Jesus Cortes, James A. Davis, Robert Laduca, Chrystal Russell, George
Scribner, Paul Smith, Tom Tataranowicz and Robert Carr Xenia; edited by David
Ramirez; music by Lee Holdridge; produced by Mr. Bakshi and Martin Ransohoff;
released by Columbia Pictures. At the Cinerama 2, Broadway and West 47th Street;
New York Twin I, Second Avenue and 66th Street, and other theaters. Running
time: 95 minutes. This film is rated R.

FEATURED VOICES:

Tony/Pete . . . . . Ron Thompson
Frankie . . . . . Marya Small
Louie . . . . . Jerry Holland
Bella . . . . . Lisa Jane Persky
Zalmie . . . . . Jeffrey Lippa
Eva Tanguay . . . . . Roz Kelly
Crisco . . . . . Frank De Kova
Benny . . . . . Richard Singer
Hannele . . . . . Elsa Raven
Palumbo . . . . . Ben Frommer


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo of a frame from American Pop

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
REAGAN AND THE LATINS;
Foreign Policy Third in a series of occasional articles on international
problems facing the Reagan Administration.

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1525 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 8


After years of taking Latin America for granted, the United States is finding
that much of the region no longer shares its view of the world or yearns for a
return to the days of American domination.

Even the Reagan Administration's fears of Cuban expansionism in Central America
have found little echo among key countries of the hemisphere, which are now more
concerned with problems of their own economic development.

Latin America has changed dramatically since the 1960's, when it accepted
Washington's political leadership much more readily. Today it puts its own
interests before those of the United States.

Brazil, Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela, in particular, have emerged as regional
powers with their own spheres of influence, as quick to clash with Washington
over economic issues as they are to defend their new political prestige.

Social Structures Challenged

Even in the tiny, dependent countries of Central America, leftists and liberals
have begun challenging near-feudal social structures long sustained by the
United States. Throughout the Caribbean basin, Washington is now competing for
influence not only with Cuba, but also with Mexico, Venezuela and the European
Social Democratic and Christian Democratic movements.

In El Salvador, for example, where Marxist guerrillas and their non-Marxist
allies opened an unsuccessful bid for power last month, Washington's policy of
bolstering the country's besieged junta with military aid has been publicly
endorsed only by Costa Rica and Venezueala and has been sharply criticized by
Mexico's President, Jose Lopez Portillo.

President Reagan's policy toward Latin America as a whole is still being
prepared, but already there is evidence that he has assigned the region a new
strategic importance. In the words of one senior Administration official, he
would like ''to tie the Americas together in a bastion of freedom.''

Even before recent American charges that Cuba and Nicaragua were arming
Salvadoran guerrillas, a report prepared for the Washingtonbased Council for
Inter-American Security echoed conservative fears of Soviet expansion in the
continent. Among its authors was Roger W. Fontaine, who recently joined the
staff of President Reagan's national security adviser, Richard V. Allen.

'Americas Under Attack'

''The Americas are under attack,'' the report warned. ''Latin America, the
traditional alliance partner of the United States, is being penetrated by Soviet
power. The Caribbean rim and basin are spotted with Soviet surrogates and ringed
with socialist states''.

Yet, in the view of many Latin American officials, any effort to draw the
continent into a tighter ideological alliance with Washington would be strongly
resisted by the region's leading powers, which now seem reluctant to become
embroiled in the broader struggle between the United States and the Soviet
Union.

These officials, whose views are shared by many American experts on the region,
also argue that any hemispheric policy shaped by United States alarm at the 1979
Nicaraguan revolution and rising insurgency in El Salvador and Guatemala and
dedicated largely to containing Cuban influence in the area would offer little
to a continent now characterized by its economic and political diversity.

''Washington cannot have a single-issue policy toward such a heterogeneous
region,'' a Mexican official said. ''It cannot even have the same policy toward,
say, Mexico and Brazil because they are so different.''

Fear of Cuba Is Overcome

Even about Cuba there is no longer a consensus. In the early 1960's, fearing the
''export'' of leftist revolution, all of Latin America except Mexico followed
Washington's lead in breaking off dipomatic and economic relations with Cuba.
Today, 14 governments in the region have embassies in Havana.

Many governments argue that, even in Central America, where civilian and
military conservatives do indeed blame Cuba for the current unrest, deep poverty
and political repression at home, rather than Communist agitation from abroad,
are responsible.

The changing attitude of Latin America toward Cuba has reduced its willingness
to accept United States intervention in the area in the name of combating Cuban
infiltration. ''These are different times,'' a Panamanian official said. ''This
is not 1965.''

In 1965, the Organization of American States was happy to endorse the occupation
of the Dominican Republic by the United States Marines. But 14 years later, the
O.A.S. refused to dispatch an inter-American peace force to Nicaragua, even
after Washington cited alleged Cuban involvement with the Sandinist guerrillas.

Oil Is a Lever of Power

Nowhere is the new political complexity of Latin America more vividly
illustrated than in the Caribbean basin. Mexico and Venezuela have begun to use
their oil wealth - they are jointly providing 30 percent credit for oil imports
by nine tiny countries in the region - to assert their political influence,
while the Social Democratic and Christian Democratic movements have filled the
vacuum created by both Cuban and United States neglect of the area in the
1970's.

Havana began to withdraw from the Caribbean basin after a number of unsuccessful
efforts to ''export'' revolution to Latin America culminated in the death of Che
Guevara in Bolivia in 1967. Having apparently lost faith in the region's
revolutionary potential, Fidel Castro eventually turned to aiding Marxist
revolutionary movements in Africa.

The United States, on the other hand, distracted in the mid-1960's by the war in
Vietnam, gradually abandoned its effort to promote social reform in Latin
America through the Alliance for Progress and chose to support the military
dictatorships that began replacing democracies.

As both Cuba and the United States now renew their interest in the region, they
have found that their influence has waned.  Although the Castro regime is still
popular among Latin American leftists, if only for surviving two decades of
United States hostility, Cuba is no longer held up as the ideal revolutionary
model, largely because of its continued dependence on Moscow. Many Marxists are
strongly critical of the rigidity of Cuban society, while Nicaragua's Sandinists
seem intent on avoiding both its economic and political mistakes.

U.S. Alienates Many Latins

The unexpected result of President Carter's human rights policy, on the other
hand, was to deepen distrust between Washington and Latin America and alienate
both liberals and conservatives throughout the hemisphere. And it demonstrated,
more than ever, the limits of United States power in the region today.

In some countries, the policy had a positive effect. Without pressure from the
Carter Administration, the civilian presidents of Peru, Ecuador, Panama and the
Dominican Republic might not be in office today. Activist sectors of the Roman
Catholic Church also felt safer under the distant protection of Washington.

''The real problem was that the human rights policy was not a policy but an
attitude,'' a United States diplomat in the area said.  ''It was a fine attitude
without an accompanying strategy. And it created expectations among people who,
when frustrated, became radicalized.''

In Central America, the policy has undermined pro-American regimes and left Mr.
Reagan facing revolutionay forces that Washington can no longer control. And
having condoned the ouster of the Somoza regime in Nicaragua in the name of
human rights, Mr. Carter himself left office supporting El Salvador's junta, one
of the more repressive regimes in Latin America, in the name of preventing
''another Nicaragua.''

The military Governments of Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay, however, all
learned to defy Washington rather than pay heed to a human rights policy that
they considered blatant interference in their domestic affairs.

Victory Cheers for Reagan

The loud cheers with which the region's military regimes welcomed Mr. Reagan's
victory last November echoed their deep hostility toward the Carter
Administration. Yet, in the main, they were toasting an end to United States
intervention rather than submitting themselves to Mr. Reagan's leadership.

But most governments are now warily awaiting signs as to how their own relations
with Washington are to be affected by the change of administration, not only
politically, but also on a broad range of complex economic issues.

Such medium-sized countries as Peru, Colombia, Chile and even Venezuela expect
no major differences. But Mr. Reagan has indicated that he will stress the
improvement of ties with Mexico, Brazil and Argentina and it is here that
potential problems exist.

The specifics of United States relations with each of these emerging powers are
very different, yet the three have much in common: they are all ''newly
industrializing countries'' looking to diversify their trading partners, they
have assumed a right to influence political developments among their neighbors,
they are deeply nationalistic and proud of their new independence and they are
eager to stand on the world stage outside the shadow of the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Central and South America

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AND YES I SAID YES I WILL YES;
by Herbert Stein

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words


Watching the other night on the McNeil-Lehrer show - that interminable
drip-drip-drip of talk on the barely-conscious consciousness that is the penance
we pay for watching television at all - Edwin Meese 3d and James Baker 3d,
outwardly so different, the one so cherubic and the other so Gary Cooperish, but
nevertheless so nearly identical, so interchangeable in words and thoughts,
carried my mind back through many Administrations, and many freshman White House
officials appearing on television talk shows in their charming innocence and
confidence that they knew what they were doing and that all within their purview
was in order, like newly engaged coal stokers on a tramp steamer, decked out in
dress whites and assuring all that everything was neat and clean below, which
could perhaps be forgiven because they have not yet been there, or if they have
been there nonetheless feel that there is about to be a new beginning, like the
schoolboy starting a new term, with newly sharpened pencils and an unmarked
notebook, who imagines himself capable of everything but knows in the back of
his mind that before the term is over he will again be a struggling ''C,'' a
thought that is still far back in the minds of new White House counselors and
chiefs of staff as, securely lodged behind the White House fence -
significantly, they did not come out to the TV studio but stayed in the
Roosevelt Room, where the cameras came to them - like novices in the abbey, who
will never have to go out to lunch, or look for a parking place, or shop for a
new suit, so well-clothed are they in their official status, they expect always
to agree with each other on what is right to do, and Cabinet Secretaries expect
always to acknowledge the propriety of being denied access to the President, and
the press always to accept the truth and reasonableness of what they have to
say, and who cannot now imagine becoming a Hamilton Jordan, or a Haldeman or
Ehrlichman or, who is for my generation the father of them all, a Harry Hopkins,
the archetype of the cynical White House operator, but who at least had never
claimed to be, or had given the impression of being, something else, which was
at least in part because he never had the need or temptation to appear on TV,
since it didn't then exist, or even on the radio - at least I don't remember,
although I saw him in newsreels, ever hearing his voice, which I think of as
being high and reedy, probably because he was thin and smoked a great deal,
although that impression could easily be wrong - which is not to say that he had
that passion for anonymity that his patron wanted in White House staff members,
a requirement that I didn't appreciate until recently, when I understood that
Cabinet members live for two things, the attention of the President and the
attention of the public, and if the White House staff denies them the former and
competes with them for the latter there will be a prompt end to that innocence
so charmingly displayed by Messrs. Meese and Baker, the only two who, through no
desire for pre-eminence, happened to be the ones on TV from among that happy and
harmonious team that had just entered Washington, the courtiers of the newly
crowned old king, bringing memories of those other courtiers who came with the
newly
crowned young prince 20 years ago, the best and the brightest who came to save
us from the myths of ''practical men'' and whose fate it was to leave the stage
before the end of the drama, before their ''gallantry'' had mired us down in
Vietnam, before their ''new economics'' had enmeshed us in inflation, and before
their ''glamour'' had transformed the White House into a set for a police
thriller, leaving the stage to a new ''crew,'' whose great conceit was their
lack of conceit and whose pride was that they were not arrogant but accepted the
role of stage hands assigned to clean up the mess left by the departed ranters
and ravers, a role that we - for I was one of them, on that team, but on a
special team of that team, like the members of the kickoff team whose sole
function is to run down the field as fast as possible, four or five times in an
afternoon, and keep the opposition from gaining ground, so we were by no means
the most conspicuous members of the team - thought we understood, but that we
could not play out consistently to the end, but were in the end ourselves
subverted by the footlights and the audience and most of all by the stage sets,
by the White House mess with the ritual of the Mexican lunch every Thursday,
established by the departed king from Texas and continued by the new king from
California, by the black car with the reading light over the back seat, but much
more by the trip through the White House as the quickest way from the Executive
Office Building to the Treasury - up the steps in the West Wing, past the press
briefing room, along the colonnade next to the Rose Garden (why are there no
hawthorns in this dream? there should be hawthorns.) and along the ground floor
of the White House to the East Wing and out, breasting a flood of tourists
asking themselves, one thought, who this cool intimate of power might be - the
thought of using the White House as a short cut itself dizzying, but not so
dizzying, not so keenly evocative of la cour as running up the narrow side steps
in the West Wing to attend a levee in the Oval Office or the Cabinet Room or the
Roosevelt Room, the levee itself not being so extraordinary as was the feeling
that it was ordinary, subverting our initial conceit that we were capable of
doing what could be reasonably expected of us, because we knew how little could
be reasonably expected of any economists or any government, into the conceit
that we were capable of doing what had to be done because we were especially
chosen, intelligent, and powerful, although this infection struck different ones
of us with different degrees of virulence, some, among whom I count myself,
having always been somewhat ambiguous about it, as when I suddenly recognized
during a meeting in the Roosevelt Room that we were a group of high school
seniors playing at being city-council-for-a-day, while others acquired so high
an estimation of their own value that they could make jokes about their own
arrogance, secure in the knowledge that the jokes could only be taken as jokes,
since no overestimation of the underlying value was possible and the jokes could
only be proof of the single virtue not fully evident, which is to say, modesty,
but even the more ambiguous of us finding ourselves
fine-tuning with vim and price-controlling with vigor, like our predecessors,
and claiming that the audience, bored with our performance as stage hands
cleaning up the mess, insisted that we show off as Don Quixote or some such
thing, until at the end, all balloons punctured by statistics, we returned, too
late, to the modesty with which we started, not now a proud conceit but an
inescapable necessity, felt with an intensity that life experience can give but
that the history of others cannot, even for those few who read history, so that
the innocence and confidence of Messrs.  Meese and Baker on the McNeil-Lehrer
show, while refreshing, was also a little sad.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Herbert Stein, professor of economics at the University of Virginia, in
Charlottesville, was chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under
Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAREY PROMISES A QUICK RESULT FROM ASIA TRIP

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 519 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Feb. 12


Governor Carey showed videotapes to the press today of his trip to the Far East
and said New York would see ''immediate results'' from his efforts to sell the
state abroad.

The earliest result, he said, will be the arrival on Monday of a team from Hino
Motors Ltd. to begin determining whether the company might be able to manfacture
buses here.

The Governor also defended his acceptance of free air travel from Pan American
World Airways and of free accommodations from American International Group, an
insurance company, for himself and two aides.

''No, no, a thousand times no,'' Mr. Carey said when asked whether there might
be a conflict of interest. ''My record of integrity as Governor is there for you
to look at.''

The Governor said Pan Am's offer was ''in reciprocity for'' the state's New York
tourism campaign, which he said was benefiting the airline, and he said there
was ''nothing in the world I could do for A.I.G.''

Assails Delay on Appointee

Speaking to reporters in the Red Room of the Capitol, Mr. Carey also touched on
various subjects, including these:

- He charged that Republicans were trying to ''hamstring'' the government by
holding up the appointment of Meyer S. Frucher to be Industrial Commissioner.
Mr. Carey said that Senator John J. Marchi had told him he ''saw nothing of
substance that he could think of in the record that would bar the
confirmation.'' But Mr. Marchi said Mr. Carey was ''inaccurate'' and had
''misinterpreted what I said to him.'' Mr. Frucher is undergoing intense
scrutiny by the Senate Labor Committee, and his nomination will proceed from
there to the Finance Committee, of which Mr. Marchi, a Staten Island Republican,
is chairman.

- He suggested that Vietnam veterans be given preference for taxi medallions if
they agreed to run cabs the way they are run in Japan.  There, he said, taxicabs
are ''Simonized every day, and the man carries a feather duster in case there's
a spot on the hood, and he wears white gloves, and you have a laundered linen
seat on which you ride.''

Explains Acceptance of Lodging

Mr. Carey said he had also ''moved toward a solid commitment'' from the Tokyu
Car Corporation, which was low bidder for Buffalo's light rail rapid transit
system, to assemble the cars in western New York.

Later, when reminded that he had ordered his former Motor Vehicles Commissioner,
James P. Melton, to repay the Automobile Dealers Association for a trip he had
taken to their convention, Mr. Carey said, ''I've had offers from three
different places for compensation in excess of $2 million a year.'' He declined
to describe who made the offers. He went on to explain that he needed a place to
negotiate and that ''you can't do it on a street corner.''

''I mentioned,'' he continued,''we saved money for the taxpayers of New York
because friends of mine made available, at no cost, lodging.'' He added that
this differed from Mr. Melton because ''he wasn't promoting trade in
automobiles, was he?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR: A TEST ISSUE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 13


The Reagan Administration has decided to make what it sees as Soviet-bloc
support for El Salvador's insurgents an early test of relations with both its
allies and the Soviet Union.

The decision and the background for it have yet to be officially announced, but
in coming days and weeks the Administration will be making known, first to
foreign governments, then to Congress and the public, the intelligence data that
it says will show conclusively that the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Cuba and other
bloc countries have secretly aided the left-wing guerrillas trying to overthrow
the Government in El Salvador.

It is not possible to evaluate independently the Administration's case in the
absence of the secret intelligence information. But what is clear is that the
Reagan Administration - pushed on this issue by Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. - has chosen to bring El Salvador to the forefront of world attention
and to make attitudes toward the guerrilla war there an early barometer of
relations with the United States.

In particular, Mr. Haig is said to see the Salvadoran situation as giving form
to the complaints he has been making about Soviet ''expansionism'' and Soviet
violations of ''an international code of conduct'' that he says the Russians
agreed to at the 1972 summit meeting but have violated since then.

Since taking office, Reagan Administration officials have talked of the
importance of ''linkage'' in relations with the Soviet Union.  Now there is a
concrete issue to ''link'' to future arms control talks, aides said, and that is
El Salvador.

The Administration is sending missions to Latin America and Europe this weekend
and plans a ''white paper'' to give details of its charges of Soviet, Cuban and
Vietnamese involvement in the guerrilla war. (Page 6.)

These moves show a kind of parallel to the energy with which President Kennedy
attacked Cuba's meddling in other countries and Soviet support for the
Communists in Laos and Vietnam.

In the early 1960's, the United States tried to coax and coerce American friends
around the world to respond as actively to the perceived threats as the United
States was doing. The United States succeeded in isolating Cuba within the
hemisphere, but the concerns about Indochina eventually produced direct American
military involvement there.

The possibility that El Salvador could become another Vietnam has been a source
of concern for allies of the United States. Yesterday, Mr. Haig, in a meeting
with Foreign Minister Emilio Colombo of Italy, said, ''We're not going to be
dragged into another Vietnam, but the problems will be dealt with at the source
of the difficulty.''

That statement suggests a willingness by the United States to confront what it
says is Communist involvement in El Salvador or in places other than El
Salvador. But officials sought to discourage speculation about blockades and
other actions. They said the purpose of Mr. Haig's comment was to assure Mr.
Colombo that the United States did not intend to use its own forces in El
Salvador.

The campaign over El Salvador has some major risks for the Reagan
Administration. Inevitably it will provoke a debate about the quality of the
intelligence information, particularly on the degree of Soviet involvement in
the guerrilla war.

Mixed Response Expected

The concern of the Administration about El Salvador will probably produce mixed
responses in Europe and Latin America. Many allied leaders, like the Italian
Foreign Minister, might temper their support for the firm line in Washington
with insistence that the United States also show readiness to resume political
discussions with the Soviet Union soon.

Mr. Haig has affirmed the American agreement to discuss mutual missile-force
reductions in Europe with the Russians, in keeping with the allied decision of
December 1979 to deploy new generations of missiles there.

But the impression being created by the Administration is that such arms control
talks must await a more conciliatory attitude by the Russians. In Mr. Haig's
words, the Soviet Union should agree to adhere to an ''international code of
conduct.''

Mr. Haig's spokesman said today that ''we will proceed with improvement of our
defense capabilities and we intend to conduct our relations with the Soviet
Union on the basis of reciprocity and restraint.''

''We expect these general criteria will be applied to all aspects of our
relationship,'' he said.  Officials suggested that Washington would watch
closely, for example, what the Russians did in Poland and Afghanistan and
whether Cuban troops began to leave Angola and Ethiopia.

It said that both sides agreed that ''efforts to obtain unilateral advantage at
the expense of the other, directly or indirectly, are inconsistent with these
objectives.''

The Americans have accused the Russians of violating that principle in such
places as Afghanistan and Ethiopia. The Russians, in turn, have said that
American moves in the Middle East to keep them out of the Arab-Israeli
negotiations were inconsistent with the agreement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD'S SENTENCE AVOIDS PRISON TERM

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 13


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood today was ordered reduced to the rank of private, forced
to forfeit some pay and allowances and dishonorably discharged from the Marine
Corps for collaborating with the enemy while in Vietnam and assaulting a fellow
prisoner of war. He could have been sentenced to life in prison.

The jury's sentence will not go into effect until an automatic military appeal
is completed.  The forfeiture of pay applies only to the period between the
sentencing and Private

Garwood's statement is on page 17.
Garwood's conviction on Feb. 5. A private first class in the Marine Corps earns
$510 a month.

The penalty does not apply to the $147,000 in pay accumulated in Private
Garwood's imprisonment in Vietnam. He has not received the pay set aside for him
in his captivity. His attorneys have filed a suit in the United States Court of
Claims seeking the money. The suit is pending.

The sentencing came after Private Garwood pleaded for mercy, telling thejury in
a statement read by a defense attorney that he was mentally ill and had suffered
enough for his actions in Vietnam, where he spent 14 years.

Private Garwood is the only former Vietnam prisoner of war to be tried on a
collaboration charge, and his conviction on that charge was the first since 10
prisoners of the Korean war were convicted 25 years ago. The five-man military
jury began deliberations on Private Garwood's sentence shortly before 3:30 P.M.
and deliberated one hour.

Friend Gasps at Sentence

Private Garwood remained impassive when the sentence was read, but the woman
with whom he lives, Donna Long, gasped audibly and buried her head in her hands.
Her 10-year-old son, D.J., hugged his mother and wept. Mrs. Long is the widow of
a former marine who befriended Private Garwood.

Private Garwood was smiling but refused to commment on the sentence as he left
the base with one arm tightly around D.J. But when asked how he felt, Private
Garwood said, ''It's been a long time.''

Col. R.E. Switzer, the presiding judge, scheduled another session for Tuesday to
consider a motion by defense attorneys to overturn the conviction and acquit
Private Garwood of all charges.

In her closing arguments, Capt. Teresa Wright, the prosecutor, said that Private
Garwood, 34 years old, was guilty of a ''heinous and disgusting crime and he
should get the full measure of the law.''

Mr. Lowe strongly objected to Captain Wright's remarks and asked Colonel Switzer
to declare a mistrial. The judge denied the motion.  Besides a life sentence for
collaboration, Private Garwood could also have received a sentence of up to six
months in prison on the charge of assaulting a former P.O.W.

But that former prisoner, David Harker, a former Army private first class, told
the jury in a statement read today that he did not want Private Garwood to be
sentenced to prison on that charge because he ''has been punished enough for the
assault.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert R. Garwood and Donna Long (page A17)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THIRD-WORLD PARLEY URGES PULLOUTS FROM 2 NATIONS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Feb. 13


Soviet-supported countries were thwarted here tonight when foreign ministers
from the nations professing nonalignment adopted a resolution calling for
withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan and Cambodia.

After five days of debate and wrangling, delegations from more than 90 countries
approved by acclamation a docment that also included a call for a cease-fire in
the Iran-Iraq war, a call for revision of a key United Nations resolution on the
Middle East and expressions of concern over militarization of the Indian Ocean.

The sharp divisions and rancor that consistently threatened unity resurfaced
just after the weary delegates adopted the declaration, which was sewn together
from scores of differing views.

Iraqi delegates took the floor to say that they would cooperate with a committee
set up by the conference and that in the spirit of harmony they were dropping
their call for Iran's explusion from the movement. The Iranians were not
mollified.

Iranians Call It a Farce

Iranian delegates, who several times openly accused the ministers of
participating in a farce, declared that the decision to appoint delegates from
three countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization to a committee to
study ways to end the five-month-old war did not go far enough. The Iranian
spokesman said that Iraq should have been condemned and suspended for its
aggression and that the conference should have demanded ''the immediate
withdrawal of the aggressor forces.''

Immediately after that, the Afghan delegate heatedly ''rejected'' the section of
the document that dealt with his country. The key parts said that the ministers
are calling ''for a political settlement on the basis of withdrawal of foreign
troops.'' The paragraph also said that conditions should be established that
would enable refugees from Afghanistan to return to their homes in ''safety and
honor.''

There was no mention of the Soviet Union, but in all other respects the section
reflected the position advanced here by Pakistan and other Islamic and
anti-Communist nations.

In criticizing this action, Shah Mohammad Dost, the Afghan Foreign Minister,
said that the entire debate over Afghanistan, which dominated the meeting, ''had
been instigated by some very well-known quarters,'' and he called it ''a very
dangerous attempt to bring into discussion the internal affairs of a member
state.''

A Call for Direct Talks

''No declaration, no conference, no committees, only bilateral negotiations
between governments can lead to a solution,'' the Afghan Foreign Minister said.
''Everything else is a waste of time.'' The Soviet-supported Kabul regime has
been seeking direct talks with Pakistan and Iran, but they have refused.

Vietnam echoed the Afghan position. The Vietnamese, who were said to feel
victimized by the final language of a section on Cambodia, focused their final
remarks on Afghanistan, saying that the action of the conference in regard to
that country was ''a dangerous precedent'' and was ''depriving the people of
Afghanistan of their right to self-protection.''

Vietnam, whose army helped an insurgent force take power in Cambodia in 1979,
said that any country had the right to call on other nations for assistance. As
for the specific sections on Southeast Asia, the Vietnamese delegate said his
Government would later enter its reservations in writing.

The section said that the ministers ''emphasized the urgent need to evolve a
comprehensive political solution that would provide for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces.''

Mideast Resolution Is Attacked

Another part of the resolution placed the conference behind Islamic attempts to
whittle the authority of Security Council Resolution 242, which called on Israel
to return territory occupied in the 1967 war in exchange for security
guarantees. The ministers here declared that the resolution does not provide for
the just rights and security of the Palestinians.

On the Indian Ocean, the resolution expressed serious concern about increasing
tensions ''brought about by expansion of existing foreign bases, military
installations, logistical supply facilities, disposition of nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction as well as the search for new base facilities.''

The ministers ''warned of the danger that could provide the pretext for
intervention or the presence of foreign powers in the area.'' There was no
specific reference to particular bases; a reference to Diego Garcia, which the
United States leases from Britain, was striken from an early draft. The
pro-Soviet bloc, which included Cuba, Vietnam, Afghanistan and Southern Yemen,
had sought retention of the reference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEEKS ALLIES' BACKING ON SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 13


The Reagan Administration will seek to rally support in Western Europe and Latin
America next week against what it sees as Soviet support for leftist guerrillas
in El Salvador, officials said today.

High-level diplomatic missions will be sent to various capitals with
documentation, assembled by American intelligence agencies, that presents what
officials here called a ''convincing case'' that the Soviet Union and its
allies, including Vietnam, Ethiopia and Cuba, have been supplying tons of arms
to El Salvador's left-wing guerrillas.

The officials said the allies would be asked to support the United States policy
of increasing military and economic aid to the military-backed Government of El
Salvador and to resist the efforts of social democratic parties, Roman Catholic
activists and Communists to isolate the Salvadoran Government because of human
rights violations.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was reported by aides to regard the
response of European and Latin American governments as a major test of the
Western alliance's resolve in confronting Sovietbacked revolutionary movements
in the third world.

Substantial Increase in Aid

The United States initiative was expected to be followed by a substantial
increase in American aid to the Salvadoran Government.  More than 11,000 people
have been reported killed during 14 months of political violence in El Salvador,
a largely agricultural country of 4.5 million people on the west coast of
Central America.

United States officials said the evidence assembled on arms deliveries to the
guerrillas points to Nicaragua as a principal transit point. The arms have been
dropped into El Salvador by small planes, delivered by boats at night and
carried by truck across Honduras to the Salvadoran border, they said.

William J. Dyess, the State Department's acting spokesman, said at a daily news
briefing that he would ''neither confirm nor deny'' reports that the missions
were being sent, but he repeated earlier statements that arms from the Soviet
Union and Cuba had been entering El Salvador. He said the guerrillas were
''organized from outside.''

The United States has suspended economic aid to Nicaragua while the
Administration decides how involved the country is in the arms smuggling to El
Salvador. A determination by President Reagan that Nicaragua was giving such
support would require a cutoff of all aid, including nearly $60 million in
economic and food credits planned for Nicaragua by the Carter Administration.

To Visit 5 European Capitals

The mission to Europe will visit Bonn, Paris, Brussels, the Hague and London
under the leadership of Lawrence S. Eagleburger, once a senior aide to former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and now Mr. Haig's choice for Assistant
Secretary for European Affairs.

The missions to Latin America will be led by retired Lieut. Gen.  Vernon A.
Walters, who was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency during the
Nixon Administration.

Mr. Haig discussed the Salvadoran situation yesterday with Foreign Minister
Emilio Colombo of Italy. Italy's Government, led by the Christian Democrats, has
some sympathy for the Salvadoran Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte,
who is a Christian Democrat.

But most Western European nations are more supportive of the Salvadoran
guerrillas, a combination of Marxist and social democratic armed factions, than
of the military-backed Government, which is seen as repressive because of the
killing of political dissidents by security forces.

Carter Backed Government

The Carter Administration tried unsuccessfully to rally backing in Western
Europe and Mexico for its policy of supporting the Salvadoran Government after
young officers took power in October 1979 and introduced some social changes,
including distribution of land to peasants, and nationalized the private banking
system.

The first reaction of the Reagan Administration to European support for the
guerrillas came early this week when a protest was delivered by the State
Department to Sweden's Ambassador, Count Wilhelm Wachtmeisser, after two
guerrilla leaders were received in Stockholm by Foreign Minister Ola Ullsten.

In a press statement, Mr. Ullsten said United States increases in military aid
to the Salvadoran military, announced in January, would ''not further the cause
of peace,'' and he called on the Government and the opposition in El Salvador to
begin negotiations.

The Salvadoran Government has offered to negotiate with opponents who will
accept a cease-fire through the Roman Catholic Church. So far, the guerrillas
have kept on fighting and have rejected any negotiations with Mr. Duarte.

Guerrilla Offensive Fails

A major guerrilla offensive launched Jan. 10 failed in its goal of taking
control of part of Salvadoran territory, which would have permitted the
guerrillas to seek international recognition of a ''state of belligerency'' and
openly request arms and supplies from abroad.

Mr. Ullsten said in the Swedish Parliament today that news reports of Soviet
arms shipments to the guerrillas could not be ''verified with the information on
hand.'' He said Sweden condemned any entry of arms ''that leads to increase in
the armed violence.''

In Latin America, Cuba and Nicaragua have openly declared support for the
Salvadoran guerrillas, whose leaders have appeared in Havana with President
Fidel Castro at public rallies.

Mexico's governing Revolutionary Institutional Party has close ties with the
Salvadoran opposition parties that have joined a political front with the
Marxist-led guerrillas. While not providing arms, Mexico has given the guerrilla
groups permission to operate offices in Mexico City and has urged a ''hands
off'' policy by outside parties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vernon Walters

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Execution Decreed for Killer Of Louisiana Police Officer

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 194 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, La., Feb. 13


A judge today sentenced 32-year-old Robert Wayne Felde to death in the electric
chair, as he had requested, for the 1978 slaying of a policeman. Mr. Felde had
pleaded insanity based on delayed stress from his experiences in the Vietnam
War.

The sentence will be automatically appealed to the Louisiana Supreme Court. ''I
think state law says the Supreme Court can take away a the death penalty and
change it to life but if they do, I'll kill myself,'' Mr. Felde said.

''I know that I could not survive in prison as I told the jurors,'' he went on.
''Given the choice between life in prison or execution, I prefer execution as
either means death to me anyway.''

Mr. Felde was convicted of shooting the officer, Glen Tompkins, in the back in
1978 while Officer Tompkins was moving Mr. Felde to jail on a charge of
drunkenness. Mr. Felde was a fugitive from a Maryland prison where he had been
serving time for manslaughter.

A jury recommended death last Aug. 21. A second trial was held on the issue of
punishment, with both Mr. Felde and his attorney, Graves Thomas, asking that he
be executed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THEY FELL IN LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


I saw and loved.  -Edward Gibbon

Skeptics and scientists may crinkle brows at the idea of love at first sight,
but lovers wounded by Cupid's arrows say phooey.  One Fourth of July, Itzhak
Perlman played Ravel's ''Tzigane'' on his violin. Toby Friedlander's heart
turned upside down. ''I rushed backstage, she recalled recently, and said, 'Will
you marry me?' ''

''I'm not a romantic, I'm a realist and believe people have to work hard at
relationships,'' she said. ''But it was a magical experience. I fell for his
sound, it's an element beyond words.''

Mr. Perlman, who was 17 years old at the time of the summer camp concert, was
''dumbfounded by the proposal,'' but he succumbed four years later in 1967.

'Moved by His Music'

Another string player, the solo cellist Lynn Harrell, had a similar experience
in 1975. Linda Blandford, an English writer, went to interview him for The
Observer of London and found him to be ''an enormous person, enormously nice.''
''I thought, 'That's It! That's the piece in the jig-saw puzzle!' '' she said.
She was moved by his music (''when he plays, his soul is there for you to
see''), and taken by his ingenuousness (''Trying to impress him with my
credentials, I mentioned that I had been a foreign correspondent in Vietnam. He
replied, 'I'm terribly sorry.' '').

Mr. Harrell, who thought things had gone pretty well, was stunned by her
newspaper article. It mentioned ''his butcher hands and enormous stomach,'' as
well as his ''poetic'' music. He returned to London six months later, 50 pounds
slimmer and eager to marry the next month. Love, marriage and, last year, came
the baby carriage - for twins.

Falling for Another's Date

''We started talking about crazy things, life,'' Philip Covello recalled, with a
wonderment in his voice. Mr. Covello, a Brooklyn banker, was only supposed to
admire his best friend's choice of dates that night. Instead he fell for her,
and she for him.

For her part, Fran Carpentier, a magazine editor, recalled thinking that Mr.
Covello was ''cocky, arrogant, a messy-looking liberal.'' In other words,
perfect: '' I am in love,'' she told friends.

But Mr. Covello said it wasn't until two nights later, when Miss Carpentier
entered the Brizzi Funeral Parlor to attend a family wake, that the full ''colpo
di tuono,'' a thunderclap, struck him.  ''The moment I saw her, I definitely
knew I wanted to marry her,'' he said. They married in 1977.

The novelists Erica Jong and Jonathan Fast fell in love when they met on the
front steps of the Beverly Hills Hotel in Los Angeles seven years ago. He had
come to chauffeur her to a party, but when their eyes met there were fireworks.

Miss Jong said she thought, ''This is the man I want to wake up next to for the
rest of my life.'' Mr. Fast's response may have lacked some spontaneity since he
had previously fallen for her poems in the book ''Fruits and Vegetables.'' ''He
said I was the woman who could understand him since I could communicate with
fruits and vegetables,'' she said.

Love is not all prose and poetry to some of the scientists who have examined it.
Sigmund Freud said it was similar to a psychotic state.  Dr. Dorothy Tennov, a
pyschologist and writer (''Love and Limerence'') has serious doubts about love
at first sight, but none about the devastating powers of passionate love.

''The desire to form a committed mating relationship,'' she explained, is
initiated in the ''limbic or primitive part of the brain, which governs our
reptilian, ritualistic functions.''

Love is a chemical reaction, according to Drs. Michael Liebowitz and Donald
Klien, who are studying the chemistry of love at the New York State Psychiatric
Institute. Love feelings, they say, are similar to amphetamine highs, because
the loving brain produces its own intoxicating substance, something the doctors
call phenylethylamine. Conversely, the ''spurned brain'' goes into a drug
withdrawal, causing severe craving for chocolate, which contains
phenylethylamine.

In 1978, Melissa Norman, a 29-year-old from California, was watching the
Yankees' spring training in Florida. Suddenly, her binoculars fastened on Number
70's smile. She felt ''an INTENSE chemical reaction,'' she said. ''After a few
minutes, I said, 'That's the one for me!'''

She sent Number 70 a note saying she had just fallen in love with him. The
rookie catcher, Pat Callahan, who is currently on the Yankees' farm team in
Nashville, said he ''didn't give much thought to the note.''

''I had to make my serious intentions known,'' said Miss Norman, a blood bank
worker. She pursued him for five days before snaring his attention.

''The rest is history,'' she said; they were married last year, ''as close to
Valentine's Day as we could.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF A STATEMENT BY GARWOOD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 13


Following is the text of a statement read today in the court-martial of Pfc.
Robert R. Garwood by Capt. Lewis Olshin on Private Garwood's behalf:

Pfc. Garwood has heard the testimony of the American P.O.W.'s concerning what
occurred from 1967 to 1969, and he accepts that as their honest and sincere
rendition of what occurred. He has also heard the explanation of the
psychiatrists and he accepts their explanation as to what occurred there, for he
himself cannot explain to himself what occurred in Vietnam 12 years ago and
believes he would never knowingly violate the law in the ways charged.

As best as Pfc. Garwood can reconstruct his past, he assures the court that he
maintains his loyalty to his country. Pfc. Garwood began his 14-year odyssey in
Vietnam in September 1965 with his belief in both his loyalty to the Marine
Corps and his loyalty to his country; he assures the court that the judicial
process has strengthened his loyalty in both the Marine Corps and his country.
Pfc. Garwood had hoped to be acquitted of these charges and to be allowed to
continue to serve his country; however, he realizes that with this conviction
his ability to stay in the Marine Corps has ended. He recognizes from talking to
all the psychiatrists, both for the defense and the Government, that he is
presently ill from causes which he does not understand and for which he will
need and will seek psychiatric care.

Pfc. Garwood would like to assure the members that he is loyal to the Marine
Corps, and has tried, throughout this trial, to conduct himself with dignity and
in a manner which would not bring discredit upon the Marine Corps. To this end,
he has specifically instructed his lawyers not to say anything which anyone
would construe as being derogatory toward the United States Marine Corps.

As the members have learned during this trial, he has virtually no formal
education and no skills. He will start at the bottom of the heap when he leaves
the Marine Corps, and with the help of his doctors, lawyers and family, he hopes
he will get well, get work, settle down and make everyone, especially Donna and
their two boys, proud of him.

'Marks for Rest of His Life'

He does not know how to explain what occurred in Vietnam 14 years ago; and, he
does not know what anyone can say to explain the 14 years he erased from his
life in Vietnam. He knows the experience he had in Vietnam will live with him
forever and, together with his conviction, will leave marks upon him for the
rest of his life.

In many ways, the two years since his freedom from Vietnam have been a
punishment due to the attention and notoriety; the ridicule suffered by his
family; and the fact that he and his family will have to live with this
conviction and the mark upon their name that this conviction and the media
attention has caused.

He asks the court to take into consideration after his many years of this trial,
his need for the continued support from people other than his doctors and
lawyers. He has found this support through Donna and her two sons, Butch and
D.J. They need each other at this time in their lives. Naturally, Pfc. Garwood
did not know them until he arrived in Jacksonville, N.C. But perhaps if there
has been any good come from this trial, he asks this court to allow him to
maintain this relationship and to permit their shattered lives the chance to
heal by working together as one family.

Pfc. Garwood hopes that through the evidence the court has heard in sentencing,
the court has found the humanity within him which will allow the court to return
him to the people he loves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
News Summary;
SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1981

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


International
Seeking support on El Salvador, the Reagan Administration will send high-level
diplomatic missions to several foreign capitals in Western Europe and Latin
America with documentation that is said to present a ''convincing case'' that
the Soviet Union and its allies are supplying arms to Salvadoran guerrillas.
(Page 6, Columns 3-5.)
Moscow has resumed issuing visas to large numbers of Jewish citizens. Some have
been seeking to emigrate for almost a decade. Approval of the visas nearly
halted last summer, but, according to members of the Jewish community in Moscow,
the official attitude became more lenient about a month ago. The reason for the
policy change was in dispute. (24:1-3.)
The Times of London was sold to Rupert Murdoch, making him one of Britain's most
powerful 20th-century publishers. The Australian added the newspaper and four
affiliated publications to his newspaper empire for a purchase price of $28
million. (16:1-2.)
A missing Mozart work was found last fall in Bavaria and will have its premiere
performance at Munich in May. The creation, a symphony, was composed by the
Austrian-born prodigy in London in 1765, when he was 9 years old. There was no
information about the seller, the price or where the symphony has been.
(11:1-2.)
National
Rejecting a tax cut retroactive to Jan. 1, President Reagan has decided instead
to propose a July 1 starting date for his planned 10 percent cut in personal
income taxes, according to Administration sources. But, they said, he still
plans to propose that increases in depreciation allowances for business be
retroactive to Jan. 1 to spur investment and the economy. (1:6.)
An increased inflation rate was in prospect as the prices that producers charge
retailers for finished goods rose by nine-tenths of 1 percent last month in a
marked acceleration from the pattern of last fall. The main cause was rising
fuel oil and gasoline prices, and the latest figure reported by the Labor
Department did not include the effects of President Reagan's decontrol of
domestic oil prices on Jan. 28. (1:1.)
Four charities given $1 million each by the Energy Department just before the
Carter Administration left office said they had distributed much of the money to
help the poor pay fuel bills and expressed dismay at attempts by the Government
to get it back. The money came from the settlement of overcharge suits against
the Standard Oil Company (Indiana). The Reagan Administration and others termed
the gifts high-handed, unauthorized and perhaps illegal.  (1:1-3.)
Pfc. Robert R. Garwood was ordered discharged dishonorably from the Marine Corps
for having collaborated with the enemy in Vietnam and for having assaulted a
fellow prisoner of war. A five-member military jury, which could have sentenced
him to life in prison, deliberated one hour. A military appeal is automatic.
(1:5.)
The remains of two children were found at opposite ends of Atlanta.  The city
has been gripped with fear for nearly two years over the deaths of 16 black
children and the disappearance of two others.  (8:1.)
More stringent curbs on the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. in their domestic surveillance
activities could result from a class action suit being argued before a Federal
judge in Chicago. A settlement formula has been accepted by both sides; to
become binding it requires the approval of the judge. (18:3-4.)
Two agencies face sharp budget cuts planned by the Reagan Administration. The
proposals call for the Federal Trade Commission to eliminate its antitrust
enforcement authority and to reduce its current $73 million budget to $41
million by 1985. Plans for the Consumer Product Safety Commission call for a
budget cut of 30 percent and the elimination of 225 employees from the staff of
850.  (9:4.)
The fight over the food stamp program exemplifies a struggle, just beginning,
between President Reagan's budget cutters and many people who hope to defend the
vast network of social welfare programs that they have created. Advocates of
food stamps acknowledge that the political climate has turned against them, but
they are trying to minimize the cuts. (9:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A drop in building inspections in New York City was reported by officials,
architects and engineers. They said that the Buildings Department no longer made
enough inspections of construction projects to insure that fire and safety codes
were being met. They also said that much construction work was done without
permits and that this was costing the city millions of dollars a year in lost
fees. (1:2.)
Water supplies increased in the metropolitan region after the heavy rains and
snow-melting temperatures of midweek. The supplies in New York City's three
reservoirs rose to 39.9 percent of capacity from 31.7 percent. In North Jersey,
supplies increased to an average of 28 percent of capacity from 24.7 percent.
But officials in New York and New Jersey warned that conservation efforts must
be continued. (1:4.)
An accord on sewage treatment was reached by officials of New York City and New
Jersey. The plan provides for the chemical treatment of thousands of gallons of
waste that might otherwise have been dumped in raw form into the Hudson River
when the New York Exposition and Convention Center is built on Manhattan's West
Side. (27:1.)

Business Digest, Page 29

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. STILL UNDECIDED ON AMOUNT OF AID TO SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14


The Reagan Administration's decision to make an international issue of alleged
Soviet-Cuban support for El Salvador's leftist guerrillas has not yet been
matched by a decision on how much United States military aid, including American
advisers, should be given the Salvadoran armed forces.

''There is still a Vietnam syndrome working on the policy makers.  They are
afraid to get the United States too involved,'' said a military source.

As soon as Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. took office, he ordered an
interagency study on El Salvador, where a large-scale guerrilla offensive was
launched in early January.

Although the study has not yet reached agreement on levels of United States
military aid, its first result was the accumulation of evidence that arms,
allegedly furnished by the Soviet Union and Cuba, were entering El Salvador on a
large scale, increasing the guerrillas' firepower to levels close to those of El
Salvador's 10,000-man combat force.

Support for U.S. Aid Sought

The Administration is sending missions to Western Europe and Latin America next
week to show the evidence of Soviet and Cuban involvement and ask for support of
United States military aid to El Salvador.

During President Carter's last few months in office, United States military aid
to El Salvador increased, beginning with an initial $5 million for ''nonlethal''
equipment in September, and concluding with $5 million for arms and ammunition
that was approved after the January guerrilla offensive began.

Pentagon planners believe that in order to contain the leftist insurgency, the
Salvadoran security forces would have to be strengthened, and that this would
require a combination of increased supplies of modern equipment and improved
training to raise the professional level of the force.

Pentagon sources said this could be accomplished by military training teams,
involving less than 100 troops from the United States, and a command advisory
group to work with the senior commanders. At this time, a five-man advisory team
and about 15 technical instructors are in El Salvador, according to American
officials, who added that there are no advisers to combat units.

New Equipment Being Considered

The new equipment that is being considered for El Salvador includes patrol
boats, to give its navy better control over coastal smuggling, helicopters to
give the infantry mobility, and radar equipment to improve detection of air and
ground border violations.

El Salvador, on the Pacific coast of Central America, has a long border with
Honduras, across which United States officials believe arms have been trucked
from Nicaragua to supply the guerrillas. El Salvador can also be reached easily
by small airplanes or boats across the Gulf of Fonseca from Nicaragua and Costa
Rica.

The use and maintenance of such equipment requires training, however, and this
would lead to a substantial increase in the number of United States military
advisers in El Salvador.

At the State Department, where Mr. Haig has not yet named an Assistant Secretary
for Inter-American Affairs, the regional bureau that covers Central America,
there are senior officials who argue against an increased United States military
presence.

These officials argue that an excessive emphasis on the military aspects of the
Salvadoran conflict would weaken the civilians in the military-civilian
Government, which is led by President Jose Napoleon Duarte, the head of the
Christian Democratic Party.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. vs.I.B.M.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 22, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 501 words


The Justice Department's landmark suit against the International Business
Machines Corporation is the most vivid illustration of the difficulty and
expense of the big antitrust cases in which a basic restructuring of a major
industry is sought as the remedy.

The suit, charging I.B.M. with monopolizing ''interstate trade and commerce in
general-purpose digital computers,'' was filed in January 1969. The case has
dragged on since - a courtroom war waged with thousands of technical documents,
scores of expert witnesses and lawyerly invective, costing both sides several
million dollars.

Though rumors of a settlement have circulated recently, close observers say that
at present there seems to be little reason to expect any agreement soon.

The trial began in May 1975. Before the outset, the Government estimated that
the presentation of its case would last 60 days.  Instead, it took three years.
The Justice Department is on its third lead counsel. Robert H. Bork, a Yale law
professor, has dubbed the case ''the antitrust division's Vietnam.''

Moreover, given the rapid pace of change in the computer industry, the case now
centers on a market situation that existed two or three technological
generations ago. ''It's pretty much an historical curiosity,'' an I.B.M.
competitor concedes.

Some outside observers view the I.B.M. case as proof that the Justice Department
cannot and should not be trying to restructure major global industries. Irving
S. Shapiro, chairman of E.I. duPont de Nemours & Company, a lawyer who spent
several years in Justice, says: ''All the ballplayers are above their heads in
these cases that concern the structure of key industries. From the lawyer who
drafted the case right on up, you're talking about people who have no experience
in economics or industry.''

Yet others argue that the big structural cases, such as I.B.M., must be pursued
to thwart monopolists. The real lesson in the I.B.M.  example, they say, is that
the case was poorly handled by the Justice Department. ''In the big cases the
Government, for lack of knowledge and for fear of missing something, frequently
has not been willing to define the issues narrowly enough,'' Michael L.
Glassman, an antitrust consultant, says. ''So the cases just go on and on.''

Indeed, even former antitrust chiefs express reluctance about recasting
industries. ''There is a legitimate modesty now about intervening in the
economy,'' says John H. Shenefield, an associate Attorney General in the Carter
Administration. ''The hard-bitten D.A. approach isn't very useful and the people
in Justice recognize that.''

During the Carter Administration, for instance, the Justice Department looked
long and hard for a shared monopoly case, but decided against bringing any.
''Frankly, we didn't find the easy case we thought we might,'' Mr. Shenefield
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
No Left Turn for Nonaligned Nations

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


Boldness and clarity weren't expected from a meeting in New Delhi last week of
94 nonaligned countries. But their foreign ministers did resist the strenous
attempts of Vietnam, Afghanistan and a minority of others to give nonalignment a
definite pro-Soviet cast.

A communique reached after five days of debate called for political settlements
of conflicts in Afghanistan and Cambodia on the basis of withdrawal of foreign
troops, meaning 85,000 Russians and 200,000 Vietnamese, respectively. At 2 A.M.
Friday, when most of the delegates were asleep in their chairs, if not their
rooms, proSoviet Southern Yemen inserted into the Afghanistan resolution a
reference to the Peoples Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. This tacit
recognition of the Soviet-installed regime in Kabul was deleted after breakfast
by the wide-awake Pakistanis.

The conference made no headway toward political solutions of the Iran-Iraq war,
the Afghan or Cambodian conflicts. However, this did not deter Secretary General
Kurt Waldheim from playing the United Nations' wild card and appointing Under
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar as his special representative for
arranging talks on Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION IN SUMMARY;
The Sentencing of Private Garwood

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 254 words


The quality of mercy is not strained, even in the Marine Corps.  Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood, convicted of collaborating with the enemy and assaulting a fellow
prisoner while a captive in Vietnam, last week was sentenced by his court
martial jury to be reduced to private and dishonorably discharged.

Private Garwood could have been sentenced to life imprisonment. The judge in his
court martial earlier had ruled out the death penalty.  His conviction, the
first of its kind in the armed services since the Korean conflict, will be
automatically appealed through military channels. Before sentencing last week,
he appealed with the jury to reverse the conviction and let him seek psychiatric
help.

Private Garwood was captured by the North Vietnamese in September 1965. At the
time, he was a 19-year-old jeep driver whose tour in Southeast Asia was about to
end. He was released in March 1979 and, returning to the United States and the
Marine Corps, was accused of violating the Code of Military Conduct.

In 12 weeks of trial, Private Garwood has not disputed testimony by former
prisoners of war that for two years he acted as interpreter, interrogator,
informer and guard for his North Vietnamese captors.  Rather, the chief defense
lawyer, John C. Lowe, argued that his client was mentally unstable before
entering the Marine Corps and that through torture and deprivation he was driven
insane. ''In the end,'' said Mr. Lowe, ''he identified with the enemy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PRESIDENT INSPIRED HIGH EXPECTATIONS; NOW, THE TEST

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The public is full of expectations, mostly optimistic, about President Reagan.
But after the ''new beginning'' he promised at the Republican National
Convention and again as President in his first nationally televised address 10
days ago, this is the week he must begin filling in the blanks in those vague
hopes.

Wednesday's speech on the specifics of how he wants to cut the budget and the
next few months of partial success or failure with Congress matter in all kinds
of ways - most immediately, of course, to the people and institutions who would
get less money. But they matter politically, too, in that they will begin to
show the public whether it will get what it expects from the new President or
whether it will be disappointed again.

It is not that the public has any particular expectation about the level of
appropriations for the Tennessee Valley Authority or interest rates on student
loans. For that matter, what is involved here is not really even the 52 percent
(Gallup) who foresee a smaller Federal Government, the 60 percent (Harris) who
expect less regulation or Government or the 37 percent (New York Times/ CBS
News) who think the President can negotiate a strategic arms limitation treaty
with the Soviet Union.

James A. Baker 3d, Mr. Reagan's chief of staff, puts it less statistically.
''We're going to be judged in these initial months on whether we can get that
inflation indicator headed in the right direction,'' he says, and to do that
''we have simply got to stop the hemorrhaging in the budget.''

Does this mean that the success or failure of the Reagan Administration rests on
its ability to balance the Federal budget, a task thought within its power by
only 37 percent of the Times/CBS News respondents? Not exactly, for the relative
importance of specific expectations, even when they clearly correspond to
campaign promises, is something polls do not measure very well. What matters
more is the 66 percent in the latest Times/CBS News Poll who said Mr. Reagan is
''able to do something about'' whatever they felt was the nation's greatest
problem, whether they cited inflation, unemployment, the economy generally or
even morality. (Among the 37 percent who cited inflation, which was the most
often cited problem, 64 percent foresaw progress.)

The bulk of those ''most important problems'' were economic. Since Mr. Reagan is
sure to be blamed for failure, his soaring promises of stable growth and curbed
inflation - underscored by last week's politicking of reassurance about not
cutting off the ''truly needy'' - carry little risk. He is not repeating the
Carter mistake of making hundreds of specific promises that, while defying
scorekeeping, left a cumulative impression of failure.

But there is more to it than even a very selective report card on campaign
promises. As John P. Sears, his former campaign manager who also served
President Nixon at the beginning of his term, said last week, ''What people
measure first in a President is what they found lacking in his predecessor.'' In
Mr. Sears' view, this was a sense that President Carter was ''really in charge,
with some orderly sense of how he's proceeding.'' Even if that is sometimes
measured against an individual's literal expectations of a smaller Federal
establishment or bigger arms spending, it may be far more a question of style
than of measurable success or failure.

Or, as Peter Hart, a Democratic polltaker, observed, ''Elections are compacts
with the voters, with a very few key elements.'' He argued that Presidents are
judged by whether they seem to be keeping those singular, critical commitments,
by a public whose perception was that Lyndon Johnson would not get the nation
more deeply involved in Vietnam after 1964, or that Mr. Nixon would see to it
that law and order flourished or that Mr. Carter would bring ''competence and
management'' to government. Their failures, Mr. Hart said, have bred the
diminished esteem for Presidents that is recorded by ever lower approval ratings
in national polls.

Even if it is impossible to say for certain just how strongly the public will
reward or punish Mr. Reagan as it measures him against its expectations, the
range of hopes suggests that the public is making distinctions about what it
expects. Only 25 percent in the New York Times/CBS Poll thought he could halt
inflation, for example, while 50 percent thought he could cut unemployment and
87 percent believed he could ''see to it that the United States is respected by
other nations.''

The pattern is not very different from what Mr. Carter confronted four years
ago. In a CBS News Poll then, 22 percent believed Mr.  Carter could balance the
budget, 53 percent believed he could reduce reduce joblessness and 62 percent,
his high mark, felt he could ''restore trust in government.'' That ''trust''
item, like Mr.  Reagan's ''high on respect from abroad,'' is beyond objective
measurement. But it may still matter a lot. V. Lance Tarrance, a Republican
pollster, argues: ''People are looking at the future.  Fulfilling some of these
global expectations, however you do it, makes a difference.''

Actually, American voters have always viewed campaign promises with considerable
skepticism. But modern polling has made it possible to judge which they are most
dubious about and, indeed, that led to Mr.  Carter's campaign to persuade the
public that the things it thought he was failing at were beyond any President's
capacity. It may also cause politicians to worry too much about the trees and
not enough about the forest. This is, however, less Mr. Reagan's kind of failing
than it was Mr. Carter's.

But there is a guide in the generally hopeful public view of Mr.  Reagan.
Sixty-one percent in the Times/ CBS Poll at the end of January thought that he
''understands the complicated problems a President must deal with''; 78 percent
considered him a strong leader. Both ratings were up from the days of the
campaign. The 13 percent who said that their greatest fear of him was that he
might get the country into a war was down from November's 21 percent.

There is an expectation at the White House that the national optimism about Mr.
Reagan will inevitably diminish, and this has led to a policy of using that
capital grandly, rather than merely letting it deteriorate. As Mr. Baker,
looking ahead to this week's budget proposals, put it, ''Maybe the best time to
spend political capital is in the initial weeks when you have the best chance of
getting things done.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of poll results concerning expectations of the
presidency

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14


When Ronald Reagan moved into the White House, there was a tendency here to
regard his promises to cut the budget, cut taxes and be tough on the Soviets as
so many New Year's Resolutions soon to be destroyed by the brutal facts and
politics of the day.

His assumption was that the country had been on a binge, that he was going to
dry it out, get it back on the wagon and maybe even back to the church. Exit
John Maynard Keynes, enter Adam Smith, raise the defense budget, reduce almost
everything else, and make the Soviets promise to behave as a condition of
military arms control.

Nobody here doubted Reagan's sincerity but almost everybody doubted his ability
to achieve these objectives. His proposals amounted to a counterrevolution
against the welfare-state policies of the last 50 years and in the opinion of
many observers they would be rejected by the Democratic majority in the House of
Representatives.

That may very well be so. However, the new President is not forgetting his
resolutions but acting on them, and calling on the people and the Congress, as
an act of patriotism, to support him.

For the moment, he has stunned his opposition and he has astonished foreign
diplomats, who are under intense pressure from their governments to explain what
he's doing and are fascinated by the fact that such a counterrevolution is even
being attempted. They tend to agree that its success or failure will have a
profound effect on the politics of the future, not only in the U.S. but also in
other parts of the world.

If he succeeds in reducing inflation, increasing productivity, and persuading
Moscow to abandon the use of force in third world countries - an ambitious
agenda - he will produce the greatest change in American domestic and foreign
policy since the New Deal.  And if he fails, many diplomats feel, he will reduce
the influence of the free enterprise system at home and abroad for at least a
decade, split the alliance and revive the bitterness of the cold war.

Nobody here is saying that Reagan has to get everything he wants in order to
succeed: Roosevelt had great influence at home and abroad though his New Deal
fell far short of its objectives. But nobody is saying either that his proposals
are merely campaign rhetoric. In the foreign field, he has already used his
executive power to change the methods and tone of American diplomacy.

First of all, he has ended the conflict between the State Department and the
National Security Council over who defines and articulates his foreign policy.
Under President Carter, important communications to the Soviet Union and other
major countries, drafted at State, had to be approved by the National Security
Council in the name of the President and could be amended or even vetoed in the
White House. Such communications can now be dispatched directly by Secretary
Haig, with or without the approval of the N.S.C.

Haig is insisting that the Soviet Union abide by ''the basic principles of
relations'' signed by Presidents Nixon and Brezhnev in 1972 as a condition of
negotiations on a new arms limitation treaty.  In Haig's view, these principles
would forbid the use of force to achieve political objectives, and he made this
condition clear in a private conversation here with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin
on Feb. 5.

Also, this principle is being applied specifically to the case of El Salvador,
where, Haig believes, the Soviet Union, Cuba and Vietnam are supplying weapons
to the left-wing guerrillas who are trying to overthrow the government in El
Salvador.

Some of the allies are uneasy at what they regard as the ''provocative
language'' of Haig and Reagan - denouncing the Soviet leaders as ''terrorists,''
''liars and cheats'' - and they doubt that the Soviet Union would abide by a
promise to abandon its practice of supporting ''wars of national liberation'' -
as in El Salvador - even if it were given.

Nor are the allies comfortable with some of the Reagan Administration foreign
policy actions so far. They wonder how the President can take such a hard line
in such a seemingly casual and light-hearted manner. They point to Washington's
tough line on El Salvador while it is trying to make common cause with Mexico's
President Lopez Portillo, who is doing business with both Cuba and the
Salvadoran guerrillas.

They are confused about Secretary of Defense Weinberger's indications, without
prior consultation with the European allies, that the United States might put
the neutron bomb in Europe. They note that the Reagan Administration plans a
substantial increase in its defense budget, but is willing to settle for a
nonmandatory promise from the NATO allies to raise their military budgets by
only 3 percent.

Nevertheless, the tendency here is to regard these unilateral moves as the
actions of a new administration that has not yet had time to get its procedures
and policies in order. There is even enthusiastic reaction in many quarters to
the sweep and determination of Reagan's reforms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SILENT SUFFERING OF EAST TIMOR

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm; Henry Kamm is The New York Times's chief Asian diplomatic
correspondent.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4028 words


No doubt there are more remote places, particularly on Timor, an island on the
eastern fringe of the far-flung Indonesian archipelago (see map below), but on a
Sunday morning last year, the village of Uatolare, inland from East Timor's
southern coast, could have served as a metaphor for the end of the world.

I walked among thousands of people huddled together, from the outskirts of the
village to its ravaged center. Men, women, children - all shared the look and
scent of deprivation to the limits of human endurance: frail bodies clothed in
rags, gaunt faces uttering mute pleas. The bloated bellies of children protruded
over waists so scrawny that the smallest ones had to hold up their shorts or
lose them.

Through the open doors of the village church, the chants of prayer could be
heard. Recently patched holes showed how heavily the church had been hit by
naval shellfire during the Indonesian invasion of December 1975. Inside, a large
congregation sat on the bare floor, singing in Portuguese the Roman Catholic
liturgy. But no priest officiated; the fervent prayers were offered in the face
of an empty altar. Standing at an open side door, a girl as emaciated as the
others, no older than 12 years, intoned a new chant whenever the chorus thinned
and faltered.

The deserted schoolhouse, also marked by the bombardment, stood across the
square. On one wall, someone had scrawled, ''Death to the traitors,'' also in
Portuguese. By now, however, after years of civil war among East Timorese and
war against Indonesia, no one recalled which faction the words applied to.

The war was over at the time of my visit in January 1980, despite sporadic
guerrilla action against the Indonesian occupiers that continues to this day.
Dismal and melancholy as the scenes I saw were, it was really not the end of the
world. Those whom I saw were survivors, those who had graduated from starvation
to malnutrition. The great dying was ending. Indonesia's belated call to the
world community for help had been answered, largely by the United States, which
had also furnished most of the weapons that Indonesia used for its invasion -
although the United States intended that these weapons be used only for
Indonesia's self-defense.

Indonesia's hold on East Timor is secure, but its annexation of the former
Portuguese colony has not been recognized by a majority of members of the United
Nations. In last year's voting on the annual question in the United Nations
General Assembly, only 35 countries, including the United States, sided with
Jakarta. But there is no fire in the annual debate; East Timor is too remote, it
seems, to deserve serious attention. It was a backwater even of the Portuguese
empire that collapsed after the Lisbon revolution of 1974. An island divided
when the Portuguese and Dutch clashed there in the 17th century, Timor had
remained colonized - if not pacified -more from force of habit than for any
benefit it offered to its conquerors.  West Timor became part of independent
Indonesia with the rest of the Dutch East Indies in 1949.

Indonesia's invasion of East Timor, occurring in the same year as the Communist
victories in Indochina, never became a major issue in the world, but in the
United States and Australia small groups centered in universities continue to
protest their Governments' acquiescence in the act of force.

There is substance to these protests, even if, at their most extreme, they
degenerate into hyperbole - accusations of ''genocide'' rather than mass deaths
from cruel warfare and the starvation that accompanied it on this historically
food-short island, of American complicity rather than acquiescence. True,
President Gerald R. Ford and Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger visited
President Suharto in Jakarta on the eve of the airborne and naval invasion, but
there is no evidence that they discussed with him the impending
attack.Indonesia, vast, populous, rich in petroleum and strategic minerals, and
emphatically anti-Communist, is deemed too valuable a friend by the West to risk
offending it for having committed aggression and Anschluss against so minor a
land and people.

The progress toward oblivion has been advanced by East Timor's isolation from
the world, and by the primitive condition in which Portugal left it, with only a
minute fraction of its preannexation population of about 650,000 educated in the
colonizer's language and fewer still in any other. Little is known about events
in East Timor since the invasion, because Indonesia has reinforced its newest
province's isolation, and the bulk of the testimony has come from highly
partisan members or supporters of Fretilin, the Revolutionary Front of East
Timor, which governed for four months until the Indonesian onslaught and whose
armed resistance lingers on. The vast majority of East Timorese have suffered
mutely and passively.  East Timor's descent into the abyss began on Aug. 11,
1975, when the people of Dili awoke to the sight of armed men patrolling the
streets of their torpid colonial capital. The Timorese Democratic Union (U.D.T.)
had staged a coup against the colonial Government.  Four days later, the Central
Committee of Fretilin, U.D.T.'s principal rival, announced from the mountains
behind Dili, to which most of its members had fled, ''a general armed
insurrection against all traitors and enemies of the people.''

In the final act of futility that had marked more than four centuries of
Portuguese rule, the Governor and his administration abandoned the East Timorese
to chaos and civil war and embarked, under the cover of the waning night of Aug.
26-27, for the safety of the offshore island of Atauro. Their arms remained to
fuel the battle - most of the army's weapons going to Fretilin, the most
left-wing of the three parties formed in the heady aftermath of Portugal's coup,
and those of the police to U.D.T., the gradualists who ostensibly favored slow
progress to independence under Portugal's aegis.

What followed U.D.T.'s disastrous ''whiff of grapeshot'' can be summarized:
Fretilin made good its armed insurrection. By the end of August it had gained
control of Dili. Before September ended, it had driven most of the U.D.T. forces
into Indonesian West Timor in disarray. Indonesia made clear its unwillingness
to accept Fretilin rule by early October, striking with full military force to
seize three towns across the international border. But except for this strip,
Fretilin controlled East Timor insofar as any central force can exercise a hold
over the forbiddingly mountainous and largely roadless interior.

In mid-November, Indonesian forces once more began to edge eastward. Late on the
afternoon of Nov. 28, when the sea breeze usually light-ens the humid air that
lies heavy over the plaza between the Governor's palace and Dili's waterfront,
Fretilin brought down for the last time the Portuguese flag that it had left
flying despite the Government's desertion, and proclaimed the Democratic
Republic of East Timor.

Two days later, on the Indonesian side of the border, leaders of U.D.T. and
Apodeti - the third major party that sprang up after the revolution in Portugal,
and which espoused joining Indonesia - presented Adam Malik, then Jakarta's
Foreign Minister, with a declaration of integration. On the morning of Dec. 7,
Indonesian paratroopers landed in Dili and Baucau, the territory's second
largest town, landing craft discharged waves of soldiers on the beaches and
troops poured across the frontier. Fretilin resistance was heavy, and on
Christmas Day, Indonesia, a nation of 135 million, brought ashore massive
reinforcements.

When 1975 ended, Fretilin had been driven into the interior with much of the
civilian population, but it had salvaged much of its fighting strength and
leadership. A new phase of warfare began, witnessed only by those who did battle
and by their victims.  Indonesia banned the press - this continues with rare and
closely shadowed exceptions to this day - as it proceeded with the task of
''pacifying'' its new possession. Word filtered back to Jakarta that fighting
and casualties were heavy, that much of the population remained in the mountains
with Fretilin and that the East Timorese were suffering.

Early in 1978, reports began to circulate in the Indonesian capital that a
possibly decisive turn had occurred and large numbers of East Timorese were
fleeing to Indonesian-held areas, telling of waning Fretilin control and, more
importantly, critical shortages of food and medicines. Their physical appearance
bore witness to this.

By September of that year, Indonesia felt the tide had turned sufficiently in
its favor to invite a large party of ambassadors and journalists to visit Dili
and nearby sites where recent refugees from the mountains had been gathered.
What the group saw and heard convinced most of its members that famine and
illness of frightening proportions were abroad in East Timor.

Fully a year later, the first international aid shipments reached the island.
Tens of thousands had died, before and during that wasted year. How many?
Figures as frightful as 200,000 have been advanced.  An Indonesian census,
recently completed but not made public, puts the population at 552,000. This
would be more than 100,000 fewer East Timorese than the last published
Portuguese statistics, dating to 1974, showed.

The belated relief effort, by all accounts, has been effective, and East
Timorese are no longer dying of hunger or untreated ills.  Indonesia ordered the
two international relief groups that it allowed to work in East Timor to wind up
their emergency operations at the end of last year.  Those are the bare bones of
the East Timor story - but crucial questions remain unanswered. Why did the East
Timorese elite, whatever its political differences, drive the colony so quickly
into murderous civil war? Why did Portugal abandon East Timor before any
pressure had been exerted on its administration and forces? Why did Indonesia
intervene so heavy-handedly?

On my first visit to East Timor, during the final week of peace before the coup
in August 1975, Dili and its surroundings presented an aspect reminiscent of the
other Portuguese colonies in the aftermath of the Lisbon revolution. I saw in
Dili, as I had in Mozambique, Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde, gross
underdevelopment, unrelieved as it was in Angola and Mozambique by glossy
capital cities with huge slums. The paved roads of the capital petered out into
dirt tracks even closer to the dusty town than in the larger African
possessions. Instead of slums, there were clusters of flimsy shacks, grafted
onto the edges of Dili, that housed the indigenous population.

When I visited one of these at midday, families were eating their meal, a mash
of boiled tubers topped with some greens and spiced with chilies. What had they
eaten in the morning? The same, they said through my interpreter. And what would
the next meal be? The same. On the Indonesian side of the island, I had been
told by a West German doctor who had been there for two years that the
population was chronically malnourished, living on a diet very short on
proteins, although on both sides of the border cattle were plentiful and the
unfished ocean swarmed with protein-rich seafood. It is a measure of Dutch and
Portuguese colonial neglect that the East Timorese were never taught to take
advantage, in any systematic way, of the food sources available. Even in times
of peace, with the populations pursuing their generally seminomadic way of life,
Timor and the other islands of the Lesser Sunda group are victims of frequent
crop failures and spells of hunger.

The Portuguese Governor of East Timor, Col. Mario Lemos Pires, received me
graciously in a comfortable corner of his huge office, guarded by two East
Timorese in glistening white uniforms and feathered headdresses who flashed
swords and smiles. He was of the new breed, a military man sent after the
revolution to oversee decolonization. It would not be easy here, he said. In
East Timor, there was not just one liberation movement to which Portugal could
hand over its authority, but three relatively large ones and two minor groups,
all newly formed.

East Timor had three options and would have to exercise a choice, Colonel
Pires's assistant for political affairs, Maj. Francisco Mota, said. They were
immediate independence, gradual progression toward freedom under Portuguese
guidance or integration with Indonesia. He did not think the last had much
support. The Portuguese Army's last remaining task was to maintain order and
educate the East Timorese to exercise their choice before many more months.

I was directed to Fretilin headquarters to look for some of its leaders. They
were in the countryside educating villagers, I was informed by a group of
friendly youths in their teens and 20's, milling about a hut under a big tree at
the edge of town. The boys inquired about my nationality and expressed
admiration for the United States based largely on Muhammed Ali and blue jeans,
which some were proudly wearing. They sheepishly sang a song when asked about
Fretilin, and my interpreter, a man sympathetic to the Portuguese revolution,
said he could not follow its meaning. One teen-ager had the names of Marx and
Lenin tattooed on his forearm. He and his friends giggled when asked about their
significance, and giggled again when asked why they were giggling.

I had met the U.D.T. leadership at the airport in Kupang, the capital of West
Timor, awaiting the plane that took them and me to Dili. Surprisingly, for an
independence movement committed to a residual Portuguese role until East Timor
eventually gained its freedom, the three leaders seemed in close harmony with
the senior, uniformed Indonesian officials seeing them off. They had been to
Jakarta, they told me on the plane, and had been cordially received by a number
of ministers.  They had also visited Macao, Taiwan, Japan and Australia. The
34-year-old U.D.T. president, Francisco Xavier Lopes da Cruz, a grave and
heavily bearded man, asked me to dinner at his house the following night.

His house was simple, befitting a minor customs official. He explained his
movement and the others, discounting Apodeti because, he said, integration,
although he would accept it if it were the people's choice, was unpopular. He
described Fretilin as a divided movement. The established leaders, Francisco
Xavier do Amaral (his senior in the customs department, who had completed his
education for the priesthood and whom he described as a friend) and Nicolau
Lobato, were Roman Catholics, but others, students who had returned from Lisbon
after the revolution, were full of Communist, even Maoist, ideas and rhetoric. A
coalition between Fretilin and U.D.T. had broken apart, said Mr. Lopes, and
Fretilin people in the hills had taken to beating up U.D.T. members and breaking
up their rallies.  ''Maybe we'll have to teach them a lesson,'' he said as a
parting remark.  Two days later, Mr. Lopes staged his futile coup, providing the
impulse for the Fretilin countercoup and the Indonesian intervention. In
November, Mr. Lopes was among those petitioning Indonesia to accept East Timor
into its republic. When I visited Dili last year, Mr. Lopes was Deputy Governor,
living in a luxurious house, and the new owner of a 20-acre coffee plantation. I
wondered, after the fact, whether he had struck a deal with Jakarta to create
the conditions for annexation.

The recent publication in Australia of a series of secret diplomatic documents -
later suppressed by the Government - sheds some light on this question. In a
situation summary for the Australian Foreign Minister, senior aides wrote:
''Other very delicate sources (which are being brought to your attention
separately) suggest that U.D.T. acted with at least some foreknowledge of the
(Indonesian) state intelligence coordination body.''

The summary continues by noting that the Dili radio under U.D.T.  control was
appealing to Southeast Asian nations to send help, including armed forces, and
it concludes: ''The broadcasts provide the pretext for Indonesian intervention
in Portuguese Timor. All this stops well short of proof of Indonesian collusion
with U.D.T. But if the Indonesians were intending to intervene, they could have
hardly stage-managed the scene any better.''

The presumption of a link between Indonesian military intelligence and U.D.T. is
pa@r alleled by the persistent allegation, made by East Timorese hostile to
Indonesia but not affiliated with Fretilin, that Major Mota and a colleague from
the Portuguese Armed Forces Movement, Maj. Silverio Jonatas, collaborated with
Fretilin in order to bring about immediate independence, thus freeing Lisbon
from costly further responsibility in the decolonization process. Friends of
Fretilin do not deny the closeness between the most radical Fretilin leaders and
the two Portuguese majors, and Fretilin's quick access to most of the arms and
munitions stores of the Portuguese military provides additional evidence.

Dispatches from Australia's Ambassador in Jakarta, Richard A.  Woolcott, provide
the most revealing insights into the American position as Indonesian
intervention drew near. Reporting on Aug. 17, the envoy cabled: ''(United States
Ambassador to Indonesia David D.) Newsom told me last night that he is under
instructions from Kissinger personally not to involve himself with the
Indonesians on the grounds that the United States is involved in enough problems
of greater importance overseas at present. The State Department has, we
understand, instructed the embassy to cut down its reporting on Timor.

''I will be seeing Newsom on Monday but his present attitude is that the United
States should keep out of the Portuguese Timor situation and allow events to
take their course. His somewhat cynical comment to me was that if Indonesia were
to intervene the United States would hope they would do so 'effectively, quickly
and not use our equipment.' ''

The Australian dispatches also illustrate what was probably Indonesia's
principal motivation for intervention: the fear of President Suharto, and the
military officers around him, of Communism. The cables report conversations with
Ambassador Newsom, in which Gen. Yoga Sugama, director of state intelligence,
suggested that U.D.T. was pro-Moscow and Fretilin pro-Peking. Mr. Newsom tried,
and failed, to persuade General Sugama that Portuguese socialism, with which the
general linked U.D.T., was strongly anti-Communist.

The cables also report that Ambassador Newsom warned General Sugama that the use
of American arms in Timor could endanger future military assistance, and that he
hinted it would provoke a negative reaction in Congress. Mr. Newsom's analysis
proved correct. Such criticism of the invasion as was heard from the United
States arose in Congress, where committee hearings continue to provide a forum
for views critical of Indonesia. From the outset, the Administration of
President Ford declared its acceptance of the Indonesian action, while conceding
that the East Timorese had not been given an opportunity for an act of
self-determination.

Officials at the American Embassy in Jakarta, now headed by Ambassador Edward E.
Masters, profess not to remember or never to have known what their predecessors
reported in 1975. Explaining the American position, which was limited to halting
the weapons flow for six months, embassy officials cite reasons of state.
Indonesia, they point out, is a valued ally, a third-world country that takes
proWestern positions, a founder-member of the nonaligned movement that is
sternly anti-Communist, and an important petroleum producer (accounting for 5
percent of American imports) that does not, they say, use the commodity as a
political weapon. Indonesia is also described as a Moslem nation that is not
hostile, a reliable supplier of several raw materials, a country in which
American investment exceeds $4 billion and which is strategically situated
athwart vital air and sea routes between the Indian and Pacific oceans.

American officials show signs of embarrassment when asked why the United States
takes so lenient a view of the annexation of East Timor when Vietnam's invasion
of Cambodia and creation of a puppet government, stopping short of outright
annexation, have met with such strong American opposition on the ground of
violation of principles of international conduct.  As in Vietnamese-occupied
Cambodia, the East Timorese use every possible occasion to make a foreigner
aware of their unhappiness over foreign occupation. In the more than four years
since my previous visit, East Timor had become a country broken in body and
spirit.  The 1978 Indonesian offensive - in which American-supplied aircraft
played a major role - had reduced Fretilin to a handful of guerrillas and
brought the people down from the hills to the coast, famished, sick, naked or in
rags.

Indonesia initially turned a deaf ear to Western requests to be allowed to bring
in aid. Finally, in January 1979, Adam Malik, now Indonesia's Vice President,
told Bishop Edwin Broderick, executive director of the American organization,
Catholic Relief Services, that it could begin a program of food and medical
assistance.

But bureaucratic delays, typical in Indonesia, put off the first survey of needs
by Francis X. Carlin, Catholic Relief's director in that country, until May.
What he saw continues to haunt Mr. Carlin, a Philadelphian with long experience
in Asia.

''The first group I saw ... about 120 of them ...were just down on the floor
with all that they owned, which didn't amount to anything.  The military had
given them some corn. Their bellies were bloated, their eyes huge and empty,
their limbs scrawny. Their skin was dry and scaly, and they were unbelievably
dirty.

''Hunger was killing not just the very young or the very old, but it was so bad
there it was killing those in the prime of life. Many of that first group were
definitely beyond recovery. Wherever we went afterward, people were skeletal and
totally deprived of food and clothing. The Indonesian colonel with me said,
'Move fast.' I couldn't move fast enough.''

The Moslem fasting month, when many services cease functioning in Indonesia, and
what Mr. Carlin termed ''internal delays'' between Catholic Relief and the
United States Government (which underwrote most of the assistance), kept aid
from arriving until September, a year after the ambassadors, including Mr.
Masters, had seen the first victims.

The ill and the starved were on their way to recovery when I saw them because,
Mr. Carlin said, those who could not be saved had died by then. But their
spirits seemed permanently wounded. The faces of those in the large resettlement
areas, where perhaps half of East Timor's population has been gathered - to
provide necessary services, say the Indonesian authorities, to keep the people
under control, say others - reflect the horrors of war, famine and military
occupation.

The stories of some East Timorese who oppose Indonesian rule but are not
affiliated with any of the East Timorese parties suggest a typical Southeast
Asian war - in which cruelty knew few bounds and both sides pushed and pulled a
largely unpolitical people in order to deny them to the ''enemy.'' Eventually,
the superior numbers and equipment of the invader succeeded in reducing Fretilin
to perhaps 600 guerrillas who are still in the mountains - and still capable of
sporadic attacks and thus of provoking Indonesian reprisals, arrests and
mistreatment of innocent East Timorese.

''Above all, the people want more justice,'' a Timorese priest said recently.
''They feel the moral injustice. Their rights are not respected. No one can
talk. And they are worried about food. There is not enough land in the villages
where they have to stay, and they haven't the health or the strength to make new
fields. You have to eat to have strength.''

The priest hesitated, then sadly resumed. ''I think it is a situation beyond our
force. I think it is the destiny of small countries. We have to accept.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos map of Indonesian archipelago

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUTLOOK DIM ON ECONOMY

BYLINE: By EDWARD C. BURKS

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words


WASHNGTON ALREADY trailing the nation as a whole in economic growth and per
capita income gains, New Jersey and most of the 18 states of the Northeast and
Middle West will continue to lag begin national averages in the next two
decades, according to an analysis by the Northeast-Midwest Institute.

In one of its gloomiest reports yet - it is entitled ''State of the Region
1981'' - the institute concludes that although ''economic decline accelerates in
the Northeast and Midwest, Federal policy remains tilted toward the development
interests of the South and West.''

Although New Jersey fits the overall pattern for the 18-state region stretching
from Maine and Maryland in the East to Minnesota and Iowa, the state's growth
figures in general are far better than those for New York and Pennsylvania.

The institute, a nonprofit research center, was set up in 1976 to compile
statistical analyses for the 213 Congressmen of both parties representing the 18
states. It uses Federal figures and projections on a wide variety of subjects.

Following are the major findings of the new analysis, with particular emphasis
on the situation in New Jersey:

POPULATION GROWTH

More than 90 percent of the nation's population growth between 1970 and 1980
occurred outside the Northeast-Middle West region. Although New Jersey had a 2
percent growth during the decade and ranks ninth among the 50 states with a
population of approximately 7,330,000, the increase for the nation as a whole
was about 11 percent.

New Jersey is losing one of its Congressional seats because of slow growth in
the last decade and, according to the estimates, could lose another in the year
2000.

OUTWARD MIGRATION

During the 1970-79 period, a net of more than 3.4 million persons moved from the
Northeast and Middle West to other parts of the nation. New York State alone had
a net outward migration of nearly 1.3 million, Pennsylvania 400,000 and New
Jersey 130,000; on the other hand, Florida had a net gain of 1.85 million,
California 1.25 million and Texas 1 million.

PROJECTED GROWTH

The Census Bureau projects that, between 1980 and 2000, the population of the
South and West will grow at four times the rate of the Northeast and Middle
West. Here again, the projected growth for New Jersey - to 8.4 million by 2000,
a gain of 12.4 percent - is far superior to the estimates for New York, for
which no gain at all is forecast, and for Penn-sylvania, where an increase of
only 3.6 percent over the 20 years is predicted. The growth for the nation as a
whole is projected at 17 percent.

MANUFACTURING JOBS

The Northeast and Middle West lost 987,000 manufacturing jobs in the last
decade, while the South gained 890,000 such jobs and the West nearly 820,000.
New Jersey's manufacturing jobs declined by 10 percent (or 85,700), from 863,000
in 1970 to 777,300 in 1980. New York State's loss was 17 percent, and
Pennsylvania's 14 percent.

NEW CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Between 1970 and 1977, investment in new capital equipment increased by less
than 90 percent in the Northeast and Middle West - inflation accounted for a
good share of the dollar gain - but similar investment in the South and West was
up by 160 percent. New Jersey's increase was only 65 percent, well below that
for the NortheastMiddle West region as a whole.

FEDERAL SPENDING

During the 1975-79 period, Northeastern and Middle Western states paid $165
billion more in taxes to Washington than they received in Federal spending. In
1979, the last year for which figures are available, New Jersey had the
next-to-worst record among the 50 states in the ratio of Federal spending
received for tax dollars paid.

New Jersey got back 69 cents for each $1 in taxes paid to Washington; Only
Michigan fared worse, with a return of 66 cents.  New York and Pennsylvania
almost broke even, getting back 96 cents and 92 cents, respectively, for each $1
in Federal taxes.

DEFENSE EMPLOYMENT

During the 1970's, Defense Department employment in the Northeast and Middle
West declined by 30 percent. The South and West had respective losses of 16 and
19 percent, as defense employment was cut back drastically after the Vietnam
war. However, the South and West together still have more than 80 percent of the
defense jobs. New Jersey lost 35,000 of its 82,000 defense jobs in 1970, a drop
of 43 percent during the decade.

INCOME PROJECTIONS

Department of Commerce estimates forecast an average annual increase of 3.3
percent in per capita income between now and 2000, with the South and West ahead
of the national average with projections of 3.9 percent. On the other hand, the
projection for the Northeast and Middle West is an increase of only 3.1 percent
a year, and for New Jersey, only 2.9 percent. Still lower is the projected
annual growth for New York State - just 2.1 percent.

In a conclusion referring to the long Federal ''tilt'' toward helping the South
and West, the institute's report states: ''Since the 1930's, the Federal
Government has invested billions of dollars in laying the foundation for
economic revival in the South and development of the West.

''Massive Federal outlays for the Tennessee Valley Authority, Interstate
highways, water and energy projects, military bases, rural electrification, port
construction, the space program, Federal procurement and other programs
established the basis for rapid economic growth in these regions. But as
economic decline accelerates in the Northeast and Midwest, Federal policy
remains tilted toward the development interests of the South and West.''

Preparation of the ''State of the Region'' report was supervised by Jacqueline
Mazza, policy analyst for the Northeast-Midwest Institute, and Bill Hogan,
editor for the Northeast-Midwest Congressional Coalition. Tom Cochran is
executive director of the institute, which is based in Washington.

Even while emphasizing the need for long-term structural changes to aid the
Northeast and Middle West, the report emphasizes that the 18-state region
''retains many strengths and resources'' that cannot be measured completely by
economic statistics.

For example, it cites the ''highly skilled and educated work force,'' a
long-standing tradition of ''inventiveness,'' the presence of ''some of the
world's finest institutions of higher learning and centers of science and
culture'' and an abundance of water, a resource so scarce in parts of New
Jersey, as well as the West, that its lack may abruptly curtail continued rapid
economic growth in those areas.

Finally, a few plus marks were recorded, among them the decision to keep Fort
Dix open, Federal approval of a special formula for Community Development Block
Grants to aid older, hard-hit urban communities, especially in the Northeast,
and the ongoing $2.5 billion project to upgrade the Boston-New York-Washington
rail corridor for high-speed passenger trains.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: NUANCES OF THE THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Feb. 15


Shah Mohammad Dost, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, said at a news conference
Thursday that he was disheartened and surprised by a resolution, drafted at the
conference of nations professing nonalignment, that called for withdrawal of
foreign forces from his country.

The Foreign Minister made it clear that he had expected and hoped such things
would be left unsaid in the four-day meeting, which ended Friday night.

Actually, what was unsaid was very important in this meeting of 94 member states
and 21 observer countries who ostensibly come to understanding not by vote but
by consensus.

Nuance is very important and Mr. Dost must have had his hopes raised at the very
outset when the Cuban chairman, Foreign Minister Isidoro Octavio Malmierca
Peoli, asked the delegates to stand in a moment of silent tribute to the leaders
of member countries who had died since the movement's Havana summit meeting in
September 1979.

The names of Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia and Sir Seretse Khama of Botswana were
mentioned by the Cuban. But the name of Mohammad Noor Taraki, the Afghan leader
slain a month after he returned home from the Havana talks, was passed over in
silence. So was the name of Hafizullah Amin, the Afghan who reportedly had Mr.
Taraki killed and who was himself killed when Soviet troops entered Afghanistan.

Whenever the United States was mentioned, it was in the context of being an
imperial power. The Cuban and North Korean delegations condemned what they said
were Washington's threats to blockade Cuba and United States intimidation of
Grenada and Nicaragua. It was the alleged occupation of Puerto Rico that was
used to place Washington in the camp of the colonial powers.

Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, in a speech marking the 20th anniversary
of the movement, affirmed that there was ''an integral, intrinsic link between
nonalignment and anticolonialism.''

She quoted as evidence a remark by someone she described only as the leader of
the first anticolonial battle. ''It is our true policy to steer clear of
permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world,'' was the quotation
she offered, choosing not to identify the source by name or country. It was
George Washington in his Farewell Address.

It is not fair to say that ''natural allies'' were not mentioned, but they were
certainly not mentioned very much. This phrase had been the rallying cry of the
pro-Soviet bloc at the Havana summit meeting. Led by Cuba, Vietnam and Ethiopia,
this group of nations failed in their effort to win acceptance of the Leninist
doctrine that the Soviet Union and its developed allies were the natural allies
of the emerging postcolonial and nonaligned countries.  Blocking an
institutionalization of this concept was one of the last successes of Tito
before his death in May 1980.

The Cubans never mentioned ''natural allies'' at the meeting here.  Only Abdulai
O. Conteh, Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone, drew attention to the debate at
Havana when he said, ''The nonaligned movement has no natural allies, only
natural enemies.''

Some observers of the nonaligned meetings over the last decade said they saw in
the deliberations here a continuing tilt toward greater conservatism.

On a sartorial level, at least, this was unquestioned, and a Whitehall bias was
very much in evidence, with striped gray flannels predominating. The Iranians
are dressing the way the Cubans used to, with beards and khaki field jackets.
The Cubans, meanwhile, seem to be favoring an East bloc look -chunky double
breasted suits and wide ties.

Some Africans and some Saudis were the only ones clinging to traditional dress.
And some delegates, such as Agha Shahi, the Pakistani Foreign Minister,
straddled the issue. When he addressed the full session he wore an astrakhan cap
and the waistcoat and baggy white trousers of a Pakistani elder. But after that,
as he moved from committee to committee consulting, debating and seeking to
persuade, Mr. Shahi wore his work clothes - the tailoring may not have been
British but the inspiration was.

The movement for nonalignment arose out of the postwar collapse of empires, and
the commitment to anticolonialism is the major adhesive that solidifies the
widely disparate members of the group. But the very success of the anticolonial
struggle has reduced the number of rallying causes.

France was criticized for failing to yield Mayotte Island to the Comoros;
Britain was upbraided for hanging on to the Falkland Islands and the United
States was scolded over Puerto Rico.

An Asian delegate conceded that, compared with the scores of colonies and
billions of people who have gained independence, the charges against the former
colonial powers were paltry. But he noted they were important because by saying
them the delegates could avoid saying other things.

Specifically, they could avoid bringing up those cases where peoples in
independent countries that were once colonies are seeking to break away and
become independent themselves. For example, Indonesia's major concern at the
conference was that no one bring up the case of East Timor. No one did. It was
another thing left unsaid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MORE SALVADOR AID BACKED IN CONGRESS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


The Reagan Administration won strong support from key members of Congress today
for future increases in American aid to El Salvador to help the Government there
to counter what the Administration says is Soviet-bloc assistance to the
insurgents in the country.

''I think those outside forces should be on notice that this nation will do
whatever is necesary to prevent a Communist state takeover in El Salvador,''
said Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, the chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee. He made the statement after a closed-door briefing
from Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. on the Administration's assertions
that arms supplied by the Soviet Union, Cuba, Ethiopia and Vietnam had been sent
to the Salvadoran insurgents.

No Decision Is Reached

Although William J. Dyess, a State Department spokesman, said that the
Administration had not decided whether, or how much, additional military and
economic assistance would be needed for El Salvador, various Senators and
Representatives appeared favorably inclined in advance to requests that might be
submitted.

El Salvador, which is ruled by a military-civilian junta, is receiving $73.5
million for this fiscal year, of which $10 million is in military aid.

Representative James C. Wright Jr., Democrat of Texas, who is the House majority
leader, said after Mr. Haig's briefing that ''Central America is probably more
vitally important to us than any other part of the world.''

''Our response to what is happening there requires a bipartisan, unified
approach and I fully expect that that is what the President and the Secretary of
State will receive,'' he said.

Mr. Percy was asked if his pledge to do ''whatever is necessary'' was meant to
include the dispatch of American combat troops to El Salvador. He said that such
a move ''would be highly unlikely'' but he declined to ''rule out any options.''

''I am simply saying that we will do what is necessary to resist outside
intervention,'' he said. ''We will not stand idly by while outside forces -
outside our hemisphere or within our hemisphere - are feeding arms to one
particular faction attempting to bring down what looks to be a centrist
government.''

''The Administration is reaching out seeking Congressional support,'' Mr. Percy
said. ''They will have that support.'' So far the Administration has not made
public what Mr. Dyess described today as ''the very solid, increasing evidence
that the leftist guerrillas are being supplied with arms from the outside.''

In addition to sharing the material with members of Congress throughout the day,
the Administration has sent special envoys to Europe and Latin America to brief
other governments on the data in an effort to win their political backing.

Officials said that a ''white paper'' would be made available later in the week.
They said that the information, which they said was compiled from a number of
sources including documents captured from the insurgents, disclosed that the
rebels had been supplied with Soviet- and American-made military equipment
shipped to El Salvador from as far away as Vietnam.

Arms From Vietnam Reported

The Administration says, for instance, that large amounts of captured American
military equipment had been sent from Vietnam to Cuba by the Soviet Union. From
Cuba, the equipment was said to have been shipped to Nicaragua, from where,
according to these accounts, it was slipped into El Salvador by sea and air and
by land through Honduras.

Mr. Haig has indicated privately that he sees the situation in El Salvador as an
early test of relations with both American allies and with the Soviet Union. He
seems to want to make El Salvador a demonstration of allied unity and an example
of Soviet overseas ''expansionism.''

Support for the Salvadoran Government in this country has been weakened,
however, by its seeming inability to crack down on rightwing groups that have
carried out political assassinations.

Of particular concern was the murder in December of four American churchwomen.
For a while, American aid to El Salvador was suspended as a result of the
killings.

Aid Resumed in January

The Carter Administration, which had suspended the aid, resumed it shortly
before leaving office because of the increased guerrilla activity. The Reagan
Administration said last week that it had ''delinked'' the question of aid to El
Salvador from the question of a thorough investigation by Salvadoran authorities
into the death of the Americans.

But Senator Percy said today he had told Secretary Haig that ''it is absolutely
crucial'' that the Salvadoran authorities find out who murdered the churchwomen.
He said that resolution of the matter was very important to Americans. Mr. Dyess
said the Administration was pressing for action on the matter.

The Senate Majority Leader, Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, said the briefing
he had received from Mr. Haig was ''alarming.'' He said it was ''pretty clear
that there is a major problem there and it is also clear to me at least that
Cuba is directly involved in the difficulties of that region.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR FACES LONG WAR AS REBELS RESUME RAIDS

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO GOTERA, El Salvador, Feb. 17


A month after the defeat of their ''final offensive,'' leftist guerrillas here
are again attacking and the Government is settling in for what now appears will
be a protracted guerrilla war.

The 16,000-man Salvadoran armed forces have had the upper hand over about 3,500
guerrillas since the failed offensive, in which the rebels are thought to have
lost about 500 men. But Government forces are ill-trained and spread thin,
locked into static defense positions in small villages. They have been unable to
mount an effective counteroffensive.

The Salvadoran Army is proud that it beat back the offensive before receiving
American arms aid. But top officers acknowledge that the success was as much
political as military; the guerrillas were relying on a popular uprising that
never took place.

For years United States military aid to El Salvador was nonlethal equipment such
as uniforms, but in one of its last acts the Carter Administration approved an
emergency grant of $5 million in arms aid and the loan of six troop assault
helicopters. Eighteen American military men are here as instructors.

Salvador Asks More Aid

The Salvadorans are asking for more aid with which to build a special 2,000-man
mobile force that could go on the attack against the guerrillas. Some makeshift
units have been largely ineffective in sweeps into rebel areas.

Salvadoran forces have recently intercepted several planes and boats loaded with
used American weapons such as M-16 rifles. American and Salvadoran officials say
the arms are funneled by the Soviet Union through Cuba from such Marxist
countries as Ethiopia and Vietnam.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. is sending missions to Europe and Latin
America this week in an effort to gather support as the Administration considers
increasing arms aid and the number of American military instructors here.

The eastern half of the country shows the scars of recent guerrilla activity:
stacks of bailed cotton valued at $2 million are now ashes, a 50-yard bridge
span lies crumpled in a gorge, damage to power transmitters has blacked out
large areas.

Banners Read 'Liberated Zones'

The guerrillas also control much of the sparsely populated mountainous area of
the north and smaller pockets in the foothills surrounding a string of volcanos
down the center of the country.

In this northeastern provincial center, where the fiercest fighting of the
offensive took place, the commander of a supposedly elite army unit asserted,
''We are in control - total control.'' But peasants from a mountain village near
here tell of banners over roads that proclaim ''Liberated zones.''

Much of the guerrilla activity has been directed at this impoverished nation's
faltering economy. The guerrillas have been blockading highways, shooting up
buses and chasing peasants from their fields.

Traffic on major highways is now half of normal, though buses and trucks still
run regularly. Production of coffee, cotton and sugar, the country's three major
exports, is down significantly from last year - in the case of cotton by more
than half - but much of the decrease is also attributed to a shortage of
fertilizer, lower world prices and the Government's new land redistribution
program.

Reported efforts by Nicaragua and other countries to encourage the guerrillas to
seek a negotiated solution to the two-year-old war appear to be having little
effect.

Rebels Vow New Offensive

Opposition political leaders in self-exile in such countries as Mexico speak
tentatively of negotiations. But the Faribundo Marti Liberation Front, the
coalition of five guerrilla bands actually fighting here, appears committed to
fight to the end. Rebel leaders, many of them hardened by up to 20 years of
guerrilla activity, have said they will open another offensive, though it is
unclear when.

''The only answer now is a military solution,'' Col. Jose Guillermo Garcia, the
Minister of Defense, said in an interview. ''This is not initiated by us, but by
the leftist terrorists.''

But what hope there might have been - or might still be - for a negotiated
solution has also been undermined by right-wing death squads that nightly
assassinate moderates and leftists.

On the main coastal highway, less than 20 miles from the country's international
airport, lie three mutilated bodies, two with their heads chopped off. A
scrawled message reads, ''Bandits, you better beware because we know all of
you.''

Even then it is difficult to tell who is killing whom. When 18 people were
killed in an ambushed farm truck last week, the authorities blamed the
guerrillas, but Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas in his Sunday sermon said he had
''doubts.'' The attack was uncharacteristic of the left, and journalists
visiting the scene found many spent cartridges from the type of weapons carried
by government forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a woman with a baby

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Pleas for Garwood Denied; Judge Wishes 'Happiness'

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 17


The long court-martial of Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood ended today with the judge
wishing the marine ''peace and happiness'' and rejecting two defense bids to
reverse the conviction.

Private Garwood is the only United States serviceman to have been convicted for
aiding the enemy in Vietnam. Pre-trial maneuvering and the trial itself spanned
two years.

A defense attorney, John C. Lowe, asked Col. R.E. Switzer, the judge in the
case, to reverse the verdict on grounds that Colonel Switzer had prejudiced the
case by telling reporters he thought Private Garwood should have testified in
his own behalf.

Colonel Switzer ruled today that he had found nothing in several news articles
presented by the defense to show that he was biased against Private Garwood.

Colonel Switzer also rejected a defense contention that there was insufficient
evidence for the five-man jury to convict Private Garwood.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Mrs. Reagan on Vietnam Panel

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


Nancy Reagan will join the National Sponsoring Committee for the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund, which by next year hopes to build a memorial honoring
Americans who died in Vietnam, the White House said today. President Carter
signed legislation in July providing two acres of Government property northeast
of the Lincoln Memorial on the Mall for construction of the memorial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Missing: a New Film

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


The small green suitcase contained the only negative of a halfhour television
documentary that had taken Jim Gambone a year to make, and when the St. Paul
film maker arrived in New York City Monday night he was very careful with it.

When he needed to alert a friend that he was on his way by cab, Mr. Gambone knew
better than to leave the suitcase on the sidewalk untended while he made the
call from a pay phone. When the cab arrived at Bleecker Street and La Guardia
Place about 10 P.M., Mr.  Gambone paid the fare, but left the suitcase in the
back seat and asked the driver to wait while he made the call.

That, it turned out, was a mistake.  The driver apparently didn't understand,
Mr. Gambone said yesterday, and a moment later he saw the light change and the
cab pull away.

''I'm wiped out,'' Mr. Gambone said.  The film, about the defoliant Agent Orange
used in Vietnam, had been scheduled for a premiere showing in a St. Paul theater
on Feb.  28, according to Mr. Gambone, who said that the film's narrator, the
actor Martin Sheen, had accepted an invitation to attend.

He urged the driver or anyone who may have found the suitcase to call him in New
York at 254-4075.

Medical College Drive

In its 105 years, the Meharry Medical College in Nashville, has educated more
black doctors and dentists that any other medical school in the country. Even
today, long after blacks have been admitted to other schools, about 40 percent
of the nation's black medical and dental practitioners claim Meharry training.

But the school, the nation's oldest medical college for blacks, has been under
mounting financial pressure in recent years, and now it is getting a new interim
president to help spearhead a $25 million fundraising drive.

He's Dr. Richard Lester, chairman of radiology at the University of Texas
Medical School in Houston, who will take over on March 1 and serve until a
permanent president is selected.

Dr. Lester, a Meharry trustee, will replace Dr. Lloyd C. Elam, who has served as
Meharry's president since 1967 and is credited with stimulating a $90 million
program of capital improvements.

Dr. Elam, who will assume the post of chancellor, said it had been his decision
to step aside to allow someone else to supervise the next phase of the school's
growth.  Albin Krebs Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LEVELING OFF OF DRUG USE FOUND AMONG STUDENTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


Use of illicit drugs by young people in this country shows clear signs of
leveling off, according to the results of a survey of high school seniors
reported today.

Indicative of the trend, for the first time since the survey began in 1975 the
number of seniors who say they have tried marijuana has actually declined.

Although use of drugs remains extremely high, the leader of the study, Dr. Lloyd
Johnston of the University of Michigan, discerns a ''gradually increasing
conservatism'' among teen-agers and says, ''The dramatic rise over the last two
decades in the proportion of young people involved with illicit drugs appears at
or very near an end.''

A similar trend toward a leveling off of drug use has been reported by the
military.  The study, a yearly sampling of about 17,000 seniors throughout the
country that is sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, found
significant changes in patterns of use from 1979 to 1980. Daily use of
marijuana, the most widely used substance, was down by 12 percent, though nearly
one in 10 seniors still said they smoked it daily.

Amphetamines an Exception

Use of inhalants and hallucinogens such as PCP decreased, and a previously
reported decline in the use of barbiturates and tranquilizers continued. Cocaine
use, which had nearly doubled from 1976 to 1979, showed signs of stabilizing,
while use of heroin and other opiates and LSD remained about stable.

The main exceptions to the downward-or-stable trend were amphetamines and other
stimulants, the second most widely used substances, and methaqualone, a sleeping
pill better known as Quaaludes.

The Michigan scientists attributed the shifts to news reports on scientific
evidence about marijuana effects, growing concern about health risks among the
young, mounting peer disapproval of drug use and the changing mood of the times.

''We are no longer in a period when external events, like the Vietnam War,
prevent young people from hearing the warnings,'' said Dr. Johnston, who is with
Michigan's Institute for Social Research.

The researchers discerned some shifts in the reasons for drug use that seem to
accord with a current, more purposeful mood of young people. For example, those
using stimulants were more likely now than before to say they used them to lose
weight or to get through the day, rather than just to ''get high.''

Use Still Widespread

Still, the study found drug use very widespread. Though the figures in 1980
appeared to be leveling, 65 percent of the seniors reported having used some
illicit drug during their lives, an 18 percent increase since the first survey
in 1975.

Moreover, the proportion of students who had ever used drugs other than
marijuana grew from 35 percent in 1976 to 39 percent in 1980, mostly because of
the rising popularity of cocaine and other ''uppers.'' Those reporting having
used amphetamines in the last 12 months was up to 21 percent, from 18, of all
seniors. One of every six reported having tried cocaine, but only one of every
500 cited daily use of the costly drug.

Critics have said the study was faulty because it did not include dropouts who
might be greater drug users than students. Dr. Johnston conceded that the survey
might somewhat underestimate the use of drugs. He said, however, that since the
survey excluded the dropouts every year, it was consistent in the trends it
reported. He said dropouts, about 15 percent of the age group measured, would
have to be using drugs at vast variance from the majority to offset the
findings.

The survey detected significant changes in attitudes toward drugs in just one
year, with disapproval increasing. A growing number in 1980, three-quarters,
said they disapproved of regular marijuana smoking, and nearly half opposed
occasional use, slightly up from 1979.

----

Fungus Linked to Marijuana

BOSTON, Feb. 18 (UPI) - Marijuana contains a common household fungus that can
lead to allergic reactions or lung damage when smoked and, in certain
individuals, can cause life-threatening infections, doctors reported today.

Research at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Milwaukee showed about half the
marijuana users studied had been infected by fungi of the aspergillus family.

Although the fungus is an everyday inhabitant of dark, damp basement corners,
the chief investigator, Dr. Steven Kagen, warned that persons who smoked
marijuana inhaled large amounts of fungal spores of many types.

''We have yet to find a sample of marijuana that doesn't have fungal organisms
in it,'' Dr. Kagen said in an interview. Dr. Kagen's study appeared in a letter
to The New England Journal of Medicine.

Members of the aspergillus family produce spores that Dr. Kagen said were not
destroyed by burning. Once inhaled, growing organisms can cause a number of lung
diseases that range from asthma to fatal infections.

In the lungs of a healthy person, the fungus is battled by the body's immune
system. The result, Dr. Kagen said, may be a cough or fever, and could be
mistaken for a typical flu virus.

Risky for Cancer Patients

But in persons with weak immune defenses, such as cancer patients being treated
with drug therapy, the same infection could cause death.

Cancer patients often smoke marijuana to lessen the nausea associated with their
drug therapy, Dr. Kagen said. While relieving the nausea, patients also expose
themselves to fungal spores, he said.

''This use of marijuana as an antiemetic ought to be vigorously discouraged,''
Dr. Kagen said. ''The user ought to be aware that there are a number of lung
diseases that can be caused by using that illegal product.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A BOLD AND RISKY VENTURE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


For all the urgent confidence in President Reagan's address to Congress tonight,
his economic program is a bold yet risky venture for both the nation's economy
and for the Republican Party that he led to stunning gains last November.

Much attention has focused in recent days on the specific numbers and programs
involved in the President's budget and tax proposals.  But only now have some
politicians begun to comment that the new President is staking the Republicans'
future on achieving a philosophical sea change in American politics.

He is bent, they say, on bringing about a watershed shift in economic thinking
and in the structure of government that transcends any specific reallocations of
funds.

Democrats and Republicans remarked that in his straight-talking, figure-studded
speech, Mr. Reagan had confronted Congress with a set of decisions on domestic
policy that were of probably greater magnitude than any since the early New Deal
period.

If Mr. Reagan is successful, his speech may be looked back upon as an important
political turning point because he has vigorously presented a conservative
blueprint on the premise that the Government's power to tax must not be used to
bring about social change. ''We've tried that and surely must be able to see it
doesn't work,'' he declared to a ringing round of applause from a
conservative-minded Congress.

In his proposals, the basic programs of the New Deal are being left largely
intact, and Mr. Reagan's advisers are counting heavily on this tactic to make
the program more palatable in Congress and with the public. But the Great
Society programs of the mid-1960's and many initiatives of President Carter are
being reversed, revised or revamped.

With all the controversy that this is sure to kindle, the new President has cast
aside the Republican tradition of pressing for balanced budgets at the earliest
opportunity and is basing the success of his economic recovery program on a
radical tax-cutting package that is not only untested but widely questioned by
some reputable economists.

''It's so far out, so unusual, so against-the-grain of the American people who
want a balanced budget that it's got to succeed or Reagan's in trouble,''
commented Representative Morris K. Udall, the liberal Democrat from Arizona.
''If it does, Reagan will be one of the heroes of this generation. But if it
fails and produces a $100 billion budget deficit, the Republican Party will be
right back in the hole again.''

''People forget how quickly politics can change and how impatient the public can
become when things don't work right,'' Mr. Udall added. ''Think back to 1964
when the press was writing off the Republican Party after Goldwater's defeat.
But they bounced back in 1966 and took the White House in 1968 after Vietnam.''

Mr. Reagan implicitly conceded the point in his speech to Congress and the
nation. He acknowledged that some economists believe that tax cuts now would be
inflationary. But he confidently rested his case on his own advisors, citing the
growth-generating precedents of other tax cuts earlier this century and
promising taxpayers $500 billion more cash in their pockets over the next five
years, as well as a new spurt of productivity and growth coupled with a steady
drop in inflation.

The real political test, both his advisors and his opponents agree, will be
whether the program, presuming that most of it passes Congress, can produce the
kind of tangible results he is promising before the 1982 Congressional elections
and the 1984 Presidential election.

The Reagan white paper on the economic program listed the important yardsticks.
The budget would be balanced by 1984, it said. The inflation rate of the
consumer price index would drop from 11.1 percent in 1981 to 8.3 percent in 1982
and 5.5 percent in 1984. The current ''anemic growth'' of the economy, which is
1.1 percent, would rise to ''a much more robust growth trend of 4 to 5 percent a
year'' from 1982 onward.

To some Democrats, those projections carry an echo of the early optimism of
President Carter's economic programs in 1977. ''Four years ago, it was Carter
who was promising to balance the budget in four years,'' Mr. Udall remarked.
''No wonder people are skeptical.''

For Mr. Reagan, the first hurdle is getting his program accepted by Congress.
Although opposition to various spending cuts has already begun to surface, White
House strategists contend that the Democrats dare not block the Reagan program
outright with their majority in the House of Representatives. Such a move, they
say, would allow the President to put the onus of continued economic troubles on
them.

Appeal to Congress

Although Mr. Reagan confronted the Democrats with that political prospect
tonight by asserting that potential opponents of his measures do not have an
alternative program, he invited Congressional partnership by offering to make
this not his plan but ''our plan.'' That won him a standing ovation, an
indication that some Democrats are ready to support him.

In Congress, the greatest risk to the White House is that liberal and big-city
Democrats will team up with labor unions and social organizations to trim,
rather than block, the Reagan budget cuts and to try to alter the Reagan tax
package.

Powerful Democrats on the House Budget Committee and the House Ways and Means
Committee have already spoken of tilting the tax cuts more toward lower-income
groups, a move that Mr. Reagan's economic advisors have resisted. They have
argued that tax cuts to higher-bracket taxpayers are more likely to end up as
savings, providing capital for investment by American industry.

Reagan aides fear a delay since they feel the best chances for success with this
package lie in getting the major action by Congress completed in the next 90
days, while Republicans and some Democrats feel the pressure of Mr. Reagan's
momentum and the Republican mandate of the last election.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Murray L. Weidenbaum and David A. Stockman
(page B7)

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FIRMLY ENDORSES SALVADOR REFORMS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


As the United States continued to provide its allies and Congress with evidence
of what it says are Soviet-bloc arms shipments to El Salvador's left-wing
guerrillas, the State Department declared that the United States was firmly
backing political and social reforms, as well as security, in El Salvador.

Responding to criticism that the Reagan Administration has emphasized only
military assistance to El Salvador against the guerrilla threat, the State
Department said in a statement that ''the United States continues to support
strongly basic economic and political reforms, including elections in 1982-83.''

The statement said that these basic changes, begun by the Salvadoran Government
during the Carter Administration, included ''agrarian and banking reforms,
promotion of employment and encouragement of the private sector.''

''The United States, with its long tradition of democratic change, recognizes
the need for and supports peaceful and democratic change in El Salvador,'' the
statement said.

An Endorsement for Junta

The statement was an endorsement by the Reagan Administration of the
military-civilian junta headed by President Jose Napoleon Duarte, a Christian
Democrat. It said that ''successful implementation of these reforms would
provide the Government of El Salvador with broad popular support and facilitate
a transition to an elected government.''

Meanwhile, a high-level United States mission continued the presentation to West
European governments of what the Administration says is evidence that large
amounts of arms have been shipped to El Salvador's Marxist-led guerrillas by way
of Cuba, with the cooperation of the Soviet Union and its allies.

The State Department has briefed members of Congress on the documentary and
photographic evidence of the arms shipments, which it says include quantities of
United States M-16 rifles and other American weapons that were abandoned in
Vietnam, according to United States intelligence officials. The officials say
that the American arms were shipped from Vietnam to the Soviet Union and from
there to Cuba.

The intelligence officials said that the evidence that arms had been transferred
from Cuba to Nicaragua, and then to El Salvador by overland trucking through
Honduras, or by small airplanes dropping the arms by air, had been assembled
from both human and electronic sources.

Evidence Termed 'Substantial'

Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, who attended one
briefing, said the State Department presentation, including slides and
photographs, was ''substantial evidence of a pretty sizable flow of arms.''

Mr. Barnes, who is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on
Inter-American Affairs, said he planned to hold hearings starting next week on
the Administration's plans to increase military and economic aid to El Salvador.

The mission to Western Europe, headed by Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who is
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig's choice for Assistant Secretary for
Europe, has almost finished its task after meetings with high officials in Bonn,
Paris and Brussels, site of the headquarters of the European Economic Communiy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD WILL RECEIVE PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT UNDER A MARINE LEAVE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 324 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 18


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood will be placed on leave Friday and sent to a civilian
hospital in Virginia for voluntary psychiatric treatment, the Marine Corps
announced today.

Maj. John Schmidt said that Private Garwood, who was convicted of collaborating
with the enemy and striking a fellow American while he was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam, was being placed on leave while his conviction was being appealed.

Military officials declined to identify the hospital.  During the court-martial,
Private Garwood's attorneys did not dispute testimony from former prisoners of
war who said he had served his captors as an interpreter and that he had guarded
other Americans and informed on them.

The defense team argued that Private Garwood had been driven insane by
deprivation and torture in captivity and could not understand the criminality of
his acts.

Testimony of Psychiatrists

Psychiatrists for both the defense and Government testified that Private Garwood
remained mentally disabled.  One psychiatrist said that even after effective,
long-term therapy Private Garwood would bear the emotional scars of his ordeal
for life.

Yesterday, Col. R.E. Switzer, the presiding judge, turned down two defense
motions. One asked him to declare a mistrial and the other asked him to overturn
the guilty verdict handed down two weeks ago by a five-man jury of marine
officers.

The defendant faced a possible life sentence. The jury ordered a dishonorable
discharge, reduction to the lowest pay grade and forfeiture of pay from the date
of conviction.

The conviction does not become official until the base commander, Maj. Gen.
David Barker, reviews the records of the court-martial and acts on it. He can
affirm the verdict and sentence, overturn them, or reduce the sentence. The
review is expected to take several weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS SALVADOR IS 'TEXTBOOK CASE' OF COMMUNIST PLOT

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


The State Department has provided embassies of friendly governments here with a
memorandum asserting that ''the insurgency in El Salvador has been progressively
transformed into a textbook case of indirect armed aggression by Communist
powers.''

In a chronology starting in December 1979, the memorandum details alleged
cooperation between El Salvador's Marx-

Text of memorandum is on page A4.
ist-led guerrillas and the Soviet bloc. It summarizes what it says is
documentary evidence that Nicaragua's Sandinist leaders cooperated with Cuba in
shipping arms through Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas, who maintained
liaison offices in Managua, the Nicaraguan capital.

The memorandum presents the alleged arms shipments as a major political thrust
into Central America by the Soviet Union. Moscow is portrayed as having
organized the shipment of tons of weapons from Vietnam and Ethiopia to Cuba,
which is said to have coordinated the final transfer with Salvadoran guerrilla
leaders in Havana.

U.S. Will Increase Aid

''The political direction, organization and arming of the Salvadoran insurgency
is coordinated and heavily influenced by Cuba with the active support of the
Soviet Union, East Germany, Vietnam and other Communist states,'' the memorandum
says.

The Reagan Administration has announced that it will increase military and
economic aid to El Salvador's military-backed Government. Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. has sent Lawrence S. Eagleburger, his choice for Assistant
Secretary for Europe, to Western Europe to explain the importance attached by
the United States to the conflict in El Salvador. Other missions have been sent
to Latin America.

Among the embassies receiving the memorandum here were those of members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Latin American countries with the
exception of Nicaragua. The memorandum was signed ''Haig.'' Official State
Department messages are routinely signed with the name of the Secretary of
State.

The full texts of the documents reportedly substantiating the United States
charges, which were said to have been captured from guerrilla forces in El
Salvador in November and January, were not provided with the memorandum. But at
least 12 documents are referred to in the chronology.

The summary of a document ''G,'' dated July 23 in the chronology, said that
members of the Salvadoran guerrilla ''general staff'' met in Managua with
Bayardo Arce, a Nicaraguan military commander, who said the Sandinist army would
give the Salvadorans some of its Western-made arms and replace these with arms
arriving from Communist sources.

A summary of document ''K,'' dated Nov. 1, said that the Salvadoran general
staff ''is informed that there are approximately 120 tons of military equipment
now in Nicaragua ready for shipment to the Salvadoran guerrillas.''

The memorandum said that in September the leadership of the Sandinist Liberation
Front, which runs Nicaragua's nine-man governing directorate, had suspended
weapons deliveries to El Salvador ''after the United States Government protests
to the Nicaraguan leadership over the supply activities.''

Nicaragua Denies Charges

But an entry in the memorandum dated November 1980 said that ''beginning in
November, the Sandinist National Liberation Front sends to El Salvador more arms
than the guerrillas can receive and distribute.''

Nicaragua's revolutionary Government has repeatedly denied having provided arms
to the Salvadoran guerrillas, which would be cause under United States economic
aid legislation for the termination of United States loans and food credits.

The memorandum said that the captured guerrilla documents and ''collateral
evidence'' from intelligence sources showed that the impulse for the shipment of
many of the arms to El Salvador came from a trip in June and July by Jorge
Shafik Handal, secretary general of the Salvadoran Communist Party, to the
Soviet Union, Vietnam, Ethiopia and Eastern European countries to ask for arms.

Tons of arms, including American weapons captured in Vietnam, were shipped to
Cuba, according to the memorandum, and sent from there to Nicaragua, from where
they were smuggled by land, sea and air to the Salvadoran guerrillas.

'Donation' From Iraq Noted

The memorandum also mentions a document ''J'' that refers to a $500,000
''logistics donation from Iraq'' for distribution to the Nicaraguan Sandinists
and the guerrillas in El Salvador.

On Jan. 10, the Salvadoran guerrillas launched a major uprising that brought to
light the existence of numerous heavy weapons, including mortars, recoilless
rifles, grenade launchers, and .50-caliber machine guns that had not been in
evidence before.

The guerrillas were unable to take control of any large town against the strong
reaction of El Salvador's security forces, built around an 8,000-men army. But
fighting continues in rural areas and the Salvadoran military has reported
continuing airdrops of supplies to the guerrillas from small planes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Lawrence S. Eagleburger

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AMPUTEE SELECTED BY REAGAN FOR VETERANS POST

BYLINE: by IRVIN MOLOTSKY Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


John Behan, a Long Island athlete who lost both legs in the Vietnam war, is to
be nominated tomorrow to head the Veterans Administration, a White House
official said today.

Mr. Behan, who serves as a Republican member of the New York State Assembly from
Montauk, is one of four persons scheduled to be nominated tomorrow to high-level
posts in the Reagan Administration.

Three Diverse Agencies

The others to be appointed are: John S. R. Shad, vice chairman of E. F.  Hutton
& Co., to become chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Ann McGill
Gorshutz, a former member of the Colorado State Legislature, to become
administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. M. Michael Cardenas, a
certified public accountant in California, to head the Small Business
Administration. All of the appointments are subject to confirmation by the
Senate.

Following Another Amputee

If Mr. Behan is confirmed, he would follow another amputee from the Vietnam war,
Max Cleland, as administrator of the veterans agency.

His appointment, as was Mr. Cleland's, would serve to blunt criticism by Vietnam
veterans that they have been neglected by the Government and forgotten by the
nation because of the unpopularity of the war they served in.

Mr. Behan was in Washington today, where he met with one of his chief
supporters, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, and to solicit
backing from other senators and members of the Reagan Administration.

'Deep Commitment' to Veterans

Senator D'Amato described Mr. Behan as a war hero and praised his ''deep
commitment'' to veterans affairs since returning to Long Island.

To accept the Securities and Exchange chairmanship, Mr. Shad would have to
divest himself of his shares in E.F. Hutton, where he is one of the biggest
stockholders, and pay substantial capital-gains taxes on the transaction.

While the switch from New York State Assembly to the Veterans Administration
would triple Mr. Behan's salary to $60,000 a year, the move to Washington would
mean a big salary cut for Mr. Shad, from $375,000 at E.F. Hutton to $55,000 at
the S.E.C.

Mrs. Gorshutz, the choice to head the Environmental Protection Agency, is a
lawyer for Mountain Bell, the telephone company in Colorado, and is a former
member of the state's House of Representatives. She has been active in
environmental matters in Colorado.

Mr. Cardenas, chosen to head the Small Business Administration, is a partner in
the Fresno, Calif., office of Fox & Co., a Denver-based accounting firm.

His office reported last week, when The Wall Street Journal inadvertently
received a premature news release from Fox & Co.  announcing his appointment,
that Mr. Cardenas was a delegate to the 1980 White House Conference on Small
Business.

It said further that he was a charter member of the American Association of
Spanish Speaking C.P.A.'s. The Reagan Administration has pledged to name several
Hispanic Americans to high-level posts.

Another Hispanic American, John Hernandez of New Mexico, was reported tonight to
have been selected for the No. 2 post in the E.P.A. However, it was understood
that Mr. Hernandez had not yet been notified of his selection, and little could
be learned about him immediately.

Rising Republican Star

Mr. Behan has been regarded as a rising star in Republican politics on Long
Island. He served as East Hampton Town Assessor until he was nominated to run
for the Assembly seat that Perry B.  Duryea Jr., the former Assembly Speaker,
had to vacate in 1978 when he ran unsuccessfully for Governor.

Mr. Behan is 36 years old and is a member of a family that formerly operated
party-fishing boats out of Montauk.  He attended East Hampton High School, where
he was president of the student body and earned his varsity letter on the
football team.  He joined the marines after graduation in 1963 and rose to the
rank of sergeant in 1966 before suffering the disabling wounds that led to
amputation of both legs. A friend of Mr. Behan's, George Watson, recalled
tonight that the attack occurred on a patrol near Danang.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF STATE DEPARTMENT DOCUMENT ON ARMING OF THE GUERRILLAS IN EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2443 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Following is the text of a State Department document issued in support of the
Reagan Administration's contention that the Soviet bloc has been supplying arms
to guerrillas in El Salvador:

Special to the New York Times

This information, which we now consider incontrovertible, has been acquired
gradually over the past year. Many key details, however, have fallen into place
as the result of seizures of particularly informative documents from the
guerrilla forces in November 1980 and on the eve of their failed ''general
offensive'' of January 1981.  This mass of captured documents includes battle
plans, letters and reports of meetings and travels, some written in cryptic
language.

When deciphered and considered in conjunction with collateral intelligence
evidence, the documents bring to light the chain of events leading to the
January attempt by the Salvadoran armed left to oust the Government of El
Salvador - a Government that has executed important reforms and has convoked a
process leading to democratic elections in 1982.

This accumulated evidence reveals a highly disturbing pattern of parallel and
coordinated action by a number of Communist and some radical countries seeking
to impose a military solution in a small, third world nation. It is a pattern we
have seen before - to be specific, in Angola and Ethiopia.

Before entering into details on the evidence, here is some background on El
Salvador's internal situation:

- In October 1979, progressive Salvadoran military officers and civilians
overthrew the conservative regime of General Carlos Romero.

- After a period of instability, the new Government stabilized around a
coalition of military participants in the October 1979 revolution, the Christian
Democratic Party and independent civilians. Since last spring it has put into
practice a broad program of change: conversion of large estates into peasant
cooperatives, distribution of land to all tenant farmers, restructuring of the
foreign trade and banking sectors and convocation of democratic elections in
1982.

- The Salvadoran Government is opposed by a coalition of four Marxist-Leninist
guerrilla groups. Three small political parties - including a Social Democratic
Party - work with the guerrilla organizations and their political fronts through
the Democratic Revolution Front (F.D.R.), most of whose activities take place
outside El Salvador. We estimate the combined membership inside El Salvador of
the non-Communist parties belong to the F.D.R. at less than 700.

- The Salvadoran guerrillas launched an abortive ''general offensive'' against
the Government of El Salvador on Jan. 18, 1981.  The chain of events that led to
this offensive is summarized below, based on information taken from documents
captured from the Salvadoran guerrillas and determined through careful
assessment to be genuine.

Introduction

Two particularly important document caches were recovered from the Communist
party of El Salvador (P.C.S.) in November 1980 and the other from the People's
Revolutionary Army (E.R.P.) in January 1981.  Only a very small portion of the
total documents recovered are attached. Many of the documents are written using
cryptic language and abbreviations. A glossary is provided before each document
to define selected relevant terms.

Chronology

Dec. 16, 1979 - Representatives of the Communist Party of El Salvador (P.C.S.),
National Resistance (FARM), and Popular Liberation Forces (F.P.L.), writing in
Havana, thank Fidel Castro for his ''help, and the help of (his) comrades of the
party'' in establishing a unity agreement among these armed groups. (See
document A.)

April, 1980 - ''Requests'' (possibly for arms) are made in a meeting at the
Hungarian Embassy in Mexico City with representatives of the German Democratic
Republic, Bulgaria, Poland, Vietnam, Hungary, Cuba, and U.S.S.R. (See document
B.)

April 28, 1980 - In a meeting of the political commission of the Salvadoran
Communist Party, party leader Shafik Handal notes the need to take advantage of
possibilities for help by the ''socialist camp.'' Their attitude is
''magnificent,'' he says. Handal also notes desirability of involving ''everyone
of the area'' (i.e., Central America) as suggested to ''Fidel.'' (See document
C.)

May 19-31, 1980 - Popular Revolutionary Army is admitted to the guerrilla
coalition after negotiations in Havana. Coalition leadership, which assumes name
of Unified Revolutionary Directorate (DRU), meets with Fidel Castro on three
occasions and with visiting German Democratic Republic leader Erich Honecker.
(See document D.)

May 19-31, 1980 - Guerrilla leadership meets twice with Cuban Directorate of
Special Operations (DOE) -clandestine operations/special forces unit of Cuban
Ministry of Interior to discuss guerrilla military plans. In addition, they met
with the Cuban Chief of Communications. (See document D.)

May 30, 1980 - Shafik Handal departs from the Navaka meeting for Moscow. (see
document D.) June 1, 1980 - Guerrilla leadership, minus Salvadoran Communist
Party chief Handal, arrives in Managua. Joint directorate of F.S.L.N.: (A)
offers a headquarters for the guerrilla directorate ''with all measures of
security; (B) states that it is disposed to ''contribute in material terms;''
(C) assumes ''the cause of El Salvador as its own;'' and (D) offers ''advice and
exchange opinions'' to the guerrillas. (See document D.)

June 2-July 22, 1980 - Salvadoran Communist Party chief Shafik Handal visits in
(A) the U.S.S.R., (B) Vietnam, (C) the German Democratic Republic, (D)
Czechoslovakia, (E) Bulgaria, (F) Hungary and (G) Ethiopia.

June 2, 1980 - Handal meets in Moscow with Mikhail Kudachkim, deputy chief of
the Latin American section of the Foreign Relations Department of the C.F.S.U.
Central Committee. Kudachkim suggests that Handal travel to Vietnam to seek arms
and offers to pay for Mandal's trip. (see Document E.)

June 9-15, 1980 - Handal visits Vietnam, where is received by Le Duan, Secretary
General of the Vietnamese Communist Party, Xuan Thuy, member of the Communist
Party Central Committee secretariat, and Vice Minister of National Defense Tran
Van Quang. Vietnamese, as ''first contribution,'' agree to provide sixty tons of
arms. (See documents E and F.)

June 18-24, 1980 - Handal visits German Democratic Republic, where he is
received by Hermann Axem, member of the G.D.R. Politburo. Axem states that the
G.D.R. was already dispatch-(garble) indicating that additional supplies will be
sent and that the G.D.R. will provide military training, particularly on
clandestine operations. G.D.R.  telegram adds that, although Berlin possesses no
Western-manufactured weapons (which the Salvadoran guerrillas are seeking),
efforts will be undertaken to find ''a solution to this problem.'' (See
documents E and F.)

June 24-27, 1980 - Handal visits Czechoslovakia, where he is received by Vasil
Bilak, second secretary of the Czech Communist Party.

Bilak notes that some Czech arms circulating in the world market will be
provided. Transportation will be coordinated with the G.D.R.  (See documents E
and F.)

June 27-28, 1980 - Handal visits Bulgaria, where he is received by Dimiter
Stanichev, member of the Central Committee secretariat.  Bulgarians agree to
supply German-origin weapons and other supplies.  (See documents E and F.)

June 28-July 3, 1980 - Handal visits Hungary, where is received by Communist
Party General Secretary Janos Kadar and ''Guesel'' (probably Central Committee
secretary for foreign affairs Andras Gyenes). The latter offers radios and other
supplies and indicates Hungarian willingness to trade arms with Ethiopia or
Angola in order to obtain Western-origin arms for the Salvadoran guerrillas.
(See documents E and D.)

July 3-6, 1980 - Handal visits Ethiopia, where he is received by Chairman
Mengistu Haile Mariam and Berhamu Bayen, executive committee member. Mengistu
indicates that Ethiopia wil supply ''several thousand weapons'' and ammunition.
(See documents E and F.)

July 22, 1980 - Handal is again received in Moscow, this time by Karen Brutents,
chief of the Latin American section of the C.P.S.U.  Central Committee. Brutents
indicates that the Soviets agree in principle to transport the Vietnamese arms.
(See document E.)

July 23, 1980 - ''Comrade Bayardo'' (Bayardo Arce of F.S.L.M.  directorate)
meets in Managua with a delegation of the Salvadoran guerrilla joint general
staff. Arce promises ammunition to the guerrillas and arranges a meeting for
them with the F.S.L.M.  ''military commission.'' Arce indicates that, since the
guerrillas will receive some arms manufactured by the Communist countries. the
Sandinista Army (E.P.S.) will consider absorbing some of these weapons and
providing to the Salvadorans Western-manufactured arms held by the E.P.S. in
exchange. (See document G.)

July 22, 1980 - Guerrilla military leadership meets in Managua, Nicaragua, with
P.L.O. leader Yasir Arafat. (See document G.) July 27, 1980 - Guerrilla general
staff delegation departs from Managua for Havana, where Cuban ''specialists''
add final touches to their military plans. (See document G.)

Aug. 15, 1980 - Ethiopian arms depart for Cuba. (See document F.) Sept. 5, 1980
- Vietnamese arms and scheduled to arrive in Cuba.  (See document F.) Sept. 24,
1980 - Guerrillas receive and distribute $500,000 logistics donation from Iraq.
Funds are distributed to the Nicaraguan F.S.L.M. and within El Salvador. (See
documents H and J.)

Sept. 26, 1980 - Guerrilla logistics committee informs its joint general staff
that 130 tons of arms and other military material supplied by the Communist
countries have arrived in Nicaragua for shipment to El Salvador. According to
the report, this represents one-sixth of the commitments to the guerrillas by
the Communist countries. (See document I.) Note to get an idea of the dimension
of this commitment, the Vietnamese offer of only 68 tons included 2 million
rifle and machine gun bullets, 14,500 mortar shells, 1,620 rifles, 210 machine
guns, 48 mortars, 12 rockets launchers and 192 pistols.)

End of September 1980 - Nicaragua F.S.L.M. suspends its weapons deliveries to El
Salvador for one month after the United States Government protests to the
Nicaraguan leadership over the supply activities. (See document J.)

End of October 1980 - The Nicaraguan F.S.L.M. provides the Salvadoran guerrillas
a new delivery schedule and resumes weapons deliveries. (See document K.)

September-October 1980 - Guerrillas begin preparation for infiltrating weapons
and equipment into El Salvador by land, air and sea. (See documents J, L, M, N
and 0.)

Nov. 1, 1980 - The guerrilla general staff is informed that there are
approximately 120 tons of military equipment now in Nicaragua ready for shipment
to the Salvadoran guerrillas. By mid-November, the guerrillas indicate that
300-400 tons of weapons and material will be in Cuba ready for subsequent
transfer to Nicaragua and then clandestinely to El Salvador. (See document K.)

Oct. 29, 1980 - Guerrillas decide to open ''clandestine'' radio station in
Nicaragua with the help of the Cubans and Nicaraguans.  (See document P.)

November 1980 - Beginning in November, the F.S.L.M. sends to El Salvador more
arms than the guerrillas can receive and distribute.  The guerrillas note that
the boats are being overloaded in Nicaragua and ask that the F.S.L.M. better
coordinate its delivery activities with the guerrillas. (See documents Q and R.)

Nov. 1, 1980 - Salvadoran guerrilla logistics representative in Mangua calls on
armed groups in El Salvador -the ''last link'' in the supply ''chain'' -to work
harder to absorb more arms shipments.  The Communist countries in some cases,
the representative notes, have doubled their promised help. (See document R.)

November 1980 - Due to overloading problems, the guerrillas raise the need for
talks on delivery arrangements with the F.S.L.M. (See document S.)

Jan. 18, 1981 - The guerrilas launch their ''general offensive'' against the El
Salvadoran Government.

Conclusions

The evidence contained in the captured documents, in some instances, is the only
information available to us. But collateral evidence is available which
corroborates information reported in the documents. To cite only a few examples:

- Arms seized in transit to El Salvador have been traced to U.S.  units formerly
in Vietnam.

- Numerous weapons of the types mentioned in the documents, not in the
Salvadoran armed forces inventory and never before in that country, have been
captured during and prior to the recent ''general offensive.''

- Arms trafficking patterns noted in the documents have been independently
confirmed.

- Much additional evidence bearing out the nature and extent of foreign arms
supply activity has become available to the United States Government.

In sum, the captured documents, supported with other evidence, lead clearly and
incontrovertibly to the following major conclusions:

- The Salvadoran insurgency has unquestionably become the focus of a large-scale
commitment by Communist and some radical states outside Latin America. Their
massing and transport of arms to the Salvadoran guerrillas must be judged
against the fact that from 1977 until January 1981, the United States provided
no weapons or ammunition to the Salvadoran armed forces.

- The availability of these weapons and war materiel significantly increases the
military capabilities of the Salvadoran insurgents. It hardly needs adding that
they also contribute directly to the killing in El Salvador.

- The political direction, organization and arming of the Salvadoran insurgency
is coordinated and heavily influenced by Cuba with the active support of the
Soviet Union, East Germany, Vietnam and other Communist states.

- A major effort has been made to provide ''cover'' for this operation by
supplying arms of Western manufacture and by supporting a front organization
known as the Democratic Revolutionary front (F.D.R.) to seek non-Communist
political support through propaganda.

- The F.D.R. is controlled by the DRU, the unified directorate of the armed
insurgent groups, which is defiantly antidemocratic and dependent on Cuban
coordination for its very existence.

- Although some non-Communist states have also provided material support, the
organization and delivery of this assistance, like the overwheling mass of arms,
is in the hands of Communist-controlled networks.

- Finally, over the past year, the insurgency in El Salvador has been
progressively transformed and a text-book case of indirect armed aggression by
Communist power through Cuba.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
REAGAN AND THE JAPANESE;
Foreign Policy Sixth in a series of occasional articles on international
problems facing the Reagan Administration.

BYLINE: By HENRY SCOTT STOKES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Feb. 19


Japan is facing the 1980's in a mood of selfconfidence that is different from
the sometimes cocky and abrasive attitude that resulted from the spectacular
growth of its economy in the preceding decades.

The new attitude is reflected in views about foreign policy and defense. In the
early 1970's the yen emerged as a strong currency, and there was talk among
right-wingers in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party of acquiring nuclear
weapons and building large conventional forces. But the oil crisis of 1973,
coupled with runaway inflation, undermined optimism here, creating a panic among
consumers and halting talk of Japan's new world role.

Eight years after that shock, however, the yen is perhaps the world's strongest
currency, and the Japanese were able to absorb the oil price rises of 1979 and
1980. Confidence is again strong, and this is coupled with the sobering
realization that Japan has international responsibilities.

'Diplomacy for Peace'

''We will not become a military power threatening neighboring countries,'' Prime
Minister Zenko Suzuki said in a recent policy address to Parliament. ''The first
imperative is that we persist in our diplomacy for peace.''

Mr. Suzuki, who took over the leadership last summer, is a cautious,
chairman-of-the-board type whose forte is seeking the center of opinion in the
party and the nation.

His recent speeches to Parliament dwelt on the need to look to the 21st century
and to avoid getting bogged down in immediate preoccupations - the threat of
disorder in the Middle East to Japan's oil supplies, for example.

Mr. Suzuki's outlook for Japan in the next decade appears to have wide support
from a population that still has deep psychological scars from World War II. Any
attempt to predict what Japanese policy makers are likely to do over the next
years must take account of the legacy of Hiroshima and the only military defeat
and occupation by a foreign power in Japan's recorded history. For more than 15
years the part of the national budget spent on the military was gradually shaved
at the Finance Ministry from a high of 15 percent in the mid-1950's to just over
5 percent in 1981. That gradual regression was a clear indicatation of policy
priorities.

Military Growth Seems Unlikely

Among the main policy themes suggested by Mr. Suzuki were the assertions that
Japan would not embark on what might loosely be called rearmament and would
probably remain the one major nation that did not join the arms race. Japan will
probably respond in part to American pressure for higher military spending, but
no rapid progress is likely. Japan spends less than 1 percent of its gross
national product on the military, by far the smallest proportion of any major
industrial nation.

Japan's total defense spending is about $18 billion when counted by North
Atlantic Treaty Organization methods, which include pensions and other extra
items not in the military budget here. This makes Japan the sixth largest
military spender in the world.

The Japanese Government appears to be firmly committed to a policy of
comprehensive security, which rules out the use of Japanese forces outside
Japan. This policy would substitute economic aid - butter rather than guns.

Some Urge New Policies

The debate over military spending has explored new areas in recent years. Some
business leaders and their friends in politics have favored departures, such as
arms exports, conscription, a quick doubling of military spending and even the
development of nuclear weapons.

But the debate is not likely to result in any decision to renovate Japanese
military abilities by, for instance, revising the postwar Constitution, which
explicitly forbids armed forces. The Constitution is interpreted as allowing
self-defense forces.

The caution in Japan may be frustrating to the Reagan Administration, which may
prefer visible military support from America's main ally in the Far East.
Japanese policy makers, notably at the Foreign Ministry, have therefore strived
since the mid-1970's to find a rationale for supporting United States global
aims by other than military means.

The rationale of the comprehensive security policy seems to be widely accepted
in Japanese politics and the bureaucracy. With the exception of Israel, Japan
will give emergency economic aid, sometimes at very short notice, to embattled
nations. Aid will be doubled in the first half of the 1980's to well over $20
billion.

The premise of this policy is that Japan will only prosper in a world at peace.
Protection of oil- and food-supply routes cannot be assured by building an
armada of aircraft carriers or by introducing nuclear weapons, Liberal Democrat
officials say.

Expressing Opinions

Japan has generally been silent on foreign policy issues since the end of World
War II. ''The truth is we have no foreign policy,'' a leading diplomat said in
an interview in early 1979.

But Japan has recently expressed definite views on foreign policy issues, with
Cambodia providing an example. Last month the Chief Cabinet Secretary, Kiichi
Miyazawa, Mr. Suzuki's right-hand man, warned that continued support for Pol Pot
as the leader of Cambodia was mistaken.

The Japanese have been cautious in their support of the Chun Doo Hwan regime in
South Korea, and Mr. Suzuki will not travel to Seoul in March for Mr. Chun's
inauguration as President, officials said.  The Japanese policy may disappoint
the United States, which has enthusiastically supported Mr. Chun. But at other
times the Japanese have strongly supported United States aims, such as in
Indochina in early 1979, when Japan cut off economic aid to Vietnam after
Hanoi's troops invaded Cambodia.

No Manichaean Outlook

The Japanese do not have a Manichaean view of the world, dividing black from
white, the Soviet Union from the United States, Communism from democracy. They
do not like the Russians, but anxiety over the territorial issue that divides
Tokyo and Moscow - the future of four islands off Hokkaido that were seized by
the Soviet Union in 1945 and not returned - has not been reduced to a simplist
formulation such as ''the Soviet threat.''

For Japan the alliance with the United States is the cornerstone of foreign
policy. There is no longer support for abrogation of the revised security treaty
of 1960, as was demanded by the Socialists and Communists two decades ago and by
student revolutionaries in the late 1960's.

Relations between the two powers were never better, officials on both sides say.
But behind this stance is the fact that Japan is increasingly independent and
quietly conscious of its weight in affairs, as was shown when Mr. Suzuki became
the first Prime Minister since the end of World War II not to make his first
overseas trip a visit to Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM TREASURES ROTTING IN FEDERAL STORAGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


To the Editor:

Having been rejuvenating, protecting and preserving motion picture film for more
than three decades, I found your Jan. 30 editorial ''The Lost Picture Show''
enlightening, but you uncovered merely the tip of the iceberg.

All film, be it nitrate (flammable) or safety film, is perishable.  Most people
think that once the film is in the can, you can put it on the shelf and forget
about it. Nothing could be further from the truth.

More than 800 million feet of treasured, one-of-a-kind, irreplaceable film owned
by the Federal Government is disintegrating on the shelves of some 384 film
storage facilities throughout the United States. A Congressional report to that
effect, published in June of 1978, suggested corrective measures. Those
suggestions, I am sorry to say, have been ignored to this date.

To complicate matters, the people in charge of the storage facilities, with very
few exceptions, lack the technical training to prevent film deterioration or to
cope with it. Those who do have the knowledge don't have the money or the proper
equipment to correct the problems.

For example, the Marine Corps archival film collection in Quantico, Va. - all
original color film, one-of-a-kind combat footage of World War II, Korea,
Vietnam, etc. - was on the verge of becoming a total loss.

Because of ignorance, this collection was improperly stored in a concrete/
cement-block building, where moisture penetrated cans and reels. They eventually
rusted, and a maple-syrup-like fungus formed on the emulsion, or picture side,
of the film, eating its way deep into this valuable col-lection.

Purely by chance, my company was notified, and we were able to rescue some
14,000 reels of film. This could have all been avoided if the archives had an
ongoing maintenance program with a trained staff.

It has been brought to my attention that about $500 million a year is spent by
the Federal Government on its audio-visual and film operations, but not a nickle
is allocated for film maintenance and preservation.

The editorial suggested that copying old film will save it. Copying is indeed
necessary if you are dealing with nitrate film, but first you must have a decent
original. The life span of other film can be indefinite, provided there are
proper maintenance, restoration, protection and preservation programs.

I, too, hope that our President needs no prompting as to the value of preserving
history on motion picture film. Since November, I have rejuvenated a few
theatrical releases, such as ''Cattle Queen of Montana,'' which stars Barbara
Stanwyck and a fellow by the name of Ronald Reagan.
MARVIN A. BERNARD, Moonachie, N.J., Feb. 2, 1981

The writer is president and chief executive officer of Filmlife, Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
News Summary;
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


International
The insurgency in El Salvador has been transformed into ''a textbook case of
indirect armed aggression by Communist powers,'' according to a State Department
memorandum. The memorandum summarizes what it says is documentary evidence that
Nicaragua's leaders have cooperated with Cuba in shipping arms through Nicaragua
to the leftist insurgents in El Salvador. (Page A1, Column 1.)
A refusal to negotiate with Iran would not have been preferable to the extended
talks that resolved the hostage crisis, according to Congressional testimony by
former Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie and former Deputy Secretary Warren M.
Christopher. If the negotiations had not been held, Mr. Muskie said, ''the
hostages would still be in Teheran.'' (A3:1-4.)
Pope John Paul II was hailed in a spontaneously enthusiastic welcome to Cebu,
the Philippines, which regards itself as the fountainhead of Roman Catholicism
in Asia. In two sermons, the Pontiff deplored divorce, abortion, artificial
contraception, sexual permissiveness and ''the fear of permanent commitment.''
(A3:1.)
National
Action on the entire economic program proposed by the Administration was urged
by President Reagan as he expressed optimism that Congress would approve it
intact. His advisers began working with Republican leaders on Capitol Hill to
avert possible Democratic attempts to separate spending cuts from tax cuts and
to reduce the size of the program. (A1:6.)
Senate Republican leaders pressed a strategy that they hoped would result in
Senate approval of a ''substantial'' part of President Reagan's proposed budget
cuts within four weeks. The Republicans seek to restrict eligibility, reduce
benefits and place ceilings on spending for such programs as food stamps and
Medicaid. (A1:5.)
A delay in action on tax cuts was predicted by House Democrats. They said that
the Administration's proposals could not be enacted in time to take effect on
July 1, and Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the new chairman of the House Ways
and Means Committee, said that the panel could not complete a bill for floor
action before mid-May ''at the very earliest.'' (A16:1-3.)
Groups opposed to the budget cuts proposed by President Reagan began a concerted
effort to blunt the impact on welfare, food stamps, child nutrition and medical
help for the poor. A broad coalition of scores of organizations said they
planned lobbying and letter-writing campaigns to thwart reductions in major
programs. (A10:3-5.)
Nominees to high-level posts in the Administration that are expected to be
annnounced today include John Behan, who is to head the Veterans Administration,
a White House official said. Mr. Behan is a former leading Long Island athlete
who lost both legs in the Vietnam war and who is now a New York State
Assemblyman. (A1:3.)
An 18-cent postal rate was approved for letters by the Postal Rate Commission,
which rejected a request by the Postal Service to increase the present 15-cent
rate to 20 cents. The commission called for more modest charges to business than
the service seeks. (A1:2.)
The Cleveland school system is again sliding into financial deficit amid charges
of mismanagement. The school system, which is Ohio's largest, is under growing
criticism by state officials over its ''inability or unwillingness'' to control
costs. (A18:1-2.)
John Knudsen Northrop died in Glendale, Calif., at the age of 85.  Mr. Northrop
was the founder of the aeronautical company that bears his name and the designer
of such pioneering achievements as the original Lockheed Vega, the A-17 attack
craft and early Navy dive bombers. (A20:4-6.)
Metropolitan
A shoplifter can be convicted of larceny even without having left a store with
stolen goods, New York State's highest court ruled. The unanimous decision said
that valid evidence included the concealing of merchandise under clothing or in
a container and ''furtive or unusual behavior.'' (A1:1-3.)
Arson was the cause of a fire Wednesday at the $75-million Harley of New York
Hotel soon after it was officially opened, the New York City Fire Department
said. Half a dozen fires had erupted during the construction of the midtown
Manhattan building. Two of them, which were also attributed to arson, occurred
during reported labor disputes. (B1:6.)
Potential power failures were averted by operators in a Consolidated Edison
control center as supplies for 18 percent of the electrical needs of New York
City and Westchester County were lost in a halfhour period. For most customers,
the only effects were three episodes of momentarily dimmed lights. The cause of
the trouble in feeder cables was not certain. (B3:6.)
A measles outbreak in Westchester, the biggest in the nation, with more than 50
cases so far this year, has led county health officals to declare a health
emergency. Susceptible children, those from 5 to 18 years old who have not had
the disease or those who have not been immunized since they became a year old,
will not be permitted to enter schools on Monday. (B2:5-6.)
A balanced New York City budget can be achieved in the next fiscal year despite
the prospect of reduced Federal aid, Mayor Koch said.  But he warned that a
suspension of Federal operating subsidies would jeopardize the city's 60-cent
transit fare unless the state assumed the burden. (A17:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'STILL LIFE' BY EMILY MANN AT AMERICAN PLACE

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


EMILY MANN'S ''Still Life,'' which opened at the American Place Theater last
night, aspires to be a searing account of the lingering aftermath of the Vietnam
War. The author's heart seems to be in the right place, but what about her mind?
Because of fuzzy-headed writing, Miss Mann has devised a play that not only
leaves the audience cold, but also tends to trivialize such issues as the plight
of the Vietnam veteran, war atrocities and feminism. Good intentions, I'm
afraid, don't stand a chance in the face of sheer incompetence.

Miss Mann has given ''Still Life'' a documentary format, as if that might excuse
her inability to select or think through her material.  According to the
program, the words we hear are, ''for the most part,'' based on interviews with
real people. The setting is a conference table, complete with water pitchers and
ashtrays, at which three characters sit to address the audience for 90 minutes.
Though Miss Mann, who also directed, occasionally allows her capable actors to
stretch their legs, her play's title all too literally describes its method.

The three speakers are Mark (John Spencer), a Vietnam veteran; his estranged
wife, Cheryl (Mary McDonnell), and the new woman he loves, Nadine (Timothy
Near). At repetitive length, they recount the history of Mark's combat
experiences, of the subsequent collapse of Mark and Cheryl's marriage and of
Mark and Nadine's blossoming affair. Miss Mann presumably wants us to understand
these characters and sympathize with them, but only the abused and abandoned
Cheryl arouses an iota of compassion. Mark and Nadine are, respectively,
contemptible and silly, at least as presented by the playwright.

Mark, by his own confession, killed a Vietnamese family in cold blood and then
returned home to beat his own wife and child.  Throughout the evening he
delivers teary mea culpas and boasts of his love for Vietnamese children, and
yet the fact remains that he is, by any standard, including Nuremberg's, a war
criminal.

Whatever the extenuating circumstances of his case, it's hard to feel much more
for Mark than one does for First Lieut. William L.  Calley Jr. It's also hard to
accept him, as the play seems to, as a representative Vietnam veteran. Many
other American soldiers - those who believed in the war and those who didn't -
behaved honorably in Southeast Asia. If Miss Mann wanted to dramatize the tragic
readjustment traumas of the veterans, why didn't she pick one who has a genuine
right to his bitterness and rage? Unlike most of his peers, Mark is a villain of
Vietnam, not a victim.

Mark's lover, Nadine, is no less peculiar. The playwright tries to present this
character as a laudable, self-made feminist activist, but she comes across as a
nasty parody of one. For all of Nadine's lectures about the insensitivity of men
in general, she is a hypocritical, utterly ga-ga apologist for the brutal
behavior of the specific man she adores. ''Everything Mark did was justified,''
she tells us. ''We've all done it - murdered someone we loved or ourselves.''
(And have we all murdered Vietnamese families as well?)

Later on, Nadine defends her lover's violent acts even more preposterously by
pointing out how therapeutic they've been for her.  ''Through Mark,'' she
explains, ''I've learned the violence I'm capable of.'' Mark's victims, no
doubt, would be thrilled to learn that their suffering has helped Nadine get in
touch with her feelings.

Maybe Miss Mann really wants us to loathe Mark and Nadine, but the evening is
too self-contradictory to support any firm conclusion.  Even the play's static
format - is this a news conference? a group therapy session? - is confused.
While the characters usually deliver their interwoven monologues independently
of one another, they sometimes interact - thereby violating the playwright's
gimmick, whatever it may mean.

The evening's climax, meanwhile, is as melodramatic as that of any conventional
play. Breaking into an explosive fit, Mark bangs the table and starts screaming,
''War kills people!'' If that, at last, is the real and banal point of this
exercise, Miss Mann has certainly reached it by the most ridiculous possible
route.

In Documentary Format
STILL LIFE, written and directed by Emily Mann; setting and costume design, Tom
Lynch; lighting design, Annie Wrightson; assistant director, Judy Dennis;
production stage manager, Joseph S. Kubala.  Presented by the American Place
Theater, Wynn Handman, director; Julia Miles, associate director.  At 111 West
46th Street.  Mark .....................................John Spencer Cheryl
.................................Mary McDonnell Nadine
...................................Timothy Near

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
A Green Beret's Bravery Gains Additional Recognition

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


A belated Medal of Honor will be awarded by President Reagan to a former Army
Green Beret from Texas who was earlier rejected for the nation's highest
military honor.

Roy P. Benavidez, a 45-year-old retired master sergeant who lives in El Campo,
will be the 239th recipient of the Medal of Honor for Vietnam service. He is
scheduled to accept the award Tuesday at the Pentagon.

Mr. Benavidez is credited with ignoring his injuries to save at least eight of
his fellow soldiers in the jungles near Loc Ninh on May 2, 1968. He acted even
though he had been shot in the legs, face, head, stomach and back, according to
the Medal of Honor citation.

He received the Distinguished Service Cross for bravery a few months later, but
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, citing insufficient evidence, rejected the
recommendation that he also get the Medal of Honor,

A few months ago, however, a new witness to the heroism told his story to Army
investigators, and the case was reopened.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roy P. Benavidez

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Cabby Saves the Show

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


When a New York cabdriver inadvertantly drove off with Jim Gambone's suitcase
Monday night, it seemed to spell curtains for a movie project the St. Paul
documentary film maker had worked on for a year. The suitcase contained the only
negative of a half-hour television film about the defoliant Agent Orange used in
Vietnam.

At 2 A.M. yesterday, Mr. Gambone said, the driver returned the suitcase after
learning his identity from a friend who read about the loss on Wednesday.

Mr. Gambone, who later delivered the negative to a local lab for final
processing, was delighted with the recovery, but somewhat disappointed that the
honest cabdriver didn't want his name publicized.

He said he planned to send the driver a $100 reward.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FROM WASHINGTON AND EL SALVADOR, DIFFERING VIEWS ON FIGHTING REBELS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


A Pentagon assessment of El Salvador's Army asserts that it is so ill-prepared
to fight Communist-led insurgents that it has ''no hope'' of defeating them.

Against that background, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  has told
ambassadors of European allies, as well as

Excerpts from briefing, page 5.
the Ambassadors of Australia, Japan, New Zealand and Spain, that the
Administration's ''most urgent objective'' is to stop a large flow of arms from
Communist nations to guerrillas in El Salvador.

The Pentagon assessment of El Salvador's Army differed somewhat from a comment
today by Jose Napoleon Duarte, President of the country's ruling junta, who said
that the armed forces were capable of handling the guerrillas at present if the
flow of arms to the insurgents stopped. What his country needed most, he said,
was economic aid to counter the guerrilla threat.

A memorandum on Mr. Haig's briefing of the foreign ambassadors on Wednesday
quoted Mr. Haig as saying that the United States ''will not remain passive'' to
what he described as a ''systematic, wellfinanced, sophisticated effort to
impose a Communist regime in Central America.''

He also asserted that the United States would not become engaged in ''another
bloody conflict,'' as in Vietnam, but would direct its action toward Cuba, which
he declared was the main source of the intervention.

This morning Mr. Haig was a little less assertive. He remarked to reporters
during a brief conversation that there was ''grave concern'' over ''countries
intervening illegally in this hemisphere through provision of arms to a Western
Hemisphere nation that is seeking to determine its destiny through due
process.''

The Pentagon assessment, completed this week on the basis of reports from
Central America, asserted that the guerrillas would most likely become stronger
by April, when new shipments of arms are scheduled to be finished.

Officials here said that the arms, from Vietnam, Ethopia, Bulgaria, Hungary, and
East Germany, were being shipped through Cuba to Nicaragua and Honduras and,
finally, to El Salvador. Most of the weapons, ammunition, communications
equipment and medical supplies were reportedly bought or captured from Western
nations.

The military assessment prepared by the Defense Department said that El
Salvador's army numbered 17,000 men, including administrative and support
elements, compared with 3,700 full-time guerrillas and 5,000 who take occasional
part in actions. With a combat ratio of about 4 to 1, the analysis said, it
would be ''impossible'' for the Government forces to put down the insurgency.

Guerrillas Have Advantage

Military experts have long held that a conventional army and police force must
outnumber an insurgent force by 10 to 1 because the guerrillas have the
advantage of knowing where, when and how they will strike.

The Pentagon study said the Salvadoran Army could not control the infiltration
of arms and guerrillas from Honduras on the ground, from Nicaragua by water and
from both countris by air. Nor, the study added, were the Government forces
capable of rooting the guerrillas out of three pockets along the border with
Honduras.

The assessment thus concluded that the Salvadoran Army was ''not organized to
fight a counterinsurgency'' battle nor even a conventional war. It was deemed
''more like a 19th century constabulary than a 20th-century army'' and was said
to have ''no hope'' of winning with the resources at hand.

In an effort to inform allies of that situation and to build up international
support for coming Administration actions, Secretary Haig held his briefing in
the State Department. Also involved was an intelligence briefing by Ronald I.
Spiers, director of intelligence and research.

'Irrefutable' Evidence on Arms

A report on the briefing said Mr. Haig asserted that the United States had
intelligence ''which we consider irrefutable'' that the Soviet bloc, with Cuban
coordination, was ''furnishing at least several hundred tons of military
equipment to the Salvadoran leftist insurgents.''

Only after the foreign intervention, Mr. Haig asserted, did the United States
provide additional military assistance, including weapons, to the Salvadoran
Government. He said the Administration was considering additions to $63 million
already appropriated for economic aid this year.

''Our most urgent objective is to stop the large flow of arms through Nicaragua
into El Salvador.'' Mr. Haig said. ''We consider what is happening is part of
the global Communist campaign coordinated by Havana and Moscow to support the
Marxist guerrillas in El Salvador.''

Mr. Haig said the Administration had not yet decided precisely how to deal with
the situation but would have to deal ''with the immediate source of the problem
-and that is Cuba.'' He said that ''I wish to assure you that we do not intend
to have another Vietnam and engage ourselves in another bloody conflict where
the source rests outside the target area.''

Officials said that much of the evidence came from captured documents, in
Spanish, with specific references to Soviet financing of arms shipments.

The report said Vietnam was shipping pistols, semiautomatic rifles, machine
guns, mortars, antitank rocket launchers and large amounts of ammunition.
Officials said that most of those were American-made arms that North Vietnamese
soldiers captured from South Vietnamese forces in 1975.

Ethiopia, the report said, had agreed to sell submachine guns, rifles, and
ammunition provided by the United States to the Government of Emperor Haile
Selassie before his overthrow.

The report said that Bulgaria had agreed to send submachine guns, machine guns,
ammunition and medical kits. Officials said most of those had been made in West
Germany and were bought by the Bulgarians openly or in black markets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FROM WASHINGTON AND EL SALVADOR, DIFFERING VIEWS ON FIGHTING REBELS

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Feb. 20


Jose Napoleon Duarte, the President of El Salvador's ruling junta, said today
that despite the debate in Washington over military aid, economic aid was more
important to his country.

Mr. Duarte said in an interview that the economic crisis caused by the guerrilla
war was a greater threat than the Marxist guerrillas.  He said the junta's
economic and social changes over the last year were part of a political strategy
that was winning the war for the Government by turning the populace away from
the guerrillas.

U.S. Sees Soviet Thrust

The Salvadoran leader's comments came as the Reagan Administration pressed a
campaign to show that its decision to increase military aid to El Salvador was
based on evidence that the shipment of tons of arms to the insurgents was part
of a major Soviet thrust into Central America. There were also reports from
Washington that the Pentagon considered the Salvadoran armed forces ill-prepared
to fight the guerrillas.

Mr. Duarte said that if the flow of weapons to the guerrillas through Cuba and
Nicaragua continued at its present pace, the Salvadoran armed forces would need
more arms, but that for the time being they had sufficient military strength to
counter the guerrillas. He said the military's primary need now was for
communications and transportation equipment, including helicopters.

''It is of no use to have the greatest and best army in the world if the people
are dying from hunger,'' he said. The country needs a $300 million loan to
replace international private credit that has been scared away, he said.

Mr. Duarte said the figures of up to $30 million in arms aid for El Salvador
reportedly being considered by the Reagan Administration appeared to be ''their
interpretation of the situation,'' though he was unsure of the cost of equipment
that had been requested.

Mr. Duarte praised the Administration's efforts to cut the arms flow to the
guerrillas and counter Soviet advances in the world. But he professed a wariness
of too large a United States presence here, saying it would lead to an
unnecessary escalation of the conflict.

''Whether this is another Vietnam does not depend on us,'' he said. ''It depends
on what the others do. If the Cubans, the Russians, the Chinese and the United
States want to come here and fight, this will be another Vietnam. But for that
to happen, they will have to finish off all the Salvadorans.''

'To Solve Our Own Problems'

''Here, struggling alone to solve our own problems is the only thing we will
accept,'' he said.  ''The masses were with the guerrillas a year ago,'' he said.
''There is no question there is misery in this country, but now we have created
an alternative and taken away the guerrillas' support.  We're struggling here
for democracy.''

Mr. Duarte charged today that Nicaragua has been the staging point for almost
150 tons of arms shipped to the guerrillas in recent months and that 450 tons
more are in Nicaragua waiting to be sent.  But he said Nicaragua was not the
enemy, and he called for direct talks to improve relations, saying neither
country can afford hostilities economically.

A negotiated end to the two-year-old guerrilla war here nonetheless appears
unlikely, he said. The Government has offered amnesty and negotiation if the
rebels lay down their arms, an offer the guerrillas say they neither want nor
trust.

A Symbol of U.S. Policy

The 55-year-old President of the civilian-military junta has become the symbol
of United States policy in El Salvador, representing the efforts by Washington
to encourage reforms and to return to elected civilian government in the face of
right-wing opposition that has produced several attempted coups.

Mr. Duarte is a Christian Democrat who by all accounts had won the presidency in
1972, only to be defrauded of his victory by the military dictatorship that had
ruled this country for 50 years. He joined the junta a year ago following a coup
by younger, reformist army officers.

He has been disavowed by many of his former political allies for joining the
junta, but he said in the interview in his office in the presidential palace
that he is satisfied with the increasing power of the civilians in the
Government. ''There is no order given by the military alone,'' he said.

The other members of the junta are Col. Jaime Abdul Gutierrez, Vice President;
Jose Antonio Morales Ehrlich, like Mr. Duarte a civilian and a Christian
Democrat, and Jose Ramon Avalos Navarrete, an independent politician.

Issue of Assassinations

One of Mr. Duarte's conditions for accepting the presidency last December was
that the military gain control over the assassinations by its personnel on
behalf of right-wing leaders. Many of his friends and political associates - as
well as three American nuns and two agricultural experts - have been killed by
the right-wing death squads.

He said that he is satisfied that such violence is being reduced.  Commanders
are being transferred and soldiers dismissed, he said. But in the face of a
''guerrilla force that has a machine gun in its hand,'' he argued that ''we
cannot destroy the morale of the army.''

Since the rebels' offensive failed last month, the guerrillas have been
attacking the economy, blowing up bridges and power stations, shooting up buses,
blocking roads and interfering with harvests.

Severe Cash Shortage

Last year, the economic growth of this already impoverished country declined by
almost 10 percent. The uncertainty created by the war, as well as the
Government's new policies of land redistribution and nationalizing banks and
exports, have caused a severe cash shortage here as manufacturers cannot get
their normal lines of credit from international banks and suppliers.

The United States is providing an estimated $90 million in economic aid this
year, much of it for agricultural plans and public works projects to help reduce
the country's unemployment, estimated 30 percent. The request for $300 million
in loans is being considered by the United States Government, the International
Monetary Fund and other agencies.

Total United States military aid budgeted this year is $10 million, plus six
helicopters lent free of charge last month.  Eighteen United States military
instructors are here with the new aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S BRIEFING ABOUT EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


Following are excerpts from a Feb. 17 briefing on El Salvador presented by
Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. to representatives of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization as well as Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Spain.

A well-orchestrated international Communist campaign designed to transform the
Salvadoran crisis from the internal conflict to an increasingly
internationalized confrontation is under way. With Cuban coordination, the
Soviet bloc, Vietnam, Ethiopia and radical Arabs are furnishing at least several
hundred tons of military equipment to the Salvadoran leftist insurgents. Most of
this equipment, not all but most, has entered via Nicaragua, and this morning we
will be briefing you in some detail on the intelligence we have gathered and
which we consider irrefutable.

I want to emphasize that the Government in El Salvador is a coalition, headed by
a true Christian Democrat, Napoleon Duarte. It includes moderate military and
independent civilians.

I also want to emphasize and know you are aware that El Salvador and its
Government has been plagued by dissension. Nevertheless, despite terrorist
attacks from both left and right, it has proceeded with a reform program and
does offer some hope for the future.

Rebels' Support Dwindling

The extreme left has thus far failed to topple the existing Government in El
Salvador. The revolutionaries' recent large military operation has failed. We
have also seen the dwindling support in the popular sector for the
revolutionaries. The left is increasingly under Marxist domination and Cuban
influence, and it has clearly opted for a military solution. The Communist
nations intervened in 1980 to provide the insurgents with large amounts of
military supplies, and we have evidence outlining this in detail, which we will
give you this morning.

During the first weeks of this Administration we have taken a number of steps to
deal with this situation. After, and only after, the external intervention, we
furnished the Salvadoran Government the additional military assistance it
urgently needs to meet the threat of the Cuban-supported guerrillas. There were
no lethal military supplies before that - none - until large-scale military
attacks had been executed. We are also continuing to disburse the $63 million in
fiscal year 1981 economic aid which was already programmed for El Salvador, and
we are now conducting an extensive interagency study to determine what
additional support may be necessary in the near future. We will be consulting
further with you from time to time on this. We believe additional help is
needed.

Campaign to Cover Intervention

The Communist countries are orchestrating an intensive international
disinformation campaign to cover their intervention while discrediting the
Salvadoran Government and American support for that Government.

As most of you know, we are sending representatives to Europe and Latin America
to present the evidence of a Communist involvement and to seek support and
understanding for our actions. Over the next few weeks I will be meeting with
key foreign leaders, as they visit Washington, to discuss the issue in greater
detail.

Our most urgent objective is to stop the large flow of arms through Nicaragua
into El Salvador. We consider what is happening is part of the global Communist
campaign coordinated by Havana and Moscow to support the Marxist guerrillas in
El Salvador.

The policy implications are already clear: First, the U.S.G. (United States
Government) supports and will continue to support the present Government in El
Salvador. We intend to work with that Government with the objective of achieving
social justice and stability in that strife-torn country.

Second, the U.S.G. is convinced that neither stability nor social justice in El
Salvador is possible as long as Communist subversion continues.

Third, we will not remain passive in the face of this Communist challenge, a
systematic, well-financed, sophisticated effort to impose a Communist regime in
Central America.

This effort involves close coordination by Moscow, satellite capitals and
Havana, with the cooperation of Hanoi and Managua. It is a repetition of the
pattern we have already seen in Angola and Ethiopia, and, I may add, elsewhere.
It is a threat, in our view, not just to the United States but to the West at
large.

We have not yet decided on the precise steps we will take to deal with the
situation; we will, however, in some way have to deal with the immediate source
of the problem - and that is Cuba.

Off the record, I wish to assure you we do not intend to have another Vietnam
and engage ourselves in another bloody conflict where the source rests outside
the target area.

We believe in all sincerity we have no alternative but to act to prevent forces
hostile to the U.S. and the West from overthrowing a government on our doorstep,
particularly when that government offers the best hope of progress toward
moderate democracy.

Q. Will a copy of this briefing be made available to us?  A. Not at the moment.
We are in a consulting phase with many of your governments and the bipartisan
leadership in Congress. We are faced with a four-legged stool:

One leg is what we should do in manifesting support of and encouraging reform in
El Salvador.  The second leg is the problem of Nicaragua and the urgent need to
put an end to the illicit arms traffic to El Salvador from Nicaragua - a country
which has received millions of dollars in U.S. economic support.

The third leg I would call the external disinformation campaign designed to
paint the revolutionary effort as distinctively apart from outside
interventionist activity.

The fourth leg is the problem of Cuba. We do not anticipate dealing with that
situation in the historic sense of what we did in Vietnam.  We are studying a
number of alternatives. I have nothing further to add on this except to assure
you that we see happening here in El Salvador what happened in Africa and
Southwest Asia - and that is dangerous not only for the U.S. but for all nations
that share our values.

Obviously the purpose of this briefing is to share with you the facts we have
uncovered. As you know, it has been my strong belief that we cannot hope to
consult and coordinate unless we have the same basis of facts. Thus I hope that
your governments would consider these facts and that they would not do anything
against what the U.S. is trying to do until they had looked at this information.


Getting at Source of Problem

Q. You said that you would not repeat Vietnam, that you would get at the source
of the problem. Could you elaborate?  A. Only to emphasize that we are studying
various sources of information. I would not want your reporting to show our
position as overly dramatic.

Q. Has Moscow been apprised of your concern?  A. I think you know there have
been exchanges. Yes, there have been a number of exchanges with Ambassador
Dobrynin. There has also been - I say it because it has been in the press -with
Gromyko. There is a growing concern over Soviet risk-taking. There is concern
over the situation in Poland.

Q. You did not mention the adjacent countries.  A. We have, for example,
conveyed to the Government of Panama the information conveyed in this briefing,
but without the same degree of specificity. I know that these governments are
aware of our increasing concern about intervention - above all, Cuban.

Question of a Deadline

Q. Is there a time deadline?  A. No, and I think it most appropriate that there
not be. I think you are aware of the provision of the U.S. law, which is
relevant to the case of Nicaragua, that countries that engage in external
intervention must lose U.S. economic assistance and even must pay back what has
been already provided. We have brought this to the attention of the Nicaraguans
and given them time to consider. They have assured us they would stop
infiltration, but given past history we are skeptical.

Q. What is the balance between the guerrillas and the Government?  A. The
guerrillas have not achieved public support. There is a hard core of 4,000,
about a quarter of the strength of Salvador's security force. The effort to
overthrow the regime in January was a failure.

Now the guerrillas are in nodes of resistance around the country, including in
selective assassination of Government officials. The situation is under
reasonable control, but there is always the possibility of further external
intervention along the lines of what happened in Ethiopia. And there is also the
possibility of Nicaraguan intervention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jose Napoleon Duarte

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MR. REAGAN'S AND MR. HAIG'S REALISTIC VIEW OF MOSCOW'S WAYS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


To the Editor:

In his Feb. 3 Op-Ed article, Yuri Kornilov, political correspondent for the
Soviet press agency Tass, expressed ''concern and anxiety'' about the emergent
foreign policy of the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Kornilov accused the Administration of either deliberately misrepresenting
the crux of the Soviet Union's foreign policy or analyzing it in a fundamentally
erroneous way. He then explained the basic Soviet postulates as ''peaceful and
equitable cooperation with other nations ... respecting the right of every
people to be masters in their homes and resolving international disputes not by
force of arms but peacefully, at the negotiation table.''

As Mr. Kornilov wrote those words, the Soviet Union, which in the last several
years has feverishly built a most impressive modern military machine, had at
least 80,000 soldiers in Afghanistan and 26 divisions crouching at Poland's
borders. It was continuing to send military aid to Vietnam, which not long ago
utilized such aid to invade Cambodia. Its military advisers were supervising
Cuban and East German military and police forces supporting governments in
Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia and South Yemen. Its military presence in Cuba was
bolstering Fidel Castro's activities both in Africa and in the Caribbean.

How to reconcile the blatant dis-crepancy between the sweet and reasonable words
of Mr. Kornilov and the stern realities of Soviet military and political
expansion, direct or in-direct, on four continents? Simple. They are a rather
crude application of Lenin's neo-Machiavellian advice to his followers to speak
in one way while pursuing completely opposite policies.

Mr. Kornilov must have studied Lenin's celebrated booklet ''LeftWing Communism,
an Infantile Disorder,'' written in April, 1920, one of the greatest manuals on
political warfare ever put together. The former President of the Communist
International, Grigori Zinoviev, called this work ''the gospel of the
proletariat,'' adding that ''for the tactics of Communist parties, this work is
no less important than is Karl Marx's 'Kapital' for the theory of Marxism.''

Among many of Lenin's precepts on how to wage a worldwide revolutionary
struggle, is ''resort to various stratagems, artifices, illegal methods, to
evasions and subterfuges.'' The goal Zinovew had in mind was penetration of the
''reactionary'' trade unions.

President Reagan might have employed undiplomatic language when he stated at his
first news conference that ''the only morality (the Soviet leaders) recognize is
what will further their cause, meaning they reserve unto themselves the right to
commit any crime, to lie, to cheat.'' Secretary of State Haig might have been
indelicate when he charged the Soviet Union with ''training, funding and
equipping international terrorism.'' But both hit the nail on its Leninist head.
And in his heart, Yuri Kornilov knows that they are right.
MILORAD M. DRACHKOVITCH, Stanford, Calif. Feb. 9, 1981

The writer is a Senior Fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Tom Streithorst, Correspondent For NBC News in San Francisco

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


Tom Streithorst, an NBC News correspondent who underwent a heart transplant
operation in 1978, died Thursday at Stanford University Medical Center after a
heart attack. He was 49 years old.

For more than 15 years, Mr. Streithorst was with NBC News as a correspondent in
Latin America, the Middle East and Vietnam. He underwent the heart operation in
August 1978.

He returned to work full time in January 1980 in San Francisco. He was a native
of New York and a graduate of Princeton University. He received an M.A. in
international relations from Johns Hopkins University in 1954.

He joined NBC News in 1958 as a Middle Eastern correspondent. He left the
network to work for Newsweek and The Washington Post, then returned to NBC News
in 1964 as a Latin American correspondent.

In 1973, he received the Maria Moors Cabot Prize awarded by Columbia University
for contributions ''to the advancement of interAmerican understanding.'' He is
survived by his wife, the former Alicia Lopez of San Mateo, Calif., and three
children, Thomas, Catherine and John.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR'S REBELS SAY THEY SEEK MORE ARMS FOR A FRESH OFFENSIVE

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Feb. 21


Four guerrilla commanders have said in an interview here that they are short of
weapons at the moment but are resupplying for an offensive.

They said they had been buying most of their weapons on the black market, but
they refused to say whether they were also receiving arms from Soviet-bloc
countries, as the United States has charged.

''We do not depend on any nation's support,'' said one of the guerrilla leaders,
who called himself Marcos. ''United States support to the Government is
prolonging the conflict.''

The four, who appeared to be mostly in their 20's, used pseudonyms and said they
were political and military commanders directing the fighting in each of the
four fronts inside El Salvador.

Guerrillas Appear Relaxed

The interview, held yesterday in a Roman Catholic institution two blocks from
the home of the Defense Minister, was the first the guerrilla commanders had
given since an offensive by their forces failed last month. To insure security
during the interview, guerrillas carrying weapons inside plastic bags were
stationed throughout the area.

The guerrillas appeared relaxed throughout the 90-minute interview despite the
danger and the prospect of almost certain death if they were caught. They spoke
with the certainty of true believers and their comments were interlaced with
Marxist-Leninist expressions.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. sent diplomatic teams to Western Europe
and Latin America last week to seek support for efforts to reduce the
guerrillas' weapon supplies, which the United States says are being funneled
through Cuba and Nicaragua from such countries as Ethiopia and Vietnam.

The guerrilla commanders gave only sketchy details about their supplies, but the
tenor of their remarks was that they had difficulty getting arms and that there
was no large flow into guerrilla areas.

''The logistics problem is very serious,'' said Marcos, a bespectacled man with
wiry hair and an uneven complexion. ''We are revolutionary organizations that do
not depend on any nation. We do not have a specific supply channel.''

Some Salvadoran officials have charged that the rebels have Cuban or Nicaraguan
advisers, but the four commanders denied this.  ''Our advisers are our
experience,'' said Eduardo, a slight man whose simple speech suggested peasant
origins.

New Offensive Being Planned

The guerrilla leaders indicated that they planned to start another offensive
during the six-month rainy season that begins in May, after they have regrouped
and improved the coordination among the five rebel groups that make up the
unified command, called the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front. One boon, they
said, is communications equipment they captured from Government forces.

The commanders used the interview mainly to rebut the generally accepted
conclusion that the guerrillas had failed in last month's offensive.

''We had to enter into a phase of generalizing the war,'' said Eduardo, ''to put
into practice the knowledge of combat and military experience we have been
getting for some time.''

Another commander, named Ali Hondro, a soft-featured man with long fuzzy
sideburns who appeared to be the senior man in the group, said that the
offensive had not been given the expected popular support in the capital and
that a planned uprising in the countryside had been hampered by a shortage of
weapons.

''The masses are restive,'' he said, ''but we are very limited as far as giving
arms to the people.'' He said that people in the city were fearful of
participating even in strikes that the guerrillas had called for.  ''But this
does not mean that we have lost our support,'' Ali Hondro said.  The guerrillas
said more than 700 Government soldiers had been killed in the offensive, and not
the 127 reported by the armed forces. They said some bodies had not been
reclaimed by the military from guerrilla-held areas. The guerrillas said their
own losses had been minor and that the core of their forces was intact.

''We are going to come back shining,'' Eduardo said.  They said that areas under
guerrilla control, mostly sparsely populated areas in the foothills in the north
and in the center of the country, were establishing local governments with
elected commissars. Residents supporting the Government have fled the areas,
they said.

Social Democratic Support Seen

The commanders said they supportedattempts by leftist political leaders in exile
to negotiate an end to the conflict. Many of the exiles are Social Democrats,
and the guerrillas, who are Marxists, said they were heartened by support from
Western Europe's Social Democrats.

''As far as international political support is concerned, we have made important
gains,'' Ali Hondro said.  But they said they doubted the likelihood of a
negotiated settlement, charging that a Government offer to negotiate was a
''masked strategy'' and that they would not negotiate because they did not trust
the Government.

''If they really want a political solution,'' Ali Hondro said, ''then what they
have to do is have the United States not provide them with arms, because that is
what is lengthening the conflict.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATIONAL DEBT: A PRIMER

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 19, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1828 words


WASHINGTON I N his televised address to a joint session of Congress last
Wednesday night, President Reagan told the lawmakers and the American people
that ''our national debt is approaching $1 trillion.'' He portrayed the debt as
symptomatic of the nation's economic troubles.

That the United States has serious economic problems, most notably a 10 percent
annual inflation rate, is widely understood. A related, but separate, question
is what to make of the Federal Government's debt, now at $940 billion.

Government borrowing has been a subject of controversy in American life for a
long time. The first Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, said, ''A
national debt, if it is not excessive, will be to us a national blessing.'' But
he also said, ''The creation of debt should always be accompanied with the means
of extinguishment.''

Q. What is the national debt?

A. It is the sum of all the money the Government has borrowed to finance budget
deficits. Prof. Robert J. Barro of the University of Rochester has called the
debt ''the accumulation of past choices to borrow rather than levy taxes.'' The
biggest deficits have been associated with financing war - the Civil War, the
two World Wars and the Vietnam War.

Q. But there have been only four balanced Federal budgets since 1950, so it is
not just a problem of paying for war, is it?

A. That's right. Deficits seems to be a habit. In part, they reflect the
Congress's desire to do all manner of good things - equip the Armed Forces,
build highways, provide school lunches and health care to the aged and poor, and
so on. Deficits are also caused, or deepened, by economic slumps, when revenues
fall and spending for such things as unemployment benefits and food stamps
rises.

Q. Is there any chance that the national debt will be paid off, or even reduced?

A. The debt can be reduced only if the Government runs a budget surplus -that
is, takes in more revenues than it spends - and uses the surplus to pay off some
debt as it matures, instead of replacing it with new debt.

President Reagan's fiscal policy statement projected a 1984 budget surplus of
$500 million, a thin margin of less than 1 percent. It is difficult to be
confident that Mr. Reagan can achieve even that result, and impossible in the
light of experience to contemplate a series of surpluses large enough to permit
steady, significant reduction of the debt.

If the Reagan economic strategy succeeds, or if the economy strengthens for some
other reason, faster growth could cause the national debt to shrink in relation
to the country's real income. If inflation abates and interest rates decline,
the ''burden'' of interest payments would decline even faster.

Q. Aren't a chronic deficit and a steadily rising public debt dangerous because
they're inflationary and a burden on future generations?

A. Some people would say it depends what the preceived alternative is. If the
atternative is seen as defeat in war, or prolonged economic depression, some
would vote for debt. As for a chronic deficit being inflationary, economists
disagree. Many would say it depends on economic circumstances, including whether
inflation has been negligible, as in the early 1960's, or whether it is
virulent, as now. Some economists say that although they don't believe a budget
deficit is necessarily inflationary, if the public and the financial markets
believe it is, they will make their expectations self-fulfilling.

Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower often preached against deficits. He called
the national debt ''our children's inherited mortgage.'' Former President John
F. Kennedy, rather like Hamilton, saw borrowing as a way to ''make our free
economy work at full capacity.''

Q. Wasn't President Eisenhower right?

A. Not with respect to repayment. If the Congress (and the country) don't wish
to shoulder the burden of repayment, the Government can borrow afresh to pay
maturing debt. Uncle Sam is still regarded as the best risk. Government
securities play an important role in the investment strategies of pension funds,
insurance companies and many other institutions.

Q. It sounds like a no-win situation. The country either goes on paying interest
year after year, or raises very large sums to pay off the debt. It's like a
family that gets behind in its car payments and takes out a cash loan to catch
up and then has to meet two sets of payments. Wouldn't it be better not to
borrow at all?

A. That is an old maxim, still respected by some people. But as Hamilton, a
fiscal conservative, acknowledged, there is a role for debt. Borrowing money to
buy and live in a house is widely regarded as appropriate debt, as is borrowing
to send a youngster to college.  The best-managed, blue-chip corporations
borrow. The house, the education, the new factory normally produce a higher
return, in appreciation or income, than the cost of the debt. So it can pay to
borrow.

Q. But government is not a business. It doesn't produce anything useful.

A. Not true. It produces a variety of investment goods - highways, airports,
irrigation projects, health-care facilities - that yield a stream of useful
services. So it often makes good sense, financial as well as social, for the
Government to borrow.

Q. But look where it has gotten us. We have a national debt of almost $1
trillion, and the interest payments must be enormous.

A. Let's take a closer look at the national debt. First, part of the debt is
held by other Government agencies, such as the Social Security System. These
debt holders received almost 20 percent of the $75 billion of interest paid by
the Treasury in the fiscal year 1980, which ended Sept. 30, 1980. Another 17
percent of the interest payments went to Federal Reserve Banks, and by law 90
percent of their profits come back to the Treasury.

Second, just as a dime will not buy a cup of coffee any more, $1 trillion is not
what it used to be. The ratio of debt held by the public, excluding Government
investment accounts such as Social Security but including the Federal Reserve,
reached a high of 119 percent of the G.N.P. in 1945, the year World War II
ended. After that, there was a steady downward trend, to 25 percent in 1974. In
other words, the Federal debt has grown slower than the economy - and also
slower than private debt, and slower than debt of state and local government.

Q. What happened after 1974?

A. The ratio of Federal debt to the G.N.P. increased between 1975 and 1977, and
hit 29.6 percent. Since 1977 it has been 27 to 28 percent.

Q. What about interest payments? I read that interest has become unpredictable
and is one of the reasons the Federal budget is out of control.

A. Interest rates do fluctuate more than they used to, because of a 1979 change
of Federal Reserve policy. So, in a year like 1980, when interest rates soared,
plunged and soared, accurately predicting interest payments on the debt is
impossible. For years, interest on debt held by the public fluctuated between 7
and 8 percent of the total budget. It climbed above 8 percent in 1977. and in
1980 it exceeded 10 percent. The early estimate for 1981 was 11.76 percent,
based on the Carter budget of January.

Q. Well, there it is - interest now takes more than 10 percent of the budget.

A. But less than 3 percent of G.N.P., to put it in a still larger perspective.
However, that ratio was under 2 percent before 1979 and in the 1950's and 1960's
ran less than 1.5 percent.

Q. Interest runs to almost $100 billion a year. Doesn't that represent a
transfer of income from taxpayers to bondholders?

A. Right. Interest in fiscal year 1981 will run about $95 billion and in 1982 it
is likely to exceed $100 billion. You could say that it represents a transfer
from poor to rich or even from the young to the old. The Treasury says it knows
of no reliable analysis of the redistributive effects.

Q. That's the old 'we-owe-it-to-ourselves' argument. But a growing part of the
debt is held by foreigners, especially the oil exporting countries.

A. That is true. From 8.6 percent of the privately held debt in December 1970,
the share held by foreigners climbed to 22 percent by last November. That trend
reflects primarily the country's continued high dependence on imported oil and
the tenfold rise in oil prices in the past decade. The oil exporting countries
have amassed huge volumes of dollars in payment for their oil. They then take
the dollars and invest them in Government securities.

Q. Isn't all that beside the point? Isn't the main point the one President
Reagan made, ''that inflation results from all that deficit spending?''

A. That is indeed a burning question, and one that is endlessly complicated and
endlessly argued by economists. Restated, the proposition is that Federal
borrowing drives up the general price level - and interest rates and wages.

Q. Right, because when the Treasury borrows, the Federal Reserve buys the bonds,
paying for them with newly created money.

A. If that were true, dollar-for-dollar, Federal borrowing would manifestly be
inflationary. But there is considerable doubt that such monetizing of the debt
has occurred. Alan Reynolds, a supply-side economist at the First National Bank
of Chicago, who helped the Reagan Administration put together last week's fiscal
policy package, says there has been very little monetizing of debt. ''The data
show us that the link between fiscal policy and money is very loose,'' Mr.
Reynolds says.

Or, as Robert Weintraub, a monetary specialist on the staff of the Joint
Economic Committee, put it, ''You can't find a simple relationship between money
growth and the deficit.''

Q. Doesn't Federal borrowing crowd out borrowing by business for investment?

A. John Maynard Keynes, the late British economist, did not think so. Writing of
the 1930's, during the Depression, Keynes argued that when private investment is
insufficient to keep the economy operating at full employment, government
borrowing and spending can take up the slack.

A post-Keynesian view is that Federal borrowing does drive up interest rates and
crowd out of the capital markets businesses that are prevented from making
productive investments. In that sense, argues Frank E. Morris, president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Federal debt ''is at the heart of our inflation
problem and our productivity problem as well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of the debt

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN MAKING THE MOST OF HIS MANDATE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


At a tense moment in one of the last budget-cutting sessions at the White House,
President Reagan and his aides were discussing a domestic program. ''Go ahead
and cut it,'' the President commanded. Then he added with a chuckle, ''They're
going to hang me in effigy anyway, and it doesn't matter how high.''

That little vignette conveys the amiable audacity of the first month of the
Reagan Presidency. Not since John F. Kennedy two decades ago has the nation seen
a new Chief Executive move so swiftly to put his personal imprint on the
Presidency.

''In terms of impressing his personality as President on Washington and giving
them the feeling that he is President of all the people, Reagan's performance
may be better than Kennedy's,'' observed Richard E. Neustadt, a scholar of the
Presidency at Harvard University. ''The way they went about it is similar -
using the media, touching political bases, sharpening the contrast with their
predecessors.''

Mr. Kennedy dazzled people with his press conference adroitness, abolished the
governmental superstructure of Dwight Eisenhower, surprised bureaucrats by
calling them personally to ask questions.  With a relaxed manner, Mr. Reagan has
begun to charm Congress. He has accumulated more political support in the polls
than he had on Election Day, seizing the national attention with the abrupt
shift in direction and the philosophical sea change that he seeks to produce
with his economic package.
High Marks All Around

Just as Lyndon Johnson created his own mandate by helping the nation get over
its shock after Mr. Kennedy's assassination, Mr.  Reagan has been gaining for
himself the political start he needs by widening his mandate and creating a
sense of economic crisis that may help push along his domestic programs. Even
experienced liberal Democrats have been impressed by the Reagan beginnings. ''I
give them pretty high marks for coming in and taking hold of the reins of
government and deciding what to do,'' remarked Representative Morris K. Udall.

''I'm exceedingly impressed,'' echoed Clark M. Clifford, long-time adviser of
Democratic Presidents. ''I see a determined, dedicated, knowledgeable group who
have very hard, fixed policy concepts. I welcome this because we've been through
a period of so much softness, so much mushiness, so much vacillation. This man
has a clear philosophy. It may be what the country needs, though I doubt it. But
it's healthy for the patient to try a new doctor.''

Many politicians are skeptical that the Reagan remedies will work.  But
Washington is rather awed by the cocky brashness of Mr. Reagan's radical call
for a three-year, 30-percent tax cut and huge budget reductions that other
Presidents always thought politically impossible.

For the moment, Mr. Reagan profits from comparisons with Jimmy Carter. He has
focused his fire rather than scattering shot in his opening weeks. He has
projected a clear vision of where he plans to take the country. Like Mr. Carter
initially, he has seemed comfortable in the Presidency and at ease with his
considerable power. Far more than Mr. Carter, he has delegated to David A.
Stockman, his budget director, and others the authority to implement his orders,
imposed an ideological unity on his Cabinet, and moved quickly on his first
domestic priority.

More important perhaps, he has avoided Mr. Carter's early stumbles with Capitol
Hill. He has extended amiable courtesies to the deans of the legislative branch,
especially the Democratic leaders of the House. The ovation that greeted his
offer Wednesday night to make Congress his partner in ''our plan'' for the
economy bore witness to the effectiveness of his early courtship of Congress.
''We had an open field because there was so much disillusionment with Carter,''
acknowledged one Reagan aide.

The glow of good feeling may dissipate as Representatives and Senators begin
going over the details of the Reagan economic package. Some members of Congress
have made no secret of their disappointment that only a handful of women and
minority leaders have so far been tapped for high jobs in the Administration.

In foreign policy, too, there have been discordant notes. The shift from Mr.
Carter's emphasis on human rights to one on international terrorism, epitomized
in El Salvador, is being pursued. The proposed boost in defense spending will
probably sit well with Congress.  Passions for revenge against Iran were quickly
defused and the hostage agreement legally approved, though politically
disavowed. And terrorists abroad were left with what Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. called the ''calculated ambiguity'' of Mr. Reagan's threat
never to idly tolerate another hostage crisis.

But little has been done to refine specific foreign policy goals and strategies
or even to agree on the policy making machinery. The President and his
Secretaries of State and Defense have sounded different notes on such basic
issues as negotiating with the Russians, producing a neutron warhead for allied
forces in Europe, or reacting to Israeli settlements on the West Bank. The lack
of broad strategies or coordination has produced some initial anxiety and
confusion in Europe and some worry that what one Democrat called ''the public
cussing at the Russians'' may eventually backfire.

In truth, Mr. Reagan has been historically fortunate in the foreign arena. He
took office without having to face the immediate challenges of a Korean War, as
Dwight Eisenhower did, or a Vietnam War, as Richard Nixon did, and without
inheriting a Bay of Pigs operation such as was bequested Mr. Kennedy. The
hostage settlement with Iran spared him a draining and debilitating distraction.
''We've been lucky,'' conceded one White House aide. ''We haven't had to deal
with any international crisis.''

What's more, Mr. Reagan is still essentially untested at home. In his first
month, he has organized his Presidency well and found that the Congress, the
press and the public like him. Only now must he begin to confront opposition,
even from such powerful figures as House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., who
have been flattered by his courtesies but balk at bowing to the Administration's
proposals and legislative strategies.

Delay is the enemy the White House fears most. In Congress, inertia, old habits
and the crippling dispersion of power may sap the Reagan mandate more tellingly
than outright opposition. Allies like Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate Majority
leader, warn it may take a year to pass the Administration's tax program, a
delay that would severely blunt its impact. The test for Mr. Reagan is to show
that he can deliver on his promises before political stalemates in Congress
drain the momentum he has created. He will need to match his initial skill at
running the Executive Branch with powerful persuasion and political maneuvering.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan at party

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR EUROPE'S LEFT, SALVADOR HELPS TO FUEL U.S. DISTRUST

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words

DATELINE: BONN


For a segment of Western Europe's left, El Salvador is a windfall. Exotic,
blessedly far from home and potentially confirming a post-Vietnam generation's
notions of the misuse of United States power, the controversy over the little
war is packed with possibilities for simplistic portrayal.

Also, it drowns out more than a year's discomfort about Afghanistan, distracts
attention from Poland - no cheering allowed from the left's grandstand - and
tends to confirm fond suspicions that superpowers behave alike.

However, as an issue in Europe, a cause of trouble between the left and European
governments and, in turn, a creator of difficulties between those governments
and the Reagan Administration, the El Salvador issue is still in a larval stage.
Last week's European tour by Ambassador Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who explained
the Administration's version of Central American events, brought the differences
onto front pages.

But the evolution stopped there for Europeans who were already deep in a fully
mature, far tougher battle with the left over the EastWest power balance. In
West Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, left-wing Socialists, Social
Democrats and their allies have been trying to overturn the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization's decision to deploy new nuclear missiles in Western Europe
in the late 1980's, if talks with the Soviet Union on reducing such arms are not
producing clear results by then.

The missile issue and El Salvador converge in two respects. The far left can be
expected to feed on the junta-versus-guerrillas issue, arguing that the United
States, whatever it does, is behaving aggressively and is exposing its ''real
intention'' to push Western Europe, through the NATO missile decision, into
confrontation with the Soviet Union. In this sense, El Salvador increases the
difficulties facing governments, such as Chancellor Helmut Schmidt's in West
Germany, that are committed to the nuclear modernization program.

But the issue also creates temptations in Bonn and other Northern European NATO
countries - Norway, Denmark and Belgium - where Socialists hold or share power.
As they choose priorities, while attempting to maintain unity, letting the
parties' left-wing groups run loose on El Salvador has its attractions. But the
trouble with the tradeoff method - selecting a policy item as a sacrificial
offering to the left - is that it is hard to control and could lead to totally
unwanted difficulties with President Reagan.

For the time being, Mr. Schmidt, whose attitudes are pivotal for the alliance
and in influencing the other Social Democratic leaders, is concentrating on the
NATO decision. In a week of interviews aimed at showing he was in firm control,
despite serious and very public differences within his party, the words ''El
Salvador'' did not cross his lips.

Instead, Mr. Schmidt made clear, in concise terms that suggested the extent of
his concern, that a breakdown of the missile deployment decision would cause
NATO irreparable harm. He was fighting off up to 60 left-wing Social Democrats
in the Bundestag said to want to block or delay deployment, holding the missiles
hostage to something like American acceptance of SALT II, the sidetracked
nuclear weapons treaty. Overconfidence that his left was under control may
explain why Mr. Schmidt allowed a party conference in 1979 to declare that
collapse of SALT would create a new situation in which stationing of the new
medium-range missiles would carry the threat of a new arms race.

This is the left-wing's argument. But the movement against deployment - which is
intended to restore the balance upset by new Soviet SS-20 missiles in Europe -
has gone further. Last week, West Germany's biggest environmental group, which
has had great success in organizing antinuclear demonstrations, called for a
march on United States nuclear weapons sites. And Stern, the largest general
interest magazine, launched an attack, promising to show ''how the republic is
going to be stuffed to the gills with atomic weapons, where they are hidden, and
the dangers lurking as a result.''

Suggesting he would seek a vote of confidence on the issue if necessary, Mr.
Schmidt sounded more like Franz Josef Strauss, his Christian Democratic
opponent, than Willy Brandt, his own party chairman, in his comments on the tone
adopted by part of the West European and West German press on the missile issue.
''It has come very heavily under the psychological influence of Soviet
propaganda,'' he said.

His party's leftists can remind Mr. Schmidt of another difficulty.  His
Government, when agreeing to the stationing of the new cruise and Pershing
missiles (about 600 are to be deployed in Western Europe), stated that more than
one other NATO member on the Continent must also accept them.

So far, Italy appears to be the only relatively certain partner. In the
Netherlands, where an official decision on deployment is scheduled for December,
no political leader has been willing to spend political capital on defending the
missiles; surveys show 60 percent opposed to accepting them. Whatever the
outcome of Dutch national elections in May, officials in the Schmidt Government
doubt they will produce a coalition that could shoulder through the decision.
''It's close to hopeless,'' said a defense expert in Bonn.

In Belgium, tortuously opaque statements have left intentions imprecise. The
Government coalition, which includes Socialists, recently suggested it would
endorse the missiles, but the Socialist Party's Flemish wing is leading a fight
to stop implementation. The Belgian and Dutch campaigns against the missiles
have been so successful that Wolfgang Roth, a left-wing Social Democrat in the
Bonn Parliament, cites them as examples of how the campaign should be pursued in
West Germany.

Unlike the El Salvador issue, which offers Europeans the luxuries of distance
and vagueness, missile deployment lacks a middle ground toward which the
adversaries in internal European struggles could be coaxed. The lines are drawn
and it was Mr. Schmidt's analysis of the balance of power that led to the
decision to modernize ''theatre nuclear forces'' in Europe.

For European governments struggling with their leftists, negotiations seem the
best way to contain both controversies. They see the resumption of talks between
the United States and the Soviet Union on the middle-range missiles as the best
way of blunting the left's anti-NATO campaign and thus helping the allies to
carry out their commitments. Getting the factions together in El Salvador, the
argument continues, might end the killing there, create a government with broad
support and make unnecessary the deeper American involvement that Europeans,
among others, dread.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators in Frankfurt, West Germany

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UDEAS & TRENDS IN SUMMARY;
The Young Tune In, Turn Off to Drugs

BYLINE: By Eva Hoffman and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 313 words


The romance of drugs, which for the past two decades has held more and more
adolescents in thrall, seems to be losing its allure for high school students of
today, according to a national survey of drug use released last week.

Not that the involvement is near over. The authors of the study, sponsored by
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, said the level of illicit drug use among
young Americans is ''probably higher than that in any other industrialized
nation of today.'' However, for the first time since 1975, when the yearly
survey of about 17,000 high school seniors was first taken, the patterns of drug
use from 1979 to 1980 showed a significant decline.

Daily use of marijuana, the most widely used substance, was reported down by 12
percent, although nearly 1 in 10 students still said they smoked it daily. Use
of inhalants and hallucinogens such as PCP decreased, and a previously reported
decline in the use of barbiturates and tranquilizers continued. The use of
cocaine, whose popularity shot way up between 1976 to 1979, showed signs of
stabilizing.

Main exceptions to the downward trend were in the use of amphetamines and other
stimulants and sleeping pills popularly known as Quaaludes. But even those who
use stimulants now tend to say that they take them for such functional reasons
as losing weight or getting through the day, rather than just to ''get high.''

The researchers credited the communications media for publicizing the dangers of
drugs, and they noted a growing concern among the young about health risks. ''We
are no longer in a period when external events, like the Vietnam War, prevent
young people from hearing the warnings,'' said the study's leader, Dr. Lloyd
Johnston of the University of Michigan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of students lighting marijuana cigarette

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AGONY OF EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Raymond Bonner; Raymond Bonner is a New York Times reporter who
recently returned from a two-month assignment in El Salvador.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4969 words


A cherubic, 14-year-old boy in pressed shirt, clean pants and shined shoes led
the way up a narrow, twisting mountain path. Behind him came a chunky woman in
her early 20's, a rainbow sewn on the front of her maroon sweatshirt, carrying a
new grenade launcher made in the United States and covered with protective
grease. Another woman followed, the front pockets of her new olive green
military jacket bulging with Soviet-made hand grenades; she led a horse burdened
with burlap bags of corn in which the shapes of automatic rifles could just
barely be seen.

At intervals that would minimize casualties in case of an ambush came an
accountant, bank clerk, printer and college student, each taking a turn at
shouldering heavy crates of grenades and ammunition. They hiked for two hours
through tunnels of trees and beside fields of prickly hemp bushes, past clusters
of mud huts where peasants offered them oranges and wished them ''Godspeed,''
until they reached their camp, hidden in a tropical forest on the side of a
volcano.  Only a few days before, an army search-and-destroy mission had passed
within a few hundred yards of the site, but now, on this warm January evening,
expectations were high among the guerrillas. They were making the final
preparations for an attack on a nearby city, their mission in a long-awaited,
nationwide offensive to overthrow El Salvador's junta.

Today, six weeks later, the Government remains in power. The guerrillas' call
for a general strike and popular insurrection went largely unheeded, and they
failed to gain control of an area where they could safely establish a
provisional government. Yet the guerrillas have demonstrated that, after decades
of political and economic repression, a revolutionary movement in El Salvador
has achieved enough power and popular support to take on the army and survive.
Until a couple of years ago, few North Americans knew whether San Salvador was
the name of the capital or the country. The five million people of this
Massachusetts-sized nation are jammed into a narrow, mountainous corridor hard
to find on a map, shoved against the Pacific Ocean by neighboring Guatemala and
Honduras and just across the bay from Nicaragua. It has no oil, virtually no
minerals, an insignificant industrial base; the per-capita income is less than
$700, one of the lowest in the Western hemisphere.

But tiny El Salvador has suddenly burst upon the world stage. In the fall of
1979, a coup by moderate army officers led to the establishment of a junta with
both civilian and military representatives. Economic reforms, including a major
redistribution of land, were undertaken, but they were accompanied by
repression.  According to El Salvador's Human Rights Commission, a private
organization, 13,194 people have been killed in political violence in the last
year, most of them by Government security forces and rightist paramilitary
groups. (The death toll of a civil war of the same proportions in the United
States would be almost 500,000 people - the population of a New Orleans.) The
Marxist-led guerrillas, growing ever stronger and bolder, have kidnapped
businessmen and bombed banks. Thousands of Salvadoran families have been forced
by the escalating warfare to flee from their villages, settling in makeshift
refugee centers in the cities and in camps across the border in Honduras.

The turmoil has forced a new international perception of El Salvador's
geopolitical significance. The cold war could become hot here. Many in
Washington worry about an updated version of the old domino theory, with the
blocks falling much closer to home. Just 19 months ago, a socialist, pro-Cuban
government took power in next-door Nicaragua. If El Salvador follows suit, can
the right-wing regime in Guatemala, already under attack from its own
impoverished peasants, be far beyond? Would that threaten the stability of the
entire region, and the precious oil reserves of Mexico and Venezuela as well?

A raging controversy has developed over what policy the United States should
pursue in El Salvador. The Carter Administration propped up what it considered
to be a ''centrist,'' non-Marxist regime, supporting - in fact, pushing - the
economic changes, in part as a means of diminishing the appeal of the leftists.
That support continued despite the increasing violence of Government security
forces against the political opposition. A few days before Mr. Reagan's
inauguration, a United States ban on shipments of lethal weapons to El Salvador
ended with the arrival there of helicopters, automatic rifles, grenade launchers
and ammunition.

Some of President Reagan's advisers are urging him to increase political and
military support. Alexander M. Haig Jr., the new Secretary of State, has charged
the Soviet Union with ''unprecedented'' risk-taking in Latin America, and
Administration aides charge that the guerrilla forces in El Salvador have
received major political or military support from the Soviet Union, Cuba and
Nicaragua. Just this month, documents allegedly captured from the insurgents
were made public that described a guerrilla leader's shopping tour for weapons
to the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Ethiopia and Eastern European capitals. When Mr.
Reagan removed Ambassador Robert E. White, a career Foreign Service officer who
had opposed United States military involvement, from his post in San Salvador,
and this month made Frederic L. Chapin, a diplomat with extensive Defense
Department experience, acting head of mission there, it was seen by many as a
certification of a change in United States policy.

For all the concern about El Salvador's becoming ''another Cuba,'' there are
other fears that it will become ''another Vietnam,'' that it will lead to the
in-volvement of the United States on one side of another nation's revolution.
Last month, for example, in Berkeley, Calif., several thousand people
demonstrated against United States involvement in El Salvador. Teach-ins are
being organized in Boston, New York and other cities. The United States Catholic
Conference has urged that Washington not provide military aid to the junta.
Thousands protested in Frankfurt, Germany. And in Mexico City, where
high-ranking Government officials have been critical of this steppedup United
States military activity, 25,000 people marched in a demonstration sponsored by
unions and leftist groups; it was one of the largest anti-Yankee protests there
in recent years.

The protestors scorn talk of an international Communist conspiracy in El
Salvador. There is no evidence, they say, of any direct Soviet involvement: Some
of the guerrilla field commanders have been trained in Cuba, and some of their
arms were made in the Soviet Union and China and transhipped through Cuba, but
the only foreign military advisers known to be in El Salvador are from the
United States. And arms-shopping tours, they say, are not restricted to the
guerrillas; an association of Salvadoran businessmen has hired a Washington
lobbyist to help the junta get more military aid from the United States.

Moreover, as one insurgent leader said in an interview, the major guerrilla
organizations ''are more anti-Soviet than your Mr. Haig.'' Whether or not that
is true, it is likely that, as an American diplomat noted: ''Even if it were not
for Cuba and the Soviet Union, we'd have a revolution here.'' Why? Here is the
explanation of Jose Napoleon Duarte, the 55-yearold leader of El Salvador's
staunchly anti-Communist Christian Democratic Party and President of the ruling
junta:

''This is a history of people starving to death, living in misery.  For 50
years, the same people had all the power, all the money, all the opportunities.
Those who did not have anything tried to take it away from those who had
everything. But there were no democratic systems available to them, so they have
radicalized themselves, have resorted to violence. And of course this second
group, the rich, do not want to give up anything, so they are fighting.''

A company president educated in the United States offered the same explanation
in fewer words: ''It is a class war.'' Until recently, the top 5 percent of the
population received 38 percent of the income. Fewer than 2 percent owned more
than half of the viable farmland, which they planted with coffee, sugar cane and
cotton for export. Malnutrition is endemic in El Salvador, and the infant
mortality rate is twice that of Cuba, four times that of the United States.
Functional illiteracy among the peasants approaches 95 percent.

And some 60 percent of El Salvador's population is rural, living in isolated
valleys or mountain hamlets. Wooden-yoked oxen draw carts that ride on solid
wooden wheels. Hundreds of thousands of peasants live in hovels made of packed
mud; naked children with swollen bellies and open sores wander among the
grunting pigs, garbage and flies. Their mothers and sisters trudge for an hour
or more to the nearest well for water, carried in gourd-shaped plastic
containers balanced on their heads.

Meanwhile, in San Salvador, at the foot of a forested volcano, brick walls hide
$500,000 houses. Many of them are now abandoned, their owners off to what were
once their second homes in Miami and Guatemala City.

There is also a middle class in this capital city of 500,000 people, a consumer
class that has burgeoned within the last decade.Owners of Toyotas and Datsuns
fill up at Esso and Shell stations before heading for a McDonald's or for the
shopping center where they can buy Sears clothes at prices slightly higher than
those in the United States or browse in reverberating record shops. But behind
the middle-class neighborhoods of new, two-story houses on tree-lined, paved
cul-de-sacs are the rutted dirt roads of the urban poor.  Scruffy children play
among the chickens and cows in front of tin shanties while their mothers warm
tortillas over fires laid in stones.

There is comparable poverty in Mexico and India, comparable contrast between
rich and poor, without violent class warfare. Why in El Salvador? Part of the
answer can be found in the nation's failure to evolve even a flawed democratic
process. That path to change has always been blocked - by the army.

In 1932, the military put down a rebellion of peasants and workers who were
seeking a minimum wage and unemployment benefits; more than 30,000 people were
slain. And ever since, El Salvador has been the fiefdom of an oligarchy
consisting of wealthy landowners and the army, with a military leader in the
presidency. By all objective accounts, the only honest election during this
period was in 1972, when Mr. Duarte was chosen President, backed by a coalition
that included Social Democrats and a Communist front as well as the Christian
Democrats.

A short, stocky man with an engineering degree from the University of Notre
Dame, Mr. Duarte was operating a construction firm when, in 1960, he attended a
meeting of businessmen and other Salvadorans concerned that Communism seemed to
be the only alternative to rule by the military. It was, he said, the start of
his political career.  He went on to become a founder of the Christian
Democratic Party and, eventually, a three-term Mayor of San Salvador before his
presidential victory in 1972. But the army voided the election, and Mr. Duarte
was exiled before he could be sworn in.

Meanwhile, the guerrilla movement was growing: A Communist leader had resigned
from the party to form the Popular Forces of Liberation; the People's
Revolutionary Army was attracting disillusioned young Catholics. The roots of
the movement were primarily among peasants and workers, with student support. It
was a far cry from the leftist guerrilla movements the United States had opposed
in the 1960's in Brazil and Uruguay, which had been manned largely by
middle-class radicals.

There was internal conflict within the Salvadoran guerrilla groups over the
means to accomplish their goals. But in 1977, after another election result
favoring a moderate coalition was blocked by the army, the armed leftists began
to cooperate in a campaign of ''destabilization'' that included strikes, street
protests and kidnappings.

The process by which Mr. Duarte finally became President of the junta began on
Oct. 15, 1979, when a group of young Army officers deposed the right-wing
Government of Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero.  The resulting junta, composed of
three liberal civilians and two colonels, fell apart less than three months
later; the civilians resigned after failing to oust the conservative Colonel
Jose Guillermo Garcia as Minister of Defense. Three other civilians were named
in their stead, but one of them quit 10 weeks later to protest the accelerating
political repression. Mr. Duarte, who had returned from nearly eight years of
exile in Venezuela, took his place on the junta. Violence precipitated another
crisis last December when four American missionaries -three nuns and a lay
worker -were murdered.  The United States reacted by suspending military aid and
demanding a restructuring of the Government that would guarantee enough civilian
control of the armed forces to reduce the violence.

But negotiations between the colonels and Mr. Duarte's Christian Democrats moved
the junta further right. Its most liberal member was forced out. Moreover,
though the military agreed to Mr. Duarte's becoming President of the junta,
Colonel Garcia again survived efforts to oust him as Minister of Defense, and
another colonel became Vice President of the junta and Commander in Chief of the
armed forces.

Said a Latin American diplomat at the time of the changes: ''If Garcia is
minister of defense and Duarte is not commander in chief, then Mr. Duarte is an
adornment.'' Privately, United States officials also had their doubts about
whether Mr. Duarte and the reorganized junta had the power and resolve to
control the Government's security forces by punishing officers and soldiers
responsible for killing civilians.  Last March, a few days after Mr. Duarte
joined the junta, the Government announced one of the most sweeping
land-redistribution programs ever attempted in Latin America. More than 250
estates larger than 1,235 acres became peasant cooperatives, the former owners
to be compensated with long-term bonds. Other programs have been promised that
will effectively transfer ownership of thousands of additional acres to the
peasants.

Fifty-five-year-old Leonar Quirola stood in front of the small, packed-mud hut
on the San Isidro plantation, 30 miles west of San Salvador. Barefoot,
gesticulating with hands grown strong from days spent grinding corn for
tortillas for her family of 14, she was complaining that her husband and sons
work harder and earn less money harvesting coffee than they did while laboring
in San Isidro's closed sugar refinery. But then she paused and added: ''Life is
better now.'' She has a say in her future. According to the president of the
cooperative that now owns the lush, 3,700-acre plantation, the members have
voted to build a second water well and to construct new housing, rather than
distribute any profits this year.

El Salvador's Institute for Agrarian Transformation has reported that 14.9
percent of the country's total farmland is now owned by cooperatives. Given the
average family size of 6.6 persons, more than 386,000 Salvadorans have
benefitted from the conversion of the largest estates. Another 200,000 families
would be included in the cooperatives formed by the breakup of farms larger than
247 acres - the second, yet-to-be-implemented stage of the agrarian reforms. The
final stage, known as the ''land-to-the-tiller'' program, would give an
estimated 150,000 peasant families title to the thousands of separate plots,
most of them no larger than two acres, which they now work as sharecroppers.

The chief motivation of most United States and Salvadoran officials in
supporting these programs has been clearly political. ''The purpose of land
reform was not to help the poorest because they were poor,'' said a Salvadoran
who worked with the United States Agency for International Development, which
has supplied economic and technical assistance to the El Salvador Government,
''but to keep them from joining the left.''

Roy L. Prosterman, a United States law professor who was an adviser on land
reform in El Salvador as he had been in Vietnam in the 1960's, last spring told
a hostile group of businessmen in San Salvador why they should support the
program: ''The left fears land reform. It deprives them of their most valuable
weapon in implementing revolution because they can no longer appeal to the
landless.''

But a Marxist university professor in El Salvador offered a different reason for
the left's opposition to the partially implemented tiller program. The goal of
land reform, he argued, should not be the creation of more landowners, but a
fairer distribution of the wealth - which is to say, food - and an increase in
food production. He favors the integration of the tiny, inefficient plots into
cooperatives.

The start of El Salvador's land distribution program last March was accompanied
by the nationalization of the businesses exporting coffee, cotton and sugar
cane; the three crops account for 75 percent of the country's foreign-exchange
earnings. The Government also took control of 51 percent of the stock of all
banks; 20 percent of what remained was made available to the employees and the
rest to the public, with individual ownership limited to 2 percent.

Even while the initial agricultural and economic reforms were going forward, the
junta's political repression continued, and the leftist groups moved toward
unity. The various armed guerrilla groups joined forces in the Farabundo Marti
National Liberation Front (F.M.L.N.), which takes its name from the leader of
the 1932 peasant uprising.  And the Democratic Revolutionary Front (F.D.R.) was
organized to coordinate the efforts of more than 40 organizations, ranging from
moderate priests and professional people to Social Democrats and dissident
Christian Democrats and including the guerrillas.

The first president of the F.D.R. was Enrique Alvarez Cordova, a wealthy
landowner who had resigned as Minister of Agriculture in the first junta in 1979
because of the military's domination of the Government. In November 1980,
uniformed soldiers surrounded a Jesuit high school where leaders of the F.D.R.
were meeting. A group of heavily armed men dressed in civilian clothes entered
the building and brought out the front members; Mr. Alvarez and five others were
later assassinated.

Mr. Alvarez's successor is 49-year-old Guillermo Manuel Ungo, whose reserved
manner and measured speech reflect his career as a lawyer and professor at El
Salvador's Jesuit-run Catholic University. Mr.  Ungo has been threatened with
death if he stays in El Salvador, and he travels around the world seeking
international support for the leftist movement. As the president of the F.D.R.,
he is the leader of El Salvador's left, opposite number to Mr. Duarte, though
once they were political partners.

A founder of El Salvador's Social Democratic Party, Mr. Ungo was Mr. Duarte's
Vice Presidential running mate in 1972 and was appointed to the junta after the
October 1979 coup. But he resigned and eventually allied his Social Democrats
with the Marxist left because he felt the army high command was blocking
promised change and because the violence was escalating. He now says of his
one-time partner: ''Duarte's personal obsession for power and his primitive
anti-Communism have all come out. He was willing to ally himself with the army
and oligarchy.'' Mr. Duarte, in turn, charges that Mr. Ungo is being ''used by
the Communists.''

In an interview last month, Mr. Ungo said, ''You can be a leftist and a
socialist without necessarily being a Communist.'' He added: ''People generally
believe that peaceful methods are synonymous with democracy, while an armed
insurrection is undemocratic. But this is pure fiction in a country like ours
that has lived in antidemocracy where 'peaceful methods' were instruments of
domination, repression and control.''

He is believed to have had a moderating influence on the guerrillas, who now
claim that they accept the need in any future regime for political pluralism, a
private sector and international nonalignment. On one point, however, the
guerrillas remain adamant: They want a thorough overhaul of the military and
full civilian control.

A wide cross-section of Salvadorans agree. Even a Government minister recently
commented privately, ''It would probably be a good idea.'' The military is
routinely accused of being responsible for much of the violence. The bodies of
the four American Roman Catholic missionaries, for example, were found in a
crude grave along a dirt road near the El Salvador international airport.
Peasants who live in the area say that the road was regularly patrolled by the
National Guard, and United States diplomats have charged that Government
security forces were involved in the slayings. A few weeks ago, an army truck
dumped the bodies of 22 young men and women in a pile on the asphalt parking lot
behind the modern multistory judicial center in the capital. The Government said
they were ''subversives.'' According to a Government official, more than 200
leaders of the new farm cooperatives have been killed, and 80 cooperatives are
now paying ''protection money'' to local military commanders.

Much of the killing is also done by quasi-independent right-wing organizations.
The Government itself, for example, organized and armed the dreaded ORDEN (the
acronym for the Democratic Nationalist Organization) in the 1970's to control
the countryside. And separate death squads operate with impunity if not official
immunity. One such, the Maximilio Hernandez Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade, is
named after the general who suppressed the peasant rebellion in 1932.

The right-wing death squads are financed in part by wealthy families who have
fled to Miami or Guatemala City. ''I know one man who has given more than $2
million,'' Mr. Duarte said. Government soldiers, he added, often moonlight for
the paramilitary groups; they are paid $40 a month and given life insurance
policies.

Leftist guerrillas, meanwhile, have kidnapped and killed businessmen, raided
plantations, burned buses and bombed banks and department stores.

''The difference in the violence,'' said a conservative priest, ''is that the
left kills selectively - members of ORDEN and Government security forces.
Killing by the right and the army is more indiscriminate. When they sweep
through a village looking for leaders and leftist sympathizers, they kill a lot
of innocent peasants.''

Tens of thousands of Salvadorans have left their mountain villages to get out of
the way of violence. Most have settled in towns, subsisting as best they can.
Several hundred camped out in a school; more than a thousand live in a field
behind the headquarters of the archbishop in San Salvador. Thousands more have
fled the country to refugee camps in Honduras.

Though the Roman Catholic Church, like the rest of the nation, is divided in its
political allegiances, the clergy have been hard hit.  An archbishop, nine
priests, a seminary student about to be ordained and the four missionaries from
the United States have been murdered.  According to Bishop Arturo Rivera Damas,
the Apostolic Administrator who is the acting head of the church in El Salvador,
''Most of the persecution against the church is done by members of the
Government security forces and right-wing paramilitary organizations.''

The first priest to die in the political violence was a Jesuit, the Rev. Rutilio
Grande. As he once explained in a letter to his superiors, he had been preaching
to the impoverished peasants that ''their hunger, their diseases, their infant
mortality, their unemployment, their unpaid wages were not the will of God, but
the result of the greed of a few Salvadorans and of their own passivism.'' On
March 12, 1977, he was on his way to celebrate mass in the dusty rural village
where he was born, when gunmen hiding in bushes on both sides of the road opened
fire on his white Volkswagen. Most of the priests who have been killed or
threatened were encouraging peasants to demand improvements in their lives or,
like the American nuns, distributing food and clothing.

Priests say that Father Grande's assassination brought about the ''conversion''
of the Archbishop of San Salvador Oscar Arnulfo Romero, who became one of the
country's most vocal human-rights advocates - until he was assassinated last
March while celebrating mass.

''The situation demands a strong moral voice, a clear statement by the church,''
said a priest last month. ''But (acting Archbishop) Rivera Damas can't make it.
He has no job security.'' Another priest suggested that Bishop Rivera Damas is
influenced by El Salvador's four other bishops, who are ''still serving the
oligarchy.'' The Vatican, he added, ''doesn't want another bishop speaking out
like Romero did.'' ''The United States policy of supporting important political,
social and economic changes has made a profound difference here - has given the
people of this country an alternative to the MarxistLeninist program. This was
one time we supported, with active diplomacy and an ample supply of economic
assistance, a progressive reform Government in Latin America.''

Those were the comments, last December, of United States Ambassador Robert E.
White. Two months later, following the Inauguration of President Reagan, he was
relieved of his post.

Mr. White had represented a President who had taken a somewhat new approach to
Latin America. In the past, when its economic and/or political interests were
thought to be threatened, the United States often interfered forcefully on
behalf of military dictatorships and right-wing governments - with the C.I.A. in
Guatemala in 1954, for example, or with the Marines in the Dominican Republic in
1965. But Mr. Carter actually supported the ouster of Gen. Anastasio Somoza
Debayle in Nicaragua in 1979. And when the civilian-military junta took over in
neighboring El Salvador later that year, Mr. Carter came forward with economic
aid. He hoped that the country would develop into a democratic, non-Communist
alternative - a model for the rest of Latin America.

But as the Carter Administration came to a close, there was increasing concern
over the growth of the guerrilla movement and over alleged shipments of weapons
to the guerrillas from Nicaragua, Cuba and other leftist nations. Mr. Carter
responded by sending in lethal weapons and military advisers. Mr. Reagan is
expected to provide at least as much support; he may, in fact, go much further.

One option, of course, would be to send in United States troops to help subdue
the guerrillas - the ''Vietnam'' scenario. El Salvador does have a mountainous
terrain, but it is a much smaller nation than Vietnam. The United States
military might be more successful there - assuming that the Salvadoran
guerrillas were not reinforced by Cubans and other foreign troops. Intervention,
however, would inevitably damage the image of the United States in the rest of
the world while the Salvadoran left would gain new international support from
democratic countries. Moreover, unless the causes of the current civil war are
addressed, another guerrilla movement would most likely be fighting in El
Salvador within a few years. Poverty and political repression, as Mao Zedong
suggested, are the waters in which guerrillas swim.

Mr. Reagan has another option of a very different kind: to seek a negotiated
settlement of the civil war. The political leaders of the left say they are
prepared to talk. Their strength within the opposition front has been bolstered
by the recent failure of their military counterparts to overthrow the junta. Mr.
Ungo has even said, ''We want to talk to Washington,'' and overtures have been
made to the Reagan Administration. Moreover, the guerrillas are under pressure
from Nicaragua's Sandinist Government to look for a political settlement. In
January, Washington suspended economic aid to Nicaragua after accusing the
Nicaraguans of allowing their territory to be used for the shipment of Cuban
weapons to El Salvador's guerrillas. The Nicaraguans have denied the charge, but
the Sandinistas believe that their relations with Washington will be in turmoil
unless the political situation in neighboring El Salvador is stabilized.

Meanwhile, Mr. Duarte and others in the junta have said that they are willing to
negotiate with the leftists. Even before the United States election, Salvadoran
Government and business leaders were openly expressing their preference for Mr.
Reagan's views on Latin America over Mr. Carter's emphasis on human rights.
Thus, the new President's encouragement of a settlement would carry great
weight.

Mr. Duarte has announced plans for the drawing up of a constitution that would,
he hopes, lead to elections in 1982. Diplomats and Government officials,
including Mr. Duarte, acknowledge that a political party representing views to
the left of the current junta would do well - particularly with Mr. Ungo on the
ballot. Of course, the Government would have to end the repression that now
accompanies its reforms before the leftists would participate in elections.

Most Salvadorans, exhausted after years of civil strife, are now troubled by the
involvement of the major powers in their country. ''I fear we are becoming a
pawn,'' a businessman said a few days after the increase in United States
military aid was announced last month.  ''We are capable of solving our own
problems if only everyone would just leave us alone.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Duarte, Guteirrez and Garcia photo of Oscar
Romero photos map of El Salvador map of Central America

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Crime

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


Carrying on the traditions of the classical British mystery, Patricia Moyes once
again brings back Chief Superintendant Henry Tibbett and his wife Emmy in ANGEL
DEATH (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, $10.95). They have been solving cases since
1960, and in ''Angel Death'' they are on vacation in the Caribbean when they are
drawn into a case involving a nice, peppery retired schoolteacher who has
disappeared. As always, one thing leads to another, and a big drug network is
finally uncovered.

Many will find that the most interesting sections of the book relate to the
peculiar behavior of Superintendant Tibbett, particularly because the medical
data involving that behavior has presumably been well researched by the author.
Aside from that, the book follows a familiar course. Its locale may be well away
from Scotland Yard, but the plotting pursues a logical line and the resources of
a police department are thrown into action. It's all very civilized, and there
is a happy ending of sorts. This is Patricia Moyes at her best.

A British series less known to American readers deals with the adventures of
Ambrose Usher, an unusual man who can be met in A TREASURY ALARM by Jocelyn
Davey (Walker and Company, $9.95). The author's real name is Chaim Raphael - a
British historian with Foreign Office experience who first started writing Usher
mysteries in 1956. Ambrose Usher, on the other hand, is a philosopher who is
famous in academic circles and often does secret work for the Foreign Office.

In ''A Treasury Alarm'' he has a series of lectures scheduled at Harvard, and
the Foreign Office asks him to do a job for them while in America. The story
moves in several different worlds: economics, art history, the Mafia. (The Mafia
''godfather'' turns out to be a man who fully deserves the respect he demands.)
Most of the interest in the book lies in the writing rather than the diffuse,
unbelievable plot. Usher is a man of wide learning who seems to have total
recall. He spouts literary allusions from Empedocles to modern poets, he
remembers every work of art he has ever seen, he knows operas (the text as well
as the music) by heart, and of course he delights in philosophical paradoxes. He
is an appealing man, but ''A Treasury Alarm'' is too self-indulgent to be much
of a crime or mystery novel. What saves it is the real intellect and wit of the
author.

Jack S. Scott's THE GOSPEL LAMB (Harper & Row, $9.95), though, is a bit of a
letdown. This is one of a series featuring Detective Sergeant Rosher, that
unlovely cop who has about as much redeeming social value as an anopheles
mosquito. Now he is 58 years old, reinstated on the force and still prone to
error. He busts the wrong guy and once more gets into trouble. The locale is a
small town where a pop festival is being given. Hippies descend from all over,
drug dealers set up shop, Hell's Angels start a riot and a psychotic killer
prowls around looking for nubile flesh. ''The Gospel Lamb'' turns out to be a
very thin book, reading as though it had been written between elevenses and
lunch. Mr. Scott has done much better.

A nice caper story is THE MILLION DOLLAR LIFT by Richard Crighton (Avon
paperback, $2.50). A Vietnam veteran who loves skiing and is good at it dreams
up a way to hijack a ski lift at a gambling resort in Lake Tahoe. He talks an
old friend into being an accomplice, and a woman is drafted along the way. Mr.
Crighton follows the Arthur Hailey style of novel writing, introducing a mixed
bag of characters who have nothing to do with the plot and could be cut. But the
writing is crisp and clear, the escape plan of the hijackers is ingenious, the
plotting is first-rate, and a chilling surprise awaits the reader on the last
page.  The sixth Charles Paris mystery by Simon Brett is THE DEAD SIDE OF THE
MIKE (Charles Scribner's Sons, $8.95). For about five years now, Mr. Brett has
been regaling us with stories in which the quiet, not very successful, actor
Charles Paris gets mixed up in murder. This time he is doing a job for the BBC
when a young lady is killed. Everybody calls it suicide, but of course it isn't.
Paris pokes around and uncovers things that put his own life in peril.

He is still a remote, elusive figure. What does Charles Paris really look like?
What does he really think? But perhaps the author wants him exactly the way he
is. He is an actor, a receptor, merely a conduit through which the action
passes. Undoubtedly Mr. Brett could bring him more completely to life, for
certainly the other characters are fully realized. And there is a civilized
patina to the writing, including sharp, satiric observations on certain British
institutions. Mr. Brett, for instance, has fun with the Beeb - the BBC - and its
bureaucracy. Here is a group of executives discussing the programming. ''Well,''
says one, ''the Gogol musical idea got as far as DPR. HDR just didn't understand
it, basically. I think at one stage DPR was going to refer it to MDR, but AHDR
reckoned that it would be publicly questioning HDR's decision. ...'' No wonder
Charles Paris, sitting in at the meeting, feels that ''he had somehow drifted
into a game of Etruscan Scrabble.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WINTER WITH A FRENCH ACCENT

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2656 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- BETSY WADE
is a copy editor on the national news desk of The Times.

By BETSY WADE

When he was in Vietnam, the war correspondent Homer Bigart wrote home that he
had a recurring dream: He was on his way to Montreal by rail, riding in the bar
car of the train called the Laurentian, iced drink in hand, gazing across icy
fields, watching the snow whirl down outside. He wrote that the first thing he
wanted to do on his return from war and heat was to live out this fantasy. He
did, too.

After two weeks of dreadful cold in New York, with the mercury hanging at 6
degrees, the last possible fantasies for me would be to drink anything iced,
watch snow, travel north from New York, or, least of all, plunge into the
snowbound Laurentian Mountains of Quebec. But tickets had been bought,
reservations made, vacation spoken for.

My ice-skating companion and I were seeking a place near enough to allow us to
crowd some relaxation and exercise into the four days we planned - two days off
work plus a weekend. She was familiar with the Catskills and I with the Poconos,
so we were looking for something more exotic. A friend recommended a newish
hotel in the Laurentians, the mountain chain that runs along the northern edge
of the St.  Lawrence Valley.

One of the pleasures that we discovered is that the nearby part of the
Laurentian resort area is not hard to get to, contrasted, for example, with the
long drive to good winter resort country in New England. The flight to
Montreal's Dorval Airport from La Guardia takes an hour and the drive northwest
into the mountains, in a rental car, is a fast 50 miles, mostly on the
Laurentian Expressway - l'Autoroute des Laurentides - a six-lane highway with a
pavement that is clear and dry.

Inspection of the road signs reminded us of a serious omission in our packing: a
simple French dictionary. We had no trouble deciding that we wanted to go
''nord'' from Montreal rather than ''sud,'' but we blanked at the yellow sign
saying ''Peage.'' A little farther on, picturegrams showing trailers and trucks
and a sign reading ''Pas de Monnaie'' appeared over the right-hand lane and we
recognized that we were approaching a tollgate with automatic tolls on the left.
We fed the machine one of the Canadian quarters we had purchased at the airport
but discovered down the line that the machine would without hesitation also
swallow an American quarter.

Most everything connected with the tourist industry in the Laurentians offers
French/English, United States/ Canadian options: Brochures are printed in one
language on one side and the other language on the reverse; menus on walls are
duplicated and odometers have two circles, one marked in miles and one in
kilometers. But to many of its people, the Province is Quebec, not Quebec, and
the last few years have been years of emphasis on French culture and the
possibility of separation from Canada. Evidently as a consequence, highway signs
take a hard line, offering no English alternative.

For being so near, the Laurentians are different. Aside from the shape of the
hills, which is smoother, drivers can tell they are in the Laurentians and not
in New England by the paint on the houses - chalet-style, traditional and
A-frame. They are in grammar-school colors - brilliant crimsons, blues, oranges.

We left the six-lane expressway and, still climbing, drove east on Provincial
Route 370, a two-lane road into the lower Laurentian resort area. We passed
skiing areas of all sorts and always before us were hills that displayed the
snowy rivulets running down through the trees that denote ski runs. Some of the
lodges and hotels were tiny and informal; many were boarded up. Many bore the
sign ''A Vendre'' and after a while I was so hypnotized by it that I stopped
seeing it as a sign saying ''For Sale'' and began to see it as the shingle of an
unfortunate man whose name doomed him to the real estate business as surely as
Jerry De Waters in my old neighborhood was doomed to become a plumber.

Curious about the prevalence of the signs, we later talked to a real estate
agent and learned that, indeed, huge tracts were for sale at $1 a square foot
because Quebec's recent upsurge of separatism had frightened away owners and
buyers. Since a vote on the question of moving toward separation lost in May,
the agent said, he expects a boom, and it seems hard to doubt in an area near to
the Northeast United States where the currency exchange is favorable to the
United States (at the time we were there, a United States dollar brought $1.15
Canadian) and where gasoline seems plentiful at 33 cents (Canadian) a liter for
unleaded premium, which works out to about $1 a gallon in United States
currency.

Our resort was L'Esterel, pleasant, light and the most modern we had seen, which
in the Laurentians tends to mean wood rather than plastic. The long zigzag
building - glass on both long sides - hugs the edge of Lac Dupuis, on a neck of
land between that lake and one much larger, Lac Masson. All around us we heard
French, but when we spoke English at the registration desk, the response was in
English that sounded distinctly American rather than British. This continued to
be true, except for a frustrating conversation with a busboy in the restaurant.

We had picked a middle-priced room on ''the garden side,'' which turned out to
mean the side of the hotel that faced away from Lac Dupuis but looked over the
grounds and the road. The room was wood and painted cinderblock, with a window
the full width, and more of the basic colors in the draperies and spreads. The
branches of pines outside sagged under clumps of many-layered snow. The room had
an air of informality that was reassuring; no brochure can forewarn a guest how
casual or formal a place will be and we had feared a requirement to dress for
dinner. We need not have; the atmosphere of the room was the atmosphere of the
place: calm, airy, bright from light bouncing off snow, do-as-you-like. As we
walked down the hall, we peeked into the lakeside rooms, and the reason for the
price differential was apparent: what for us was a window was for them a
balcony.

Through net-like curtains at the back of the glass-enclosed lobby, we could see
the indoor pool, moderately populated, and beyond the snow-covered lake.
Cross-country skiers streamed across a trail over the ice in their distinctive
bouncy lope. We discovered that guests at L'Esterel much preferred
cross-country, or ski de fond - literally, skiing at the bottom - to alpine, or
downhill skiing.  Despite the effort it requires, cross-country is evidently
enjoyable for people of considerable age and it obviously involves many fewer
hazards than downhill. The skis, poles and shoes were rented by the day or by
the hour, making it possible to visit the resort without having to transport
skis and shoes.

Next time we will probably test the cross-country skiing, but we are skaters,
not skiers, and L'Esterel had promised us outdoor skating on the lake and an
indoor rink five miles down the road at another resort. The outdoor skating was
free, as were all the other activities save racquetball, but the skating area, a
cleared rectangle on the lake, was not heavily used. We tested it under the
interested eyes of guests taking lunch in the cafeteria, La Brioche.  This was
the place adjoining the ski shop and the start of the ski trails, where warmly
dressed guests, including snowmobilers, came clumping in to stoke in
carbohydrates and beer all day long.

La Brioche is also where breakfast was served. The French and English menus
explained that guests got, for the room price, a fruit, a cereal, a bread, a
main course and coffee or tea and jam and such.  I never saw any tray for which
a surplus charge was made despite jumbles of croissants and bran muffins,
combinations of juice and dishes of prunes, coffee and tea and milk. A chef with
a high hat greeted each tray carrier, ''Bon jour, good morning,'' and awaited an
order for something hot. I ordered bacon and got an array that would have served
my entire family in the days before everyone but me stopped eating bacon.

We wanted to look at an older resort, so we drove a few minutes down the road to
Ste.-Marguerite Station, really barely a crossroads, and the Alpine Inn, which
did the rustic theme in a main building and various cabins and houses in the
woods. Erle Bergh, the director of the Alpine Inn ski center, said that skiing
in the Laurentians was traditionally cross country. ''They did not plow the
roads at all in those days,'' he said. ''People would take the train into the
area and then ski from inn to inn, staying longer or shorter at one or another.
Eventually, they would ski to another railroad stop and return home. Cross
country was popular here 10 years before it became important in the States.''

It was at the Alpine Inn that we found the promised indoor skating rink. The
rink was open all day, and the same admission tag costing $2.50 (for those not
staying at the inn) that admitted one to crosscountry skiing also provided
admission to the rink. We had it to ourselves and were able to live out a good
many fantasies, to the tune of a French radio station or one in Burlington, Vt.,
until the sun got low at 3:30. Then, when the shadows outside flopped down the
hill in a Cezanne blue, the skiers propped up their skis and poured into our
rink.

On our way out the next day, we paused at Auberge du Lac Lucerne, the nearest
downhill skiing site to L'Esterel, with 15 downhill ski runs and seven lifts. A
small slope next to the road was overrun with children, all part of a ski school
that had arrived by bus. When the sun got down to a certain point, the
instructors inspected all the toddlers, scooping up those wearing the
appropriate tags, and abruptly the slope was empty.

The conventional wisdom in the Laurentians is that prices for skiing, housing
and other tourists' needs are 40 percent of United States prices. For those who
want to compare, lift tickets at Lac Lucerne were $8 a day for adults on
weekends and holidays; $5 a day for weekdays. A daily ticket for cross country
at Lac Lucerne was $3. Rental of cross-country ski equipment at the Alpine Inn
was $6 a day on weekdays and $8 a day on weekends. Rental of a cross-country
outfit at L'Esterel was $7 a day; downhill equipment $10 a day.

Our package at L'Esterel, costing $53 a day each, provided the use of the
cross-country trails and transportation to downhill areas, the indoor
facilities, plus the ample breakfast and a dinner of too many courses for which
outsiders were billed $12.50 on a Thursday and $14.50 on a Saturday. There were
10 entrees ranging from omlette to medallions of wild boar, at an extra charge
of $5.75. The food was pleasant and the wine agreeable at $2.70 a carafe.

For lunch we were on our own. With the advice of the Berghs, we traveled 10
miles, back to the intersection with the expressway, to the town of Ste.-Adele,
which has a population of 1,000 or less, and is the only real town in the area.
We went to Au Petit Chaudron, a home-cooking spot where there is a persistent
waiting line of what are apparently local people for the few booths and tables
and the counter. Crepes seem to be the most popular entree, but vegetable and
chicken soups moved briskly. Sometimes dessert was topped with french fries with
vinegar. It was all home baking and the doughnut holes, or ''beignes,'' might
have done me in had not my companion reminded me of my hopes to walk unaided to
the car. For two of us, lunch came to $6.87.

On our way back, a quarter centimeter of unfilled stomach cried out as we passed
Patisserie J. C. Lemoine in Ste.-Adele. We wheeled about. Inside were racks of
baton-like French bread, glass cabinets of chocolate delicacies, homemade
sausages and pate, beers and whole brie cheeses, plus half a dozen women
prepared to pack up any and all of it. We bought two chocolate cookies at 45
cents each, and I got a plastic sack of a dozen croissants for $4.80. These were
eaten by friends back home in New York who told me I should have carried home
three more sacks and left behind some of my luggage.

When the Laurentian windless cold threatened to become too much, it was possible
to sink up to one's neck in the warm churning waters of the whirlpool tub
(''bain tourbillon'') next to the swimming pool and watch skiers and skaters
leave their traces across the whiteness.  Fearing for my liver, I made a close
inspection of the health facilities. For a moderate extra charge, I could have a
''cataplasme du parafango,'' a poultice of volcanic mud and paraffin, or a
different ''bain tourbillon,'' this one with ''algues marines,'' or seaweed. The
most appealing goal was to achieve ''detente,'' which turned out to be
''relaxation.''

In search of a less difficult sort of detente, I swam and baked in the sauna,
and glowing with health, took to the bar, always a good source of information.
At Christmas-New Year week, L'Esterel is filled to its capacity of 300 guests,
as is every place in the Laurentians. Then for three weeks, and in some resorts
for longer, there is a calm, and low-season rates apply. By luck, we had arrived
in the low season and therefore had more waiters than we could use and had no
difficulty getting a seat by the roaring fire in the bar room or in the lounge
above it.

Saturday evening, we had hopes of going to the bar to see the disco dancing, but
it was all too much. I began to watch ''The Sound of Music'' on the color
television set in our room. I really wanted to get all the words of ''My
Favorite Things'' in French, but somehow I drifted off.

On Sunday, we sped through United States customs at Dorval Airport, where they
warned me not to squash my croissants, and we were back at La Guardia too soon,
but filled with detente.
If You Go ... The first thing to get is a tourist map of the Laurentians with a
list of resorts. This may be obtained free by writing to Lower Laurentian
Tourist Information Bureau, 301 Boulevard Ste.-Adele, Ste.-Adele, Quebec J0R
1L0. The number is 514-229-2921, but it is cheaper from New York to call
Montreal; the number is 514-430-8770.

The address of Hotel L'Esterel is Ville d'Esterel, Quebec J0T 1E0; the number is
514-228-2571. The address of the Alpine Inn is Ste.- Marguerite Station, Quebec
J0T 2K0, and the phone is 514-229-3516.  The address of Auberge Lac Lucerne is
also Ste.-Marguerite Station, Quebec J0T 2K0, and the phone is 514-228-2511.
Among the famous resorts of the Laurentians are Mont Tremblant Lodge,
Mont-Tremblant, Quebec J0T 1Z0, and Gray Rocks, Box 1000, St.-Jovite, Quebec.

The round-trip air fare between New York and Montreal is $174.40 including
taxes. On March 1 the fare will go up to $189.66.  All of the usual rental car
agencies have booths at Dorval Airport in Montreal; we rented a car on a weekend
special for a bit over $50, plus gas. In addition, many resorts in the
Laurentians use special buses with special rates; a potential guest should
inquire as to what's available. Making reservations or getting information by
phone in English is normally not hard, but whatever difficulty I have
encountered has been in Montreal, not in the Laurentians. - B.W.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of skiiers map of Quebec

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRIGHT SPOTS IN STATE'S LAGGING ECONOMY

BYLINE: By EDWARD C. BURKS

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words


WASHINGTON, D.C.  CONNECTICUT and most of the 18 states of the Northeast and the
Middle West will continue to trail the nation as a whole in population growth,
economic expansion and per capita income gains in the next two decades,
according to a new analysis by the NortheastMidwest Institute.

Even so, there are bright spots for Connecticut based on recent figures that
show the state ranking third in the nation in the value of Federal military
procurement contracts and with a statewide unemployment percentage well below
the national average.

In one of its gloomiest reports yet, ''State of the Region 1981,'' the
Washington-based institute concluded that, although ''economic decline
accelerates in the Northeast and Midwest, Federal policy remains tilted toward
the development interests of the South and West.''

The institute, a nonprofit research center, was set up in 1976 to compile
statistical analyses for the 213 Congress members of both parties representing
the 18-state region, which stretches from Maine and Maryland in the East to
Minnesota and Iowa.

Although Connecticut fits the overall pattern of reduced expectations for the
18-state region, as summarized by the institute, its growth figures in general
are far better than those for such nearby ''giants'' as New York and
Pennsylvania.

Edward J. Stockton, Connecticut's Economic Development Commissioner, took issue
with the ''bleak picture'' given in the report, saying, ''We are in our
strongest economic position in 50 years.'' He pointed to signs of a
''turnaround'' in the state's economy, including a higher rate of employment,
particularly in manufacturing, increased capital investments, expansion of
companies and new business coming into the state.

He commended the report, however, for stressing the need for more Federal
attention to the Northeast. He said that for too long ''Northern Congressmen
have been asleep at the switch'' when it came to getting programs and aid for
their districts, while their Southern counterparts were ''quietly feathering
their economic nests.''

Following are some major findings of the new analysis, with particular emphasis
on the situation in Connecticut: POPULATION GROWTH - More than 90 percent of the
nation's population growth from 1970 to 1980 occurred outside the
Northeast-Middle West region. Although Connecticut had a 2.7 percent increase to
3.1 million, enough to hold on to its six seats in the 435-seat House of
Representatives, the increase for the nation as a whole was about 11 percent.

OUTWARD MIGRATION - In the 1970-79 period, there was a net migration of 3.4
million people out of the Northeast and Middle West to other parts of the
country. New York alone had a net outward migration of nearly 1.3 million so
that Connecticut's net loss by migration of only 37,000 was trivial in
comparison. Massachusetts had a net outward migration of 92,000 and Rhode
Island, 49,000. On the other hand, Florida had a net gain through migration of
1.85 million (considerably more than half the total population of Connecticut);
California had a net inward migration of 1.25 million, and Texas, 1 million.

PROJECTED GROWTH - The Census Bureau projects that the population of the South
and West will grow at four times the rate of the Northeast and Middle West
between 1980 and 2000. The modest gain of 8 percent projected for Connecticut is
far superior to the estimate for New York, where no gain at all is forecast, but
the Connecticut growth rate is still slightly less than half of the 17 percent
increase predicted for the nation as a whole. If those projections are realized,
then Connecticut could expect to lose one of its six seats in the House after
the 2000 census.

MANUFACTURING JOBS - The Northeast and Middle West lost 877,000 manufacturing
jobs in the past decade while the South gained 890,000 and the West, nearly
820,000. Connecticut's manufacturing jobs declined by nearly 4 percent - from
443,700 to 426,700, a loss of just 17,000 jobs, small in comparison with New
York's loss of 17 percent and Pennsylvania's 14 percent. But no other state in
New England had a loss and both New Hampshire and Vermont had gains of
approximately 25 percent.

NEW CAPITAL INVESTMENT -From 1970 to 1977, investment in new capital equipment
increased by less than 90 percent in the Northeast and Middle West (inflation
accounting for a good share of that dollar gain), but similar investment in the
South and West was up by 160 percent. Connecticut's increase in dollars invested
in new equipment was just 66 percent, slightly better than the Massachusetts
gain of 58 percent but far behind the 120 percent increases of New Hampshire and
Rhode Island.

FEDERAL SPENDING - The Northeast and Middle West states sent $165 billion more
in Federal taxes (individual and corporate) to Washigton than they got back in
Federal spending in the 1975-79 period.  Connecticut and all of New England,
with the exception of Massachusetts, fared much better, however, than the
Northeast-Middle West region as a whole. In 1979, the last year for which
figures are available, Connecticut got back $1.02 in Federal spending for each
$1 in taxes paid to Washington. For New England as a whole, the ratio was $1.09
back for each $1 sent to Washington. Only Massachusetts had a negative balance,
with 92 cents back for each $1 sent to Washington. New York got back 96 cents
for each $1.

DEFENSE SPENDING AND EMPLOYMENT - In contrast to sharply downward trends in
defense employment not only in the Northeast-Middle West region but across the
country, Connecticut reported rising figures.  In the 1970's, Defense Department
employment in the Northeast and Middle West declined by 30 percent. The South
had a 16 percent loss and the West, 19 percent, as defense employment was cut
back drastically after the Vietnam War, but the South and West together still
have more than 80 percent of defense jobs. Connecticut, the only state in the
Northeast to gain, had an increase of nearly 6 percent, from 9,192 defense jobs
to 9,720 in the decade.  Massachusetts lost more than 20,000 of the 42,000
defense jobs it had in 1970; New York dropped from 50,300 to 35,000 jobs.

It was in Federal military procurement contracts that Connecticut stood out,
accounting for 7 percent of the value of contracts throughout the country in
1979, according to the institute's study of Federal figures from the Office of
Management and Budget. With military contracts totaling $4.15 billion,
Connecticut was topped only by Texas ($4.3 billion) and California ($11
billion).

INCOME PROJECTIONS - The Department of Commerce forecast an average annual
increase of 3.3 percent in per capita income between now and the year 2000, with
the South and West ahead of the national average with projections of 3.9 percent
a year. Connecticut's annual growth rate is projected at 2.8 percent, compared
with 3.1 percent for the entire Northeast-Middle West region. It should be
noted, however, that Connecticut already leads substantially most Southern and
Western areas in income levels.

UNEMPLOYMENT - Labor Department figures for late 1980 showed that eight states -
only New Hampshire in the Northeast - had a lower rate of unemployment than
Connecticut. The state's 5 percent unemployment rate, compared with a national
average at that time of 6.9 percent. The New Hampshire figure was 4.1 per cent.
In New York, it was 7.4 percent.

In a conclusion referring to what it called the long Federal ''tilt'' toward
helping the South and West, the institute's report stated:

''Since the 1930's, the Federal Government has invested billions of dollars in
laying the foundation for economic revival in the South and development of the
West. Massive Federal outlays for the Tennessee Valley Authority, interstate
highways, water and energy projects, military bases, rural electrification, port
construction, the space program, Federal procurement, and other programs
established the basis for the rapid growth in these regions. But as economic
decline accelerates in the Northeast and Midwest, Federal policy remains tilted
toward the development interests of the South and West.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AIDE REFUSES TO RULE OUT ACTION AGAINST CUBA ON SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22


President Reagan's chief White House policy adviser renewed warnings to Cuba
today that the United States ''does not rule out anything'' in its efforts to
halt arms deliveries to left-wing guerrillas in El Salvador.

Edwin Meese 3d, interviewed on television, said it was time that Cuba and the
Soviet Union ''wake up to the fact'' that the Reagan Administration ''will take
the necessary steps to keep the peace any place in the world, and that includes
El Salvador.''

Asked if such steps could include a naval blockade of Cuba, which the United
States has identified as the coordinator of Soviet-bloc arms shipments to El
Salvador, Mr. Meese replied:

''The President has said many times he would like potential or real adversaries
to go to bed every night wondering what we will do the next day. I don't think
we would rule out anything.''

In Cuba's Self-Interest

In reply to another question, Mr. Meese said that other unspecified direct
United States action against Cuba short of a naval blockade was ''entirely
possible if the arms shipments do not cease.''

Mr. Meese, following the line adopted by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. in discussing the Salvadoran crisis with ambassadors of friendly countries
last week, made it clear that the Administration hopes its warnings will be
sufficient to end outside aid to the Salvadoran guerrillas.

''I think it's to Cuba's own self-interest to halt them right now,'' he said of
the reported arms shipments.

Carter's Role Faulted

Mr. Meese, appearing on the ABC News program ''Issues and Answers,'' said the
Reagan Administration was not adopting a ''confrontational attitude'' toward the
Soviet Union. But he said the Carter Administration had failed to take the
''necessary effective steps to stop the expansion of Communism through the
world.'' As examples, he cited the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan
and the presence of Cuban troops in Angola.

Mr. Meese said that the ''signals'' being sent by the new Administration were
that ''they cannot continue to deal with the United States on a nornmal trade
basis and at the same time expand their armed forces into other parts of the
world.''

''We're not belligerent,'' he said. ''We're not arrogant. All we're interested
in is keeping the peace in the world along with our allies.''

The importance the Reagan Administration has attached to El Salvador, a small
Central American country of four million people, as a testing ground for United
States-Soviet relations has focused attention on United States charges that arms
shipments, organized by Cuba, have been moving through Nicaragua to the
Salvadoran guerrillas.

Haig Sends Missions

Mr. Haig has sent high-level missions to Western Europe and Latin America with
intelligence reports, based on documents reportedly captured from guerrillas and
other intelligence information, to support the claim that the Soviet Union,
Vietnam, Cuba and other Communist countries have organized a major supply of
arms to the guerrillas.

Mr. Haig has identified Cuba as the political organizer of the guerrilla
movement as well as the source of major arms shipments.  The State Department
will issue a white paper on El Salvador tomorrow containing some of the
evidence, which has already been made available to allied governments and
members of Congress.

Two Congressional hearings on El Salvador have been scheduled for this week, one
by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, the conservative chairman
of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on Latin America, and the other by
Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, a liberal second-term
Congressman who is the new chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on
Inter-American Affairs.

A major debate appeared to be shaping up over the Administration's still
unspecified plans to increase military as well as economic aid to the Salvadoran
Government headed by President Jose Napoleon Duarte, a Christian Democrat.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in a policy statement
reflecting the views of Congressional liberals that increased United States
military aid, particularly an increase in American military advisers, could lead
to American casualties and ''a full-scale military intervention'' in El
Salvador.

Mr. Kennedy called for ''a political solution'' involving a ''military truce''
between the Government and the guerrillas, no increase in military supplies to
either side, and a conference between ''all political elements committed to a
long-term peaceful solution'' similar to the conference that ended the civil war
between whites and blacks in Zimbabwe.

Mr. Kennedy said the United States should not abandon efforts to obtain an
effective investigation by El Salvador's security forces of the killing of three
Ameri Roman Catholic nuns, a lay worker and two American land-program advisers,
who are among more than 12,000 victims of political violence in El Salvador in
the past year.

Mr. Helms, who leads the conservtive caucus in the Senate, was reportedly
pushing for a hearing on El Salvador as a way of putting pressure on the White
House to end economic aid to Nicaragua's revolutionary Sandinist regime. Mr.
Helms contends that the evidence of arms shipments to El Salvador's guerrillas
puts Nicaragua in the role of supporting ''terrorism'' in Central America.

Mr. Haig has so far accepted the advice of the State Department's Latin American
experts, and of Ambassador Lawrence A. Pezzullo in Nicaragua, that cutting off
economic aid would undermine diplomatic efforts to persuade moderates in the
Nicaraguan leadership to halt the arms flow, attributed to pro-Cuban groups in
Nicaragua's leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STATE DEPT. SAYS SALVADOR REBELS GET FEWER ARMS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


State Department officials said today that a campaign by the United States had
apparently slowed the infiltration of what it describes as Soviet-bloc arms
shipments through Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador.

At the same time, the department made public a special report accompa-

Text of American report, page A8.
nied by a separate volume of 19 documents to support its charges that Cuba, the
Soviet Union and other Communist countries had organized a ''well-coordinated,
covert effort'' to bring down El Salvador's military-backed Government and
''impose in its place a Communist regime with no popular support.''

The department said the documents had been captured from Salvadoran guerrilla
commanders by Salvadoran Government forces.

Documents Tell of Arms Pipeline

The special report, entitled ''Communist Interference in El Salvador,'' was the
State Department's public version of confidential memorandums that the Reagan
Administration has shown allies in Western Europe and Latin America during the
last week.

Citing supporting documents, the report said nearly 200 tons of arms had been
smuggled to El Salvador through a pipeline reaching from Vietnam, Ethiopia and
Eastern Europe to Cuba and Nicara-gua.  This, it said, was the final transit
point for delivery by land, sea and air to the guerrillas.

The United States suspended economic aid, including scheduled wheat supplies, to
Nicaragua in January and has made strong diplomatic efforts to convince
Nicaragua's Sandinist leaders, who overthrew a right-wing military regime in
their country, to halt the arms shipments to El Salvador.

John A. Bushnell, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for InterAmerican Affairs,
said at a press briefing, ''There is some evidence that the flow may have
stopped in the last couple of weeks.''

But Mr. Bushnell said a longer period of observation would be necessary to
determine whether this was a temporary halt or a permanent withdrawal by
Nicaragua from what he described as the Cuban-organized supply of arms to El
Salvador.

He said the Administration had made it clear to Nicaragua's leaders ''that this
needs to stop in order for us to have a relationship with them.''

U.S. Is 'Drawing the Line'

James S. Brady, President Reagan's press secretary, said today that the United
States was ''drawing the line in El Salvador'' against Communist advances in the
Western Hemisphere.

''We have clear evidence,'' Mr. Brady said, ''of catching the Communists' hands
in the cookie jar.'' Foreign Minister Jean Francois-Poncet of France met today
with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and said afterward that he had
been shown evidence of arms smuggling into El Salvador, and he called this
''external interference in El Salvador.'' He said there should be political
changes in El Salvador, but he said, ''this can't happen as long as arms are
being shipped from outside.''

The Soviet Union has said that it has not provided arms to the Salvadoran
guerrillas but that it had no control over weapons in the hands of its allies.
The Salvadoran guerrillas have denied receiving arms from Soviet-bloc countries
and have questioned the authenticity of the documents presented by the State
Department.

Rebel Strength Put at 4,000

Mr. Bushnell said that the report, in addition to detailing military support
from the Soviet bloc, showed that President Fidel Castro of Cuba played a key
political role in unifying various feuding factions among the Salvadoran
guerrillas at a meeting in Havana in December 1979. That meeting, he said, led
to the present Unified Revolutionary Directorate of the guerrilla movement.

Mr. Bushnell said United States intelligence estimates put guerrilla fighting
strength at 4,000 regulars, with several thousand more supporters or occasional
collaborators.

The Reagan Administration is studying plans drawn up by Pentagon officials for
sending military training teams, patrol boats, more helicopters and
communications equipment that would raise the combat efficiency of El Salvador's
16,000-member armed forces.

Jon Glassman, a political officer at the United States Embassy in Mexico City,
who has been on special assignment to El Salvador, said the captured guerrilla
documents were seized in El Salvador.

Mr. Glassman said that one batch of documents belonging to the Salvadoran
Communist Party, which forms part of the guerrilla directorate, was taken from
an art gallery that belonged to a brother of Jorge Shafik Handal, secretary
general of the Communist Party.

He said the other set of documents, including what he described as minutes of
meetings and reports of the unified directorate, were seized in a ''safe-house''
of the People's Revolutionary Army, one of the armed factions.

Liberals Challenge Military Aid

Meanwhile, opposition among Congressional liberals to the Administration's
policy on aid to El Salvador grew today with 46 members of the House announcing
they would co-sponsor legislation to terminate military aid, which has amounted
to $10 million in the last year.

But Republican conservatives were also disturbed by the Administration's
announcement that it supported economic and political changes in El Salvador,
such as distribution of large estates to landless peasants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF STATE DEPARTMENT REPORT ON COMMUNIST SUPPORT OF SALVADORAN REBELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 5253 words


WASHINGTON (AP) - Following is the text of a State Department report on
Communist support for the insurrection in El Salvador:

WASHINGTON (AP) - Following is the text of a State Department report on
Communist support for the insurrection in El Salvador:

This special report presents definitive evidence of the clandestine military
support given by the Soviet Union, Cuba and their Communist allies to
Marxist-Leninist guerrillas now fighting to overthrow the established Government
of El Salvador.

The evidence, drawn from captured guerrilla documents and war materiel and
corroborated by intelligence reports, underscores the central role played by
Cuba and other Communist countries beginning in 1979 in the political
unification, military direction and arming of insurgent forces in El Salvador.

From the documents it is possible to reconstruct chronologically the key stages
in the growth of the Communist involvement:

- The direct tutelary role played by Fidel Castro and the Cuban Government in
late 1979 and early 1980 in bringing the diverse Salvadoran guerrilla factions
into a unified front;

- The assistance and advice given the guerrillas in planning their military
operations;

- The series of contacts between Salvadoran Communist leaders and key officials
of several Communist states that resulted in commitments to supply the
insurgents nearly 800 tons of the most modern weapons and equipment;

- The covert delivery to El Salvador of nearly 200 tons of those arms, mostly
through Cuba and Nicaragua, in preparation for the guerrillas' failed ''general
offensive'' of January 1981;

- The major Communist effort to ''cover'' their involvement by providing mostly
arms of Western manufacture. It is clear that over the past year the insurgency
in El Salvador has been progressively transformed into another case of indirect
armed aggression against a small third world country by Communist powers acting
through Cuba.

The United States considers it of great importance that the American people and
the world community be aware of the gravity of the actions of Cuba, the Soviet
Union and other Communist states who are carrying out what is clearly shown to
be a well-coordinated, covert effort to bring about the overthrow of El
Salvador's established Government and to impose in its place a Communist regime
with no popular support.

I. A Case of Communist Military Involvement in the Third World

The situation in El Salvador presents a strikingly familiar case of Soviet,
Cuban and other Communist military involvement in a politically troubled third
world country.

By providing arms, training and direction to a local insurgency and by
supporting it with a global propaganda campaign, the Communists have intensified
and widened the conflict, greatly increased the suffering of the Salvadoran
people and deceived much of the world about the true nature of the revolution.

Their objective in El Salvador as elsewhere is to bring about - at little cost
to themselves - the overthrow of the established Government and the imposition
of a Communist regime in defiance of the will of the Salvadoran people.
The Guerrillas: Their Tactics and Propaganda

El Salvador's extreme left, which includes the long-established Communist Party
of El Salvador (P.C.E.S.) and several armed groups of more recent origin, has
become increasingly committed since 1976 to a military solution.

A campaign of terrorism - bombings, assassinations, kidnappings and seizures of
embassies - has disrupted national life and claimed the lives of many innocent
people.

During 1980, previously fragmented factions of the extreme left agreed to
coordinate their actions in support of a joint military battle plan developed
with Cuban assistance.

As a precondition for large-scale Cuban aid, Salvadoran guerrilla leaders,
meeting in Havana in May, formed first the Unified Revolutionary Directorate
(D.R.U.) as their central executive arm for political and military planning and,
in late 1980, the Farabundo Marti People's Liberation Front (F.M.L.N.), as the
coordinating body of the guerrilla organizations.

A front organization, the Revolutionary Democratic Front (F.D.R.), was also
created to disseminate propaganda abroad. For appearances' sake, three small
non-Marxist-Leninist political parties were brought into the front, though they
have no representation in the D.R.U.

The Salvadoran guerrillas, speaking through the F.D.R., have managed to deceive
many about what is happening in El Salvador. They have been aided by Nicaragua
and by the worldwide propaganda networks of Cuba, the Soviet Union and other
Communist countries.

The guerrillas' propaganda aims at legitimizing their violence and concealing
the Communist aid that makes it possible. Other key aims are to discredit the
Salvadoran Government, to misrepresent U.S.  policies and actions and to foster
the impression of overwhelming popular support for the revolutionary movement.

Examples of the more extreme claims of their propaganda apparatus - echoed by
Cuban, Soviet and Nicaraguan media - are:

- That the United States has military bases and several hundred troops in El
Salvador (in fact, the United States has no bases and fewer than 50 military
personnel there);

- That the Government's security forces were responsible for most of the 10,000
killings that occurred in 1980 (in their own reports in 1980, the guerrillas
themselves claimed the killings of nearly 6,000 persons, including noncombatant
''informers'' as well as Government authorities and military).

In addition to media propaganda, Cuba and the Soviet Union promote the insurgent
cause at international forums, with individual governments and among foreign
opinion leaders.

Cuba has an efficient network for introducing and promoting representatives of
the Salvadoran left all over the world. Havana and Moscow also bring indirect
pressure on some governments to support the Salvadoran revolutionaries by
mobilizing local Communist groups.

II. Communist Military Intervention: A Chronology

Before September 1980 the diverse guerrilla groups in El Salvador were
ill-coordinated and ill-equipped, armed with pistols and a varied assortment of
hunting rifles and shotguns.

At that time the insurgents acquired weapons predominantly through purchases on
the international market and from dealers who participated in the supply of arms
to the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.

By January 1981 when the guerrillas launched their ''general offensive,'' they
had acquired an impressive array of modern weapons and supporting equipment
never before used in El Salvador by either the insurgents or the military.

Belgian FAL rifles, German G-3 rifles, U.S. M-1, M-16 and AR-15 semiautomatic
and automatic rifles and the Israeli UZI submachine gun and Galil assault rifle
have all been confirmed in the guerrilla inventory.

In addition, they are known to possess .30- to .50-caliber machine guns, the
U.S. M-60 machine gun, U.S. and Russian hand grenades, the U.S. M-79 and Chinese
RPC grenade launchers and the U.S. M-72 light antitank weapon and 81-mm.
mortars.

Captured ammunition indicates the guerrillas probably possess 60-mm. and 82-mm.
mortars and 57-mm. and 75-mm. recoilless rifles.  Recently acquired evidence has
enabled us to reconstruct the central role played by Cuba, other Communist
countries and several radical states in the political unification and military
direction of insurgent forces in El Salvador and in equipping them in less than
six months with a panoply of modern weapons that enabled the guerrillas to
launch a well-armed offensive.

This information, which we consider incontrovertible, has been acquired over the
past year.  Many key details, however, have fallen into place as the result of
the guerrillas' own records.  Two particularly important document caches were
recovered from the Communist Party of El Salvador in November 1980 and from the
Peoples' Revolutionary Army (E.R.P.) in January 1981.

This mass of captured documents includes battle plans, letters and reports of
meetings and travels, some written in cryptic language and using code words.

When deciphered and verified against evidence from other intelligence sources,
the documents bring to light the chain of events leading to the guerrillas'
January 1981 offensive.

What emerges is a highly disturbing pattern of parallel and coordinated action
by a number of Communist and some radical countries bent on imposing a military
solution.

The Cuban and Communist role in preparing for and helping to organize the
abortive ''general offensive'' early this year is spelled out in the following
chronology based on the contents of captured documents and other sources.

Initial Steps

The chronology of external support begins at the end of 1979. With salutations
of ''brotherly and revolutionary greetings'' on Dec. 16, 1979, members of the
Communist Party of El Salvador (P.C.E.S.), National Resistance (F.A.R.N.) and
Popular Liberation Forces (F.P.L.) thank Fidel Castro in a letter for his help
and ''the help of your party comrades by signing an agreement which establishes
very solid bases upon which we begin building coordination and unity of our
organizations.''

The letter, written in Havana, was signed by leaders of these three
revolutionary organizations.  At an April 1980 meeting at the Hungarian Embassy
in Mexico City, guerrilla leaders made certain ''requests'' (possibly for arms).
Present at this meeting were representatives of the German Democratic Republic,
Bulgaria, Poland, Vietnam, Hungary, Cuba and the Soviet Union.

In notes taken during an April 28, 1980, meeting of the Salvadoran Communist
Party, party leader Shafik Handal mentions the need to ''speed up reorganization
and put the party on a war footing.''

He added: ''I'm in agreement with taking advantage of the possibilities of
assistance from the socialist camp. I think that their attitude is magnificent.
We are not yet taking advantage of it.''

In reference to a unification of the armed movement, he asserts that ''the idea
of involving everyone in the area has already been suggested to Fidel himself.''
Handal alludes to the concept of unification and notes, ''Fidel thought well of
the idea.''
Guerrilla Contacts In Havana

From May 5 to June 8, 1980, Salvadoran guerrilla leaders report on meetings in
Honduras, Guatemala, Costa Rica and Nicaragua.  They proceed to Havana and meet
several times with Fidel Castro; the documents also note an interview with the
German Democratic Republic (G.D.R.) chairman, Erich Honecker, in Havana.

During the Havana portion of their travels, the Salvadoran guerrilla leadership
meets twice with the Cuban Directorate of Special Operations (D.O.E., the
clandestine operations-special forces unit of the Cuban Ministry of Interior) to
discuss guerrilla military plans.

In addition, they meet with the Cuban ''chief of communications.'' During this
period (late May 1980), the Popular Revolutionary Army (E.R.P.) is admitted into
the guerrilla coalition after negotiations in Havana.

The coalition then assumes the name of the Unified Revolutionary Directorate
(D.R.U.) and meets with Fidel Castro on three occasions.  After the Havana
meetings, Shafik Handal leaves Havana on May 30, 1980, for Moscow. The other
Salvadoran guerrilla leaders in Havana leave for Managua.

During the visit of early June, the D.R.U. leaders meet with Nicaraguan
revolutionary leaders (Sandinistas) and discuss (1) a headquarters with ''all
measures of security''; (2) an ''international field of operations, which they
(Sandinistas) control'', and (3) the willingness of the Sandinistas to
''contribute in material terms'' and to adopt ''the cause of El Salvador as its
own.''

The meeting culminated with ''dinner at Humberto's house'' (presumably
Sandinista leader Humberto Ortega).
Salvadoran Communist Party Leader's Travels In the East

From June 2 to July 22, 1980, Shafik Handal visits the U.S.S.R., Vietnam, the
German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary and Ethiopia to
procure arms and seek support for the movement.

On June 2, 1980, Handal meets in Moscow with Mikhail Kudachkim, Deputy Chief of
the Latin American Section of the Foreign Relations Department of the C.P.S.U.
Central Committee. Kudachkim suggests that Handal travel to Vietnam to seek arms
and offers to pay for Handal's trip.

Continuing his travels between June 9 and 15, Handal visits Vietnam where he is
received by Le Duan, Secretary General of the Vietnamese Communist Party; Xuan
Thuy, member of the Communist Party Central Committee Secretariat, and Vice
Minister of National Defense Tran Van Quang.

The Vietnamese, as a ''first contribution,'' agree to provide 60 tons of arms.
Handal adds that ''the comrade requested air transport from the U.S.S.R.''

From June 19 to June 24, 1980, Handal visits the German Democratic Republic
(G.D.R.), where he is received by Hermann Axen, member of the G.D.R. Politburo.
Axen states that the G.D.R. has already sent 1.9 tons of supplies to Managua.

On July 21, G.D.R. leader Honecker writes the G.D.R. Embassy in Moscow that
additional supplies will be sent and that the German Democratic Republic will
provide military training, particularly in clandestine operations.

The G.D.R. telegram adds that although Berlin possesses no Western-manufactured
weapons - which the Salvadoran guerrillas are seeking -efforts will be
undertaken to find a ''solution to this problem.'' (NOTE: The emphasis on
Western arms reflects the desire to maintain plausible denial.)

From June 24-27, 1980, Handal visits Czechoslovakia where he is received by
Vasil Bilak, Second Secretary of the Czech Communist Party.

Bilak says that some Czech arms circulating in the world market will be provided
so that these arms will not be traced back to Czechoslovakia as the donor
country. Transportation will be coordinated with the German Democratic Republic.

Handal proceeds to Bulgaria from June 27 to June 30, 1980. He is received by
Dimiter Stanichev, member of the Central Committee Secretariat.

The Bulgarians agree to supply German-origin weapons and other supplies, again
in an apparent effort to conceal their sources.  In Hungary, from June 30 to
July 3, 1980, Handal is received by Communist Party General Secretary Janos
Kadar and ''Guesel'' (probably Central Committee Secretary for Foreign Affairs
Andras Gyenes). The latter offers radios and other supplies and indicates
Hungarian willingness to trade arms with Ethiopia or Angola in order to obtain
Western-origin arms for the Salvadoran guerrillas.  ''Guesel'' promises to
resolve the trade with the Ethiopians and Angolans himself, ''since we want to
be a part of providing this aid.''

Additionally, Handal secures the promise of 10,000 uniforms to be made by the
Hungarians according to Handal's specifications.  Handal then travels to
Ethiopia, July 3 to July 6. He meets Chairman Mengistu and receives ''a warm
reception.'' Mengistu offers ''several thousand weapons,'' including: 150
Thompson sub-machine guns with 300 cartridge clips, 1,500 M-1 rifles, 1,000 M-14
rifles and ammunition for these weapons. In addition, the Ethiopians agree to
supply all necessary spare parts for these arms.

Handal returns to Moscow on July 22, 1980, and is received again by Mikhail
Kudachkim.  The Soviet official asks if 30 Communist youth currently studying in
the U.S.S.R. could take part in the war in El Salvador.  Before leaving Moscow,
Handal receives assurances that the Soviets agree in principle to transport the
Vietnamese arms.
Further Contacts In Nicaragua

On July 13, representatives of the D.R.U. arrive in Managua amidst preparations
for the first anniversary celebration of Somoza's overthrow.

The D.R.U. leaders wait until July 23 to meet with ''Comrade Bayardo''
(presumably Bayardo Arce, member of the Sandinista Directorate).

They complain that the Sandinistas appear to be restricting their access to
visiting world dignitaries and demanding that all contacts be cleared through
them.

During the meeting, Arce promises ammunition to the guerrillas and arranges a
meeting for them with the Sandinista ''Military Commission.'' Arce indicates
that, since the guerrillas will receive some arms manufactured by the Communist
countries, the Sandinista Army (E.P.S.) will consider absorbing some of these
weapons and providing to the Salvadorans Western-manufactured arms held by the
E.P.S. in exchange.

(In January 1981 the Popular Sandinista Army indeed switched from using
U.S.-made weapons to those of Soviet and East European origin.) The D.R.U.
representatives also meet with visiting Palestine Liberation Organization
(P.L.O.) leader Yasir Arafat in Managua on July 22, 1980.

Arafat promises military equipment, including arms and aircraft.  (A Salvadoran
guerrilla leader met with Fatah leaders in Beirut in August and November, and
the P.L.O. has trained selected Salvadorans in the Near East and in Nicaragua.)

On July 27, the guerrilla general staff delegation departs from Managua for
Havana, where Cuban ''specialists'' add final touches to the military plans
formulated during the May meetings in Havana.

Arms Deliveries Begin

In mid-August 1980, Shafik Handal's arms-shopping expedition begins to bear
fruit. On Aug. 15, 1980, Ethiopian arms depart for Cuba.  Three weeks later the
60 tons of captured U.S. arms sent from Vietnam are scheduled to arrive in Cuba.
As a result of a Salvadoran delegation's trip to Iraq earlier in the year, the
guerrillas receive a $500,000 logistics donation. The funds are distributed to
the Sandinistas in Nicaragua and within El Salvador.

By mid-September, substantial quantities of the arms promised to Handal are well
on the way to Cuba and Nicaragua.  The guerrilla logistics coordinator in
Nicaragua informs his joint general staff on Sept. 26 that 130 tons of arms and
other military material supplied by the Communist countries have arrived in
Nicaragua for shipment to El Salvador.

According to the captured documents, this represents one-sixth of the
commitments to the guerrillas by the Communist countries.  (NOTE: To get an idea
of the magnitude of this commitment, the Vietnamese offer of only 60 tons
included two million rifle and machine gun bullets, 14,500 mortar shells, 1,620
rifles, 210 machine guns, 48 mortars, 12 rocket launchers and 192 pistols.)

In September and October, the number of flights to Nicaragua from Cuba increased
sharply.  These flights had the capacity to transport several hundred tons of
cargo.  At the end of September, despite appeals from the guerrillas, the
Sandinistas suspend their weapons deliveries to El Salvador for one month after
the U.S. Government lodges a protest to Nicaragua on the arms trafficking.

When the shipments resume in October, as much as 120 tons of weapons and
materiel are still in Nicaragua and some 300-400 tons are in Cuba.

Because of the difficulty of moving such large quantities overland, Nicaragua -
with Cuban support - begins airlifting arms from Nicaragua into El Salvador.

In November, about 2.5 tons of arms are delivered by air before accidents force
a brief halt in the airlift.  In December, Salvadoran guerrillas, encouraged by
Cuba, begin plans for a general offensive in early 1981. To provide the
increased support necessary, the Sandinistas revive the airlift into El
Salvador. Salvadoran insurgents protest that they cannot absorb the increased
flow of arms, but guerrilla liaison members in Managua urge them to increase
their efforts as several East European nations are providing unprecedented
assistance.

A revolutionary radio station -Radio Liberacion - operating in Nicaragua begins
broadcasting to El Salvador on Dec. 15, 1980.  It exhorts the populace to mount
a massive insurrection against the Government.  (References to the Sandinistas
sharing the expenses of a revolutionary radio station appear in the captured
documents.) On Jan. 24, 1981, a Cessna from Nicaragua crashes on takeoff in El
Salvador after unloading passengers and possibly weapons.  A second plane is
strafed by the Salvadoran Air Force, and the pilot and numerous weapons are
captured.  The pilot admits to being an employee of the Nicaraguan national
airline and concedes that the flight originated from Sandino International
Airport in Managua.

Air supply is playing a key role, but infiltration by land and sea also
continues. Small launches operating out of several Nicaraguan Pacific ports
traverse the Gulf of Fonseca at night, carrying arms, ammunition and personnel.

During the general offensive on Jan. 13, several dozen well-armed guerrillas
landed on El Salvador's southeastern coast on the Gulf of Fonseca, adjacent to
Nicaragua.

Overland arms shipments also continue through Honduras from Nicaragua and Costa
Rica.  In late January, Honduran security forces uncover an arms infiltration
operation run by Salvadorans working through Nicaragua and directed by Cubans.

In this operation, a trailer-truck is discovered carrying weapons and ammunition
destined for Salvadoran guerrillas. Weapons include 100 U.S. M-16 rifles and
81-mm. mortar ammunition.

These arms are a portion of the Vietnamese shipment: a trace of the M-16's
reveals that several of them were shipped to U.S. units in Vietnam where they
were captured or left behind.

Using this network, perhaps five truckloads of arms may have reached the
Salvadoran guerrillas.  The availability of weapons and materiel significantly
increases the military capabilities of the Salvadoran insurgents.  While attacks
raged throughout the country during the ''general offensive'' that began on Jan.
10, it soon became clear that the D.R.U. could not sustain the level of violence
without suffering costly losses in personnel.

By the end of January, D.R.U. leaders apparently decided to avoid direct
confrontation with Government forces and reverted to sporadic guerrilla
terrorist tactics that would reduce the possibility of suffering heavy
casualties.

III. The Government: The Search For Order and Democracy

Central America's smallest and most densely populated country is El Salvador.
Since its independence in 1838, the country has experienced chronic political
instability and repression, widespread poverty and concentration of wealth and
power in the hands of a few families. Although considerable economic progress
took place in the 1960's, the political system remained in the hands of a
traditional economic elite backed by the military.

During the 1970's, both the legitimate grievances of the poor and landless and
the growing aspirations of the expanding middle classes met increasingly with
repression.

El Salvador has long been a violent country with political, economic and
personal disputes often resulting in murders.

The Present Government

Aware of the need for change and alarmed by the prospect of Nicaragua-like
chaos, progressive Salvadoran military officers and civilians overthrew the
authoritarian regime of Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero in October 1979 and ousted
nearly 100 conservative senior officers.

After an initial period of instability, the new Government stabilized around a
coalition that includes military participants in the October 1979 coup, the
Christian Democratic Party and independent civilians.

Since March 1980, this coalition has begun broad social changes: conversion of
large estates into peasant cooperatives, distribution of land to tenant farmers
and nationalization of foreign trade and banking.

Four Marxist-Leninist guerrilla groups are using violence and terrorism against
the Salvadoran Government and its reforms.  Three small non-Marxist-Leninist
political parties - including a Social Democratic Party - work with guerrilla
organizations and their political fronts through the Democratic Revolutionary
Front (F.D.R.), most of whose activities take place outside El Salvador.

The Government of El Salvador -headed since last December by Jose Napoleon
Duarte, the respected Christian Democrat denied office by the military in the
presidential elections of 1972 - faces armed opposition from the extreme right
as well as from the left.

Exploiting their traditional ties to the security forces and the tendency of
some members of the security forces to abuse their authority, some wealthy
Salvadorans affected by the Duarte Government's reforms have sponsored terrorist
activities against supporters of the agrarian and banking reforms and against
the Government itself.

A symbiotic relationship has developed between the terrorism practised by
extremists of both left and right.  Thousands have died without regard to class,
creed, nationality or politics.  Brutal and still unexplained murders in
December of four American churchwomen - and in January of two American trade
unionists - added U.S. citizens to the toll of this tragic violence.

The United States has made clear its interest in a complete investigation of
these killings and the punishment of those responsible.

Despite bitter resistance from right and left, the Duarte Government has stuck
to its reform programs and has adopted emergency measures to ease the lot of the
poor through public works, housing projects and aid to marginal communities.

On the political front, it has offered amnesty to its opponents, scheduled
elections for a constituent assembly in 1982 and pledged to hand power over to a
popularly elected government no later than mid-1983.

The Government's pursuit of progress with order has been further hampered by the
virtual breakdown of the law enforcement and judicial system and by the lack of
an effective civil service.

The introduction of the reforms -some of which are now clearly irreversible -
has reduced popular support for those who argue that change can only come about
through violence.

Few Salvadorans participate in anti-Government demonstrations.  Repeated calls
by the guerrillas for general strikes in mid- and late 1980 went unheeded.

The Duarte Government, moreover, has made clear its willingness to negotiate the
terms of future political processes with democratic members of all opposition
forces - most notably by accepting the offer of El Salvador's Council of Bishops
to mediate between the Government and the Democratic Revolutionary Front.

In sum, the Duarte Government is working hard and with some success to deal with
the serious political, social and economic problems that most concern the people
of El Salvador.

U.S. Support

In its commitment to reform and democracy, the Government of El Salvador has had
the political support of the United States ever since the October 1979
revolution.

Because we give primary emphasis to helping the people of El Salvador, most of
our assistance has been economic.  In 1980, the United States provided nearly
$56 million in aid, aimed at easing the conditions that underlie unrest and
extremism.  This assistance has helped create jobs, feed the hungry, improve
health and housing and education and support the reforms that are opening and
modernizing El Salvador's economy.

The United States will continue to work with the Salvadoran Government toward
economic betterment, social justice and peace.  Because the solution in El
Salvador should be of the Salvadorans' own making and nonviolent, the United
States has carefully limited its military support.

In January, mounting evidence of Communist involvement compelled President
Carter to authorize a resupply of weapons and ammunition to El Salvador - the
first provision of lethal items since 1977.

IV. Some Conclusions

The foregoing record leaves little doubt that the Salvadoran insurgency has
become the object of a large-scale commitment by Communist states outside Latin
America.

- The political direction, organizationand arming of the insurgency is
coordinated and heavily influenced by Cuba - with active support of the Soviet
Union, East Germany, Vietnam and other Communist states.

- The massing and delivery of arms to the Salvadoran guerrillas by those states
must be judged against the fact that from 1977 until January 1981 the United
States provided no weapons or ammunition to the Salvadoran armed forces.

- A major effort has been made to provide ''cover'' for this operation by
supplying arms of Western manufacture and by supporting a front organization
known as the Democratic Revolutionary Front to seek non-Communist political
support through propaganda.

- Although some non-Communist states have also provided material support, the
organization and delivery of this assistance, like the overwhelming mass of
arms, are in the hands of Communist-controlled networks.

In short, over the past year, the insurgency in El Salvador has been
progressively transformed into a textbook case of indirect armed aggression by
Communist powers through Cuba.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of El Salvador Photo of Jorge Shafik

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Private Garwood Indicted On Sexual Felony Counts

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 205 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Feb. 23


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps, convicted of collaborating with the
enemy in Vietnam, was indicted today on felony charges of sexual misconduct
involving a 7-year-old girl.

The four-count indictment accused Private Garwood of taking indecent liberties
with a minor, first-degree sex offense, attempted first-degree sex offense and
attempted first-degree rape. If convicted, he could be sentenced to life in
prison.

A member of the attorney general's staff in Raleigh said one of the definitions
of a first-degree sex offense is sexual misconduct involving a person under age
12 committed by a person at least four years older.

Private Garwood was arrested last September and charged with attempting to
commit a sex offense with the child and committing a ''lewd and lascivious act''
upon the body of the child.

Private Garwood previously denied the charges against him and was not available
for comment today.  Maj. John Schmidt, a Camp Lejeune spokesman, said that
Private Garwood was on leave while Maj. Gen. David Barker, the camp commander,
reviews his conviction and sentence. Private Garwood's attorneys said last week
he would undergo psychiatric treatment at an undisclosed civilian hospital in
Virginia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MOVING ON THE FAST TRACK;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


''At the meeting that we had with the President last week, it was just
unbelievable,'' Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Speaker of the House, said today of Mr.
Reagan's briefing on his economic package. ''He said he wanted it on the floor
in a couple of weeks. The President thought he was going to send us a message,
it would go to the Ways and Means Committee and come out the same day.  Whether
he was serious or pulling my leg, I don't know.''

Whether or not the Massachusetts Democrat's impression of the President's hopes
is accurate, the Republican Congressional leaders have indeed placed Mr.
Reagan's proposed budget cuts on a fast track that represents a marked departure
from the traditional leisurely pace of legislation. Programs that took Congress
years and even decades to enact would be severely curtailed or even repealed in
a matter of weeks under the Republican plan.

''It is my intention to move these budget cuts in less than a month,'' Senator
Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader, said. ''Every day that
this is delayed makes it more difficult to pass. This is an extraordinary
proposal, and these are extraordinary times.''

Senate officials said today that Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New
Mexico, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, and the committee's top
Democrat, Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, had agreed to introduce
a measure tomorrow calling for the cuts President Reagan wants.

David A. Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, told the
Senate Government Affairs Committee today that delays ''would result in a
serious blow to our ability to implement an economic policy and to turn around
the economy.''

The Republicans are seeking to exploit the momentum of what they consider a
national consensus, and the President's high standing in the polls. But the
Democrats know that such a consensus can quickly evaporate, and recall that
President Carter had an approval rating in the 80's when he put on his cardigan
sweater and called the energy crisis ''the moral equivalent of war.''

Worried About Deliberation Time

The Democrats, who had previously often expressed impatience with the slowness
of the legislative process, have rediscovered its virtues. They question whether
the fast track will allow time for ample deliberation, and whether opponents of
the budget cuts would receive their day in court. They also are concerned about
the longterm effects on the nation's social fabric and its economy.

''We don't want to have an economic Gulf of Tonkin resolution,'' said
Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal, recalling the speed with which Congress
gave wide powers to President Johnson in the Vietnam War in 1964.

Similarly, Representative Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas, the majority leader,
considered ''hardly warranted'' the President's assertion that the nation faced
its greatest economic crisis since the Depression. That assertion provides the
Administration's rationale for the accelerated pace.

Medicaid, which provides medical assistance to the poor, is among the programs
whose enactment took decades, and which would be severely curtailed by the
President's plan. First proposed by President Truman,it was dismissed by
Congress as ''socialized medicine.'' The bill received a major impetus from
President Kennedy, and was killed by one vote in the House Ways and Means
Committee in 1963. The legislation was finally enacted in 1965, as part of
President Johnson's ''Great Society,'' and has not been significantly changed
since then.

The Reagan Administration now seeks to place a ceiling on Federal funding of the
health program, and also restrict sharply dozens of other programs, including
Social Security, Aid to Families of Dependent Children, school lunches, student
loans, black-lung assistance and food stamps.

'Look at Long-Term Issues'

''If you move some of these programs to state and local governments, will this
lead to increased sales and property taxes that will be inflationary?'' asked
Representative Timothy E. Wirth, Democrat of Colorado. ''We have to look at the
long-term issues, and that's not something that should be done rapidly.''

To expedite Congressional action on the budget cuts, Republicans have seized
upon a seldom used and poorly understood process called ''reconciliation.'' This
process was authorized by the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 as a device to
reconcile Federal spending and revenues.

It is ideally suited to the present task. It packages most of the budget cuts in
a single bill, so that they cannot be picked off one by one by special interest
groups. And it is immune to a Senate filibuster because debate on the bill is
limited to 50 hours.

Unlike customary legislation, in which the standing committees of the House and
Senate have complete legislative discretion, the ''reconciliation'' process
vests much of this discretion in the budget committees. Since the standing
committees often develop close relationships with the special-interest groups
that they oversee, this transfer of power often provides for a more objective
look at the programs under consideration.

Under reconciliation, the House and Senate budget committees ask Congress to
instruct the standing committees to approve statutory changes that would result
in specified savings. For example, the Administration seeks $1.8 billion in
reduced spending for food stamps. If the budget committees agree, they ask
Congress to instruct the agriculture committees, usually farmer-dominated, to
approve legislation that would restrict eligibility and reduce benefits to
provide the necessary savings.

Come to Floor for One Vote

If Congress agrees, the standing committees are required to report these
statutory changes by a specified date. The budget committees then package them
in a single reconciliation bill, and send them to the floor of the House and
Senate for a single vote.

Republican leaders scaled down their intentions to accelerate the budget cuts.
Instead of having the Senate complete work in four weeks, they would now be
happy to have the budget committees complete hearings by then, they said. And
although they hope to have the entire legislation on the President's desk by
May, they are resigned to the House's more leisurely timetable, by which action
would be completed in July.

Even that goal may prove elusive, however. Representat1ive O'Neill believes that
as Americans begin to grasp the full impact of the Reagan proposal, they will
become increasingly critical, and Congress will reflect their views.

Others point out that world events and the attention span of Congress are other
factors to be considered. ''If there's any major crisis, if the Russians invade
Poland or there's an oil crisis or a drought, the President's timetable goes to
hell,'' said Representative Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of Suffolk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Reagan

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BURKE'S ISSUES CANDID 'PEERAGE' OF U.S. PRESIDENTS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words


BURKE'S Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage, the last word in tracking the lineage
of Britain's kings, queens, princes, dukes, knights, heirs-presumptive and
presumptuous heirs, has finally crossed the Atlantic with a definitive edition
about the closest to royalty that America has - the American Presidents, from
Washington to Reagan.

The London firm that has put out the bible of the British pedigreed class since
1826 calls its American version Burke's Presidential Families of the United
States of America. It has been edited by Hugh Montgomery-Massingberd, and it
includes the ancestry, wives, siblings, descendants and remarkably frank
comments about the Chief Executives. Furthermore, in an editorial reach for
objectivity, and perhaps for readers below the Mason-Dixon Line, there is an
appendix that includes the life and lineage of Jefferson Davis, President of the
Confederate States of America.

Unusually Blunt Observations

The biographical section on Ronald Wilson Reagan, 1911-, 40th President of the
United States of America, 1981-, includes these observations about him that
appear unusually blunt for a historical reference book:

''Not surprisingly, he began to cast his gaze toward the White House while he
was still in the governor's house in Sacramento. He attempted belatedly to
secure the Republican presidential nomination in 1968. He supported the
re-election of Richard Nixon in 1972 -when Nixon was, of course, certain of
renomination. He professed his faith in President Nixon up to the brink of
Nixon's resignation.

''By then, Ronald Reagan was a powerful Republican chief. Though unsuccessful in
his campaign against President Ford in 1976, he and his advisers began to lay
their plans for 1980. This time he defeated Ford, sealing his victory at the
Republican convention in Detroit after a long run of primary successes. His
acceptance speech at Detroit impressed even the millions of Americans who still
visualized Ronald Reagan as an aging ham actor with a slight look of Mickey
Mouse, a bizarre manifestation from the crazy state of California, possibly with
sinister tendencies toward reactionary-fringe politics.''

Outspoken Views on Presidents

The comments on President Carter, while acknowledging his personal integrity and
achievements, such as bringing together Egypt and Israel at Camp David, also
have a bite: He was ''unduly tolerant of failings among his friends and
family''; he and his advisers were ''ignorantly naive'' in dealing with
Congress; the only talent of the White House staff was in ''political
campaigning''; and ''Jimmy Carter had no clearcut opinions or policies.''

There are also outspoken views of most of the other Presidents.  On President
Nixon: ''He was never able to live down the charge that some moral dimension was
lacking in his character.'' On President Kennedy: ''He committed the nation to
an unwholesome conception of global responsibility of which the Vietnam war was
the fruit. If he had lived, he might have avoided some of the pitfalls that
awaited his successor.''

On President Franklin D. Roosevelt: ''He would have been amused to discover that
he was to be accused of both giving way too easily at Casablanca, Yalta and
Teheran, and of plotting an anti-Communist American imperium. The truth may be
that, being human, he did not exactly know what he was aiming at, beyond ending
the war.''

President Wilson: ''His vision of the world made safe for democracy, whatever
its defects of detail, was more wholesome than the cautious opportunism of his
opponents.''

President Lincoln: ''A man of apparently middling ability was thrust into a
nightmare for which no amount of previous American training could have
adequately prepared him. Lincoln revealed a felcity of language that any writer
might envy and that no President has surpassed. He was the plain man
transfigured, the American democrat raised to glory.''

President Jefferson: ''He was well aware that the history of mankind was in
large part a record of greed, violence, stupidity. But Jefferson kept alive his
essential faith that America could inaugurate a new, far happier era in the
world's chronicle.''

President Washington: ''He knew he was less clever and less sophisticated than a
Hamilton or a Jefferson. But he was uniquely the right man in the right place.
He was aware that the new 'Federal City' would be named Washington. The man
deserved the honor. Skeptics of a later age might ask: Has the city always been
equally deserving?''

Work of Marcus Cunliffe

These opinionated biographical comments are the work of Marcus Cunliffe and of
his former wife, Lesley Hume Cunliffe, an American.  Professor Cunliffe, long
with the Universities of Manchester and Sussex, educated his fellow Britons
about the United States in lectures and in such books as ''American Presidents
and the Presidency.'' He now holds a university professorship at George
Washington University in Washington.

''I had a few uneasy moments with some of the material,'' Professor Cunliffe
said. ''I wanted to make sure of the accuracy and origin of a phrase such as
'the happy warrior' that was used by Franklin D. Roosevelt when he nominated
Alfred E. Smith for President in 1928. But I have some of the instincts of a
journalist and, with the help of other scholars from Burke's, we were able to
bring the book up to the 40th President.''

The ''pedigrees'' of the Presidents, as they are called in the book, were
compiled by David Williamson, who has worked for Burke's for some 30 years. With
the help of an American genealogist, Gary Boyd Roberts, the lineages of the
Presidents were traced in some cases with even greater knowledge than that known
by the descendants themselves.

Mr. Williamson said that it was fairly easy to find President Reagan's English
grandmother, Mary Ann Elsey (1843-1908), who was originally from Epsom, Surrey,
by looking up church records, census returns and the General Registrar Office,
which began in England in 1837 and includes all births, marriages and deaths.
President Reagan's ancestry is one-fourth English, one-fourth Scottish, one-half
Irish.

As for President Jefferson Davis, ''To the end of his days he refused to ask for
a federal pardon - preserving the fiction that he was still a citizen of a
Confederate nation which now existed only as an imperfect memory.''

Burke's on the Presidents is distributed here by the British Book Centre, a
division of Pergamon Press of Elmsford, N. Y. It has 712 pages and costs $69.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN VOWS TO HELP SALVADORANS BUT SAYS U.S. WON'T BE LOCKED IN

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


President Reagan said today that he had ''no intention'' of involving the United
States inextricably in the fighting in El Salvador, but he declared that his
Administration would continue to support the Government there against those
committed to its ''violent overthrow.''

The President's comments at a brief news conference this morning came as he
scheduled a meeting of his top national security advisers tomorrow to discuss
ways to bolster El Salvador's Government.

El Salvador's military leaders say they can defeat the guerrillas despite a
Pentagon report to the contrary, and in interviews in San Salvador they gave a
less drastic view of the military threat to the country than the one presented
in Washington. (Page A4.)

More U.S. Advisers Expected

Administration officials said today that the alternatives being studied included
delivery of reconnaissance patrol boats to help El Salvador monitor the Gulf of
Fonseca, which separates El Salvador and Nicaragua and which the United States
believes is the major route for arms being sent to Salvadoran guerrillas by the
Soviet bloc.

Administration officials said the United States was likely to send as many as 40
advisers to El Salvador, including teams to help the Government reorganize its
basic training and monitor the arrival of arms. The United States is also
considering more helicopters for El Salvador.

The American officials emphasized that the advisers would teach the military in
El Salvador to use and maintain the equipment, but that they would not help in
combat. They said that sending combat advisers was not being contemplated.

The United States now has 19 military advisers in El Salvador plus its regularly
stationed military attaches. The 19 are 14 helicopter technicians and 5 members
of a command advisory group that is said to be helping the Government assess the
military situation.

In his news conference, Mr. Reagan also suggested that Soviet involvement in
supplying the rebels had to be ''staightened out'' if his Administration was to
proceed with arms control negotiations with the Russians.

In this context, he said he was ''most interested'' in the proposal of Leonid I.
Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, for a summit meeting, but he reiterated his
position that any negotiations on arms limitations had to deal with ''all of the
problems that are dividing us.''

'They Are Involved'

''I think that you can't just deal with just one facet of the international
relationship,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''You've got to deal with all the problems that
are dividing us.''

Referring to El Salvador, he added: ''So far, at least publicly, they've been
denying that they're involved in that, but I think the evidence that we have and
we've made public and that we've told our allies about makes it evident they are
involved.''

Yesterday, the Administration made public a State Department report in support
of its charge that Cuba, the Soviet Union and other Communist countries had
organized a ''well-coordinated, covert effort'' to overthrow El Salvador's
military-backed Government. The report was a distillation of documents and
memorandums shown to American allies.

Mr. Reagan was asked this morning if there were any danger of the United States
becoming involved ''to the point that we might not be able to extricate
ourselves easily.''

Medal of Honor Presented

''No, I don't think so,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''I know that this is a great
concern. I think it's part of the Vietnam syndrome, but we have no intention of
that kind of involvement. But there's no question but that we are in support of
the Government there against those who are attempting a violent overthrow of the
Government.''

American involvement is a matter of concern for the five-week-old
Administration. Senior White House officials have said they would not discuss
possible American steps in El Salvador. On Sunday, Edwin Meese 3d, the chief
policy spokesman at the White House, said the United States ''does not rule out
anything'' in its efforts to halt the arms deliveries to the guerrillas.

The more cautionary note struck by Mr. Reagan today occurred only a few hours
before he made an emotional address in which he again defended America's
involvement in Vietnam.

At an outdoor ceremony this afternoon at the Pentagon, where the Medal of Honor
was presented to Master Sgt. Roy P. Benavidez, a Vietnam War hero, Mr. Reagan
said that Americans fought in Vietnam ''as bravely and as well as any Americans
in our history.''

The United States withdrew, he added, ''not because they'd been defeated, but
because they'd been denied permission to win.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PHILIPPINE MAYOR WAGES WAR ON SIN NEAR U.S. BASE

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: OLONGAPO, the Philippines


''People call Olangapo sin city,'' said Richard J. Gordon, the 35-year-old Mayor
of this community of 200,000 people connected with the United States naval base
at Subic Bay.

''When I was elected last March, I gave myself 90 days to clean up the city.''
There were threats against his life, the Mayor said, when he closed houses of
prostitution and barred local teen-agers from the fourblock strip of discos,
bars, pizza parlors and massage parlors that American sailors by the thousands
have long frequented. He also enforced a curfew on minors.

Mr. Gordon recalled that in 1967, just one year after Olongapo became an
independent city, his father, James L. Gordon, who was its first elected Mayor,
was assassinated while trying to combat crime, the flourishing black market and
prostitution.

With the end of the Vietnam War and the scaling down of American activity in the
Pacific, Olongapo has been feeling an economic strain, and municipal leaders
fear that should the base be reduced or closed, the city will die. The only
hope, they say, is to clean up its reputation and develop new industries to
support its inhabitants.

Servicemen Said to Feel Safer

The Mayor's campaign is credited with reducing crime - in 1980 there were 849
crimes against servicemen and 484 against local residents - and making the city
appear cleaner and more efficiently run. The servicemen feel safer, a naval
officer said.

The Mayor, a lawyer and former student leader at the University of the
Philippines, has had the support of the United States Navy and the local police,
and he has the political help of the Philippine military through his close
association with Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile.

He says he has taken a ''cheerleader'' approach to city government. He began by
organizing minibus and pedicab drivers into zones. They received T-shirts and
instructions on courtesy.

The Mayor distributed trash cans with the name of the city and that of the
owner. He put up a monument to the city to remind the residents that it was
named for a tribal chieftain who lost his head. He ordered the curbs painted
white and he organized a Mardi Gras, a city band and booster clubs.

Businessmen Join the Campaign

''They are little things,'' he said, ''but that is how I'm trying to show the
people that you don't just take from the city. You give, too.''

Behind the smiling, good-natured mayor is an organization of mostly
second-generation businessmen, all in their 30's, who have been recruited into
his campaign against crime. Dressed in T-shirts and jeans, they are often seen
accompanying the Mayor, who with walkie-talkie in hand and bodyguards in front
and behind, polices the clubs and the four-block strip. Without brothels,
prostitution now occurs in hotels.

Mayor Gordon's opponents accuse him of building business for his friends, who
control the city's major nightclubs, hotels and cafes, and of using his
peace-and-order campaign to seize total control of the city. One opponent
charged that, with the streets clean and crime declining, the Americans did not
care about the methods of the Mayor, a Filipino with an American grandfather.

Some Olongapo residents say the town is being run by ''kids.'' ''But they are
making progress,'' said Max B. Endoso, a member of the City Council. ''The best
thing is that the people are beginning to show some pride in their city.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SAVING SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Richard H. Ullman

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.


The Administration seems headed toward disaster in El Salvador. Its obsessive
concern to demonstrate that the United States can no longer be pushed around by
the Soviet Union and Cuba has tied our prestige to the survival of a brutal
military regime.  In so doing, it is inviting a confrontation from which, no
matter what the outcome, Moscow will emerge a winner.

Our standing - in the eyes of much of the rest of the world, and perhaps even in
those of our own people - will surely diminish. The ultimate losers will be
those whom the Administration in its simplistic Realpolitik has overlooked: El
Salvador's four million people.

The Soviet Union will emerge enhanced because governments and publics in many
countries, including Mexico and Western Europe, seem to believe that the
Salvadoran rebels, who now enjoy Moscow's and Havana's support, are much more
worthy of support than the regime they oppose. Thus, if large-scale United
States assistance saves the junta, Washington will be accused of again stifling
a ''progressive third-world revolution.'' On the other hand, now that
Washington's prestige is engaged, an insurgent victory will seem yet another
sign of declining United States power. For Moscow, no matter what the outcome,
the applause of much of the third world will come as a welcome diversion from
the opprobrium that has rightly attached to its brutal intervention in
Afghanistan.

Like the Carter White House, the Reagan Administration purports to regard the
junta as courageous centrists battling repression from left and right. But the
overwhelming evidence is that whatever democratic center there may have been
exists no longer. Its fragile chances were snuffed out with the lives of six
civilian opposition leaders rounded up by army units in November and executed,
just as nearly every other voice for moderation - including many priests and an
archbishop -have similarly been silenced. And the land reform on which
Washington has placed its bets for weaning the rural poor from the insurgents
has proved largely a sham, as much undermined in the countryside by the army as
ballyhooed by the junta.

Yet the Administration has firmly nailed its flag to the junta's mast. No longer
can there be a graceful exit. Our military mission in El Salvador has doubled;
the flow of arms will surely double, too.  But the Pentagon's own analysis is
said to conclude that the junta is not capable by itself of putting down the
insurgency even with vastly enhanced resources. So the next steps will surely
include a gradual assumption of more active roles by our own forces. They will
fly the helicopters that ferry Salvadorans into battle. They will operate
electronic sensors to detect the influx of arms. And when they begin to die in
combat, the Administration will find its prestige even more irrevocably on the
line.

El Salvador is not Vietnam, however. ''Our side'' will almost surely win. But
the costs, in Salvadoran lives and perhaps our own, too, and to the United
States' reputation will be gigantic. And the sparks of revolution will have
ample tinder for re-ignition.

The tragedy is that these costs are so unnecessary. Our prestige is on the line
only because the Administration insists it be there. The fact of Soviet and
Cuban support for insurgents need not trigger automatic United States
opposition. There are conflicts for which no satisfactory resolution is
possible. The civil war became such a conflict when the army and right-wing
death squads liquidated the moderate center.

The insurgents undoubtedly include many Communists among their number. Their
blueprint for a reconstructed society will not accord with the preferences of
most people in this country. But they nevertheless seem the favorites of a
terrorized population that evidently feels that an insurgent victory will bring
the more equitable distribution of wealth so long denied it by El Salvador's
rulers.

That fact alone should give us pause. But if it does not, then Washington's
policy should at least be shaped by the likelihood - indeed, certainty - that a
victorious left in El Salvador, as in Nicaragua, would scarcely be anyone's
willing client. The Soviet Union and Cuba are useful arms suppliers during civil
war. But it is to the United States that victorious insurgents look for aid in
rebuilding their countries. Then our resources and influence can decisively
shape events.

Alas for the Salvadorans, and also for ourselves, the Administration has all but
foreclosed such an outcome. Any hope for preventing a disastrous escalation of
our involvement in the war must rest with the Administration's critics at home -
with Democrats, liberal Republicans, and the churches, especially the Roman
Catholic Church. They may yet save the honor the Administration is so recklessly
squandering.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard H. Ullman is professor of international affairs at Princeton University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-REP. BRADEMAS IS APPOINTED BY N.Y.U. TO BE 13TH PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


New York University yesterday chose former Representative John Brademas,
Democrat of Indiana, to be the school's 13th president.  The 53-year old Mr.
Brademas, who was majority whip in the House of Representatives until he was
defeated in last fall's Republican landslide, will succeed John C. Sawhill, who
resigned last summer after six years in the post. The new president is expected
to take over at the country's largest private university at the end of the
current academic year.

Mr. Brademas, a Harvard University graduate and Rhodes scholar, is a well-known
figure in higher education. As an 11-term Congressman, he was active in helping
pass Federal programs to provide tuition grants and loans to college students
and was a primary supporter of the National Institute of Education, the
educational research arm of the Federal Government.

The trustees acted during an hourlong meeting late yesterday afternoon at Bobst
Library. Afterward, Mr. Brademas declined to comment on his selection, but said
he would be available at a news conference scheduled for this morning.

Acting President Holds Post

Mr. Sawhill, the former Federal Energy Administrator, became head of the
46,000-student university in 1974 and was widely credited with turning around an
institution that had serious financial, enrollment and administrative problems.
In the summer of 1979 he took a leave of absence to become Deputy Secretary of
Energy, and Ivan Bennett, former dean of the N.Y.U. Medical School, was named
acting president.

Last fall Mr. Sawhill was named chairman and chief executive officer of the
newly formed United States Synthetic Fuels Corporation, and he announced that he
would not be returning to the N.Y.U. helm. Last month, at the request of the
Reagan Administration, he submitted his resignation from the corporation post.

Mr. Brademas will come to N.Y.U. without experience in running a large
institution. Supporters argued, however, that he will bring the university the
fund-raising ability and the national visibility that it needs to become an
important national rather than a regional university.

''If we want to get up there with Berkeley and all, we need another $200 or $300
million,'' said one high academic official. ''Brademas seems to know everyone
worth knowing in this country, and he is the kind of person who can make
important statements about education.''

Brademas Chosen by Panel

The former lawmaker was selected by a seven-member committee of trustees headed
by Laurence A. Tisch, the head of Loews Corporation and chairman of the board of
trustees. The full board approved the nomination at a special meeting yesterday
afternoon.

Mr. Brademas was born in Mishawaka, Ind., an industrial suburb on the outskirts
of South Bend, in 1927 and was a star quarterback and valedictorian in high
school. In 1945 he enrolled in a Navy officers' training program and then went
on to Harvard, where he was a member of Phi Beta Kappa. He continued his
education at Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar and in 1954 received a Ph.D.
degree in social studies.

Mr. Brademas became an assistant professor of political science at St. Mary's
College in South Bend and in 1958, on his third attempt, was elected to Congress
as a Democrat. He was assigned to the House Committee on Education and Labor,
and was viewed as a knowledgeable and effective legislator.

Pushed Education Legislation

He was a vigorous supporter of the Great Society programs of President Lyndon B.
Johnson and played an important role in such legislation as the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, which greatly increased the role of the Federal
Government as an advocate for disadvantaged students. He led the floor fights in
behalf of Project Head Start, the National Teachers Corps and programs to help
teachers pay for graduate studies.

During the war in Vietnam Mr. Brademas supported numerous antiwar resolutions
and voted against appropriations for the antiballistic missile and the B-1
bomber.

Despite the fact that he came from a conservative district, Mr.  Brademas
continually won re-election with as much as 79 percent of the vote. Last fall,
however, he was defeated in his bid for a 12th term by John Hiler, a 27-year-old
businessman.

Folowing the defeat, he commented, ''As the Bard said, 'If it were done, better
'twere done quickly.' I have not had a gloomy moment, in truth, because I ran a
good campaign and did the best I could. I always had to swim uphill in my
district, and this year the unemployment statistics were tough.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of John Brademas

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RESURGENCE OF SWEATSHOPS REPORTED IN NEW YORK

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2056 words


violations (page D11)

By SANDRA SALMANS

Concealed behind painted-over storefronts and crowded into shuttered lofts and
cellars, sweatshops are reappearing in garment manufacturing in the New York
area, Government investigators and union officials say.

According to these investigators, the sweatshops are spreading from Chinatown,
where they took root long ago, to Washington Heights, Inwood and the South
Bronx, and extending into Queens, Brooklyn and even Staten Island. Sweatshops
have also been found in northern New Jersey and parts of Westchester.

''It's exploding,'' said Herbert Rickman, special assistant to Mayor Koch.
While sweatshop conditions vary, there is a grim sameness to the basic
appearance: rows of women bent over sewing machines, separated by narrow aisles
often made impassable by dress racks and piles of piece goods. Fire exits and
windows, too, are often blocked or even padlocked, reducing emergency escapes to
a rickety freight elevator and unlit stairs. For 30 employees, there may be only
a handful of time cards - with stamped times that bear little resemblance to the
actual hours worked.

Even the most reputable garment factories tend to be crowded and cluttered by
modern standards. Sweatshops, however, may fail to comply with minimum wage and
hour laws, child labor regulations and fire and safety codes laws.

50,000 Workers Estimated

Precisely how many sweatshops and sweatshop workers there are in New York is
impossible to determine. In a report to be released today, State Senator Franz
Leichter, who represents an upper Manhattan district where many sweatshops have
recently sprung up, estimates that some 50,000 people are employed in as many as
3,000 sweatshops in the apparel trade. Ten years ago, according to Senator
Leichter, there were only 200 sweatshops in the city, half of them in Chinatown.
The industry's official estimate of total employment in New York is less than
200,000, but no one dismisses the sweatshop figure as improbably high.

The resurgence comes nearly 70 years after the fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist
factory, where 146 garment workers died. The notorious episode is invariably
invoked by government officials in discussing the situation today.

Increasingly, the workers are illegal aliens - from Hong Kong, South Korea, the
Dominican Republic, Haiti or Latin America. Lacking work permits and sufficient
knowledge of English, they are easy targets for exploitation. The flow of
immigrants from these areas is generally cited as a main factor in the revival
of sweatshops, which were believed to have declined sharply in the city
following reformist legislation and union activity in the 1930's and 40's.

As Herman Starobin, research director of the International Ladies Garment
Workers Union, noted, ''There's a growing garment-producing operation in the
midst of a completely different culture.''

Government, union and industry officials cite several reasons for the growth of
the sweatshops:

- Budgetary cutbacks have compelled government departments to reduce the number
of inspectors and deploy them in top-priority sectors, which do not include
garment manufacturing.

- The large inflow of immigrants, both legal and illegal, has created a sizable
and trained pool of workers who are easily exploited.

- Indifferent or ineffectual officials in government and the I.L.G.W.U., the
main union responsible for organizing garment factories in the New York area,
are cited by some garment manufacturers as contributing to the problem. Many
Chinatown factories are unionized but are often found in violation of city
building and fire codes.

- The contracting system, in which apparel companies parcel out the production
of garments to small, highly competitive contractors and subcontractors, is said
to encourage the companies to put a squeeze on wages while obviating any sense
of responsibility.

In theory, a number of government departments are responsible for policing the
apparel trade and imposing criminal and civil penalties. But, apart from some
much-publicized periodic raids - the most recent of which occurred some 18
months ago in Chinatown - inspection and policing have been sharply curtailed as
a result of budgetary cutbacks, officials say. When inspections are carried out,
they are often handicapped by a lack of interpreters, especially in questioning
new immigrants from South Korea or South Vietnam.

Number of Inspectors Cut

For the five boroughs, the buildings department has only 69 inspectors to
examine construction, issue violations and pursue recalcitrant owners. The fire
department has only 150 inspectors, down by 100 from several years ago. Instead
of annual inspections, ''we might hit between 10 and 15 percent of the buildings
each year,'' said Paul Kotch, the department's inspector-general. Payoffs of
inspectors by contractors, Mr. Kotch acknowledged, were an additional problem.

While the city's authority covers only building and fire codes, the United
States Labor Department is supposed to inspect for machine safety, minimum-wage
and overtime payments, and the employment of minors. But since the Chinatown
raids in 1979, the department has turned its attention to higher-priority
industries.

''We don't normally make inspections unless we get complaints,'' said Nicholas
DiArchangel, deputy regional administrator in New York for the Labor
Department's Occupational Safety and Health Administration. He added: ''Very few
complaints come from sweatshops. They don't speak English, and they're afraid.''

While garment manufacturing is admittedly not a high-risk trade, OSHA inspectors
are supposed to insure that sewing machines have needle guards to protect
seamstresses' hands. But in sweatshops, where workers tend to be paid by
piecework and productivity is the foremost concern, the workers themselves
resist using guards, saying the guards slow them down, Mr. DiArchangel said.

''If I tried to enforce it, I'd be doing someone out of a livelihood,'' he
added. ''Do you get punctures - which can become infected - or do you feed your
children? It's that basic.''

Paying for piecework, the norm in garment sweatshops, is not illegal as long as
workers receive at least the minimum wage of $3.35 an hour. ''But in most cases,
people can't possibly make the number of pieces to come anywhere near the
minimum wage,'' said Frank Mercurio, regional director of the Labor Department's
Employment Standards Administration.

$1.50-an-Hour Wages

Mr. Mercurio's department has found sweatshops where workers were averaging
$1.50 an hour for a 50-hour week. To show a 40-hour week on their records,
inspectors say, employers often punch time cards in and out dutifully as workers
remain at their machines, not collecting overtime for extra hours.

To raise their income, inspectors say, garment workers increasingly take work
home. The practice, largely banned by state and Federal law, removes workers
from public scrutiny and makes law enforcement difficult.

It is widely agreed that sweatshop workers are easy to exploit because many are
recent immigrants, lacking adequate English, fearful of government and
accustomed to substandard wages and working conditions. If they are here
illegally, they are even more vulnerable to abuse by employers.

''Undocumented workers are afraid,'' Mr. Starobin said. ''That fear allows
employers not to pay Social Security or withholding tax, and to fight efforts to
unionize. If the workers protest, he threatens to tell the Department of
Immigration about them. Legally, they're unpersons. The less documentation they
have, the more serious the violations are apt to be.''

Union Cited as Part of Problem

Some manufacturers suggest that the I.L.G.W.U., as a result of ineffectual
leadership, is partly to blame for the resurgence of sweatshops.

''Why blame someone who gives work to people?'' said Myron Norris, owner of
Givenchy for Little Tantrums, which makes children's apparel under license from
the designer. The company uses a contractor in Chinatown. ''Why not blame the
Mayor, or the union for not enforcing the contract?''

Union officials insist that they are working harder than ever to organize
garment workers, including illegal aliens. Of the 110,000 I.L.G.W.U. members in
the New York area, as many as 30 percent are estimated to be illegal immigrants.

The Seventh Avenue manufacturers are the guilty ones, says Frederick Siems,
I.L.G.W.U. executive vice president. ''The name of the game is price,'' he said.
''Sweatshop operators bid on garments, and the one who is most desperate gets
the work. These manufacturers know what's happening.''

In the view of Mr. Siems and others, contracting, the traditional method of
garment manufacturing, is fundamental to the perpetuation of the sweatshop.
Typically, apparel manufacturers send their cut or piece goods to contractors to
be sewn; the contractors, in turn, may subcontract the work.

The system encourages fly-by-night operators who, in a seasonal industry,
manufacture for a few months, pocket their profits and close. ''It isn't
difficult to find a loft where you can put 30 or 60 machines, and you're in
business,'' Mr. Mercurio said. ''It's a fastbuck operation. It's just like a
pusher - the police kick him off one corner, but in a week he resurfaces on
another.''

'We Can't Police Him'

Contracting also removes the manufacturer from direct responsibility for the
treatment of workers. ''When we give a contractor an order, we can't police
him,'' said Mr. Norris of Little Tantrums. Mr. Norris has a representative visit
his Chinatown contractor daily to inspect the garments' quality but not wages or
working conditions. ''If they're breaking the law,'' he said of his contractors,
''the city should close them down.''

Government representatives also charge that the truckers, who convey piece goods
from the manufacturer to the contractors, help support sweatshops by charging
excessively high rates for shipping the goods. And it is virtually impossible
for contractors to switch to another trucking concern because of the influence
of organized crime, according to Senator Leichter.

To clamp down on sweatshops, Senator Leichter this week is offering legislation
that would compel contractors to register with the state. Under the measure, the
state would be able to confiscate goods found in sweatshops - a practice that
would adversely affect manufacturers who own the goods.

''The manufacturers may become our policemen,'' said James Quillin, Labor
Commissioner of California, where a similar law is scheduled to go into effect
this July.

Most New York manufacturers oppose the measure. ''All the laws that we need are
already on the books,'' said Kurt Barnard, executive director of the Federation
of Apparel Manufacturers. ''They should be enforced.''

Other measures cited as means of stopping sweatshops include making it a crime
knowingly to employ illegal aliens, and granting amnesty - and legalization of
their status - to illegal immigrants already working here.

The outlook for any legislation is uncertain, however. A similar bill proposed
by Senator Leichter failed to pass last year, and laws concerning immigrants
require Federal action.

Some manufacturers and government representatives tend to be blase about the
need for such laws. As one manufacturer noted, ''Why should we object to
employing people in sweatshops here when we're willing to import garments from
sweatshops in Hong Kong and other countries?''

But Mr. DiArchangel rejects that. ''Legal or not,'' he said of the workers,
''they're here and they're working and we should be protecting them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of apparel manufacturer on East Broadway cited for
building

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ORDERS CUTS OF $3 BILLION MORE IN SPENDING FOR '82

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


President Reagan today ordered $3 billion to $6 billion in additional budget
cuts after he was informed that his advisers had underestimated the growth in
Federal spending for the fiscal year 1982.

At a hastily called economic briefing this afternoon, the White House announced
what it said was a miscalculation in the built-in growth in the cost of
government. The newly authorized reductions must be added to the $41.4 billion
in budget cuts that Mr. Reagan announced on Feb. 18 if the Administration is to
hold to its goal of a Federal spending ceiling of $695.5 billion in 1982.

Mr. Reagan's adviser on domestic policy, Martin Anderson, said ''there is no
intention now'' to achieve the new reductions by cutting into the seven social
welfare programs that the President spared from his original round of budget
cuts.

President Learns About Problem

Mr. Reagan learned that 1982 outlays would exceed the $695.5 estimate in an
unannounced meeting with his main economic advisers and senior staff at the
White House. The economic meeting apparently contributed to cancellation of a
scheduled meeting of the National Security Council on the question of sending
American advisers or military aid to El Salvador. That meeting was set aside
until tomorrow or Friday.

At the economic meeting, Mr. Reagan was told that ''a reestimation of the
numbers essentially from the ground up'' showed that 1982 spending would exceed
the spending figure arrived at from budget figures inherited from the Carter
Administration, Mr. Anderson said. The cost overruns were attributed primarily
to Congressionally mandated growth in such social-service programs as Medicare,
the health care program for the elderly that is one of the ''entitlement,'' or
pledged spending, programs that Mr. Reagan promised to preserve.

The President received more favorable news today when a Federal judge in
Washington upheld his freeze on Government hiring, which affects thousands of
people who received job offers from the Carter Administration from Nov. 5 to
Jan. 20. (Page B14.)

Deeper Cuts Urged

According to sources in the White House and the Office of Management and Budget,
Mr. Reagan was told that without additional cuts, the 1982 budget deficit would
exceed the $45 billion he announced in his nationally televised speech last
week. David A.  Stockman, the Federal budget director, recommended that Mr.
Reagan go for deeper cuts, even in the face of building Congressional opposition
to the cuts already scheduled. ''The President accepted that in principle,'' a
source in the budget office said.

Mr. Anderson declined to blame the Carter Administration figures directly for
the cost overruns, but other Administration aides made the point privately. ''We
tried to get the Carter budget early,'' a White House source said. ''We got it
late and had to go with a lot of their numbers and estimates.''

''It's a regrettably normal and routine overrun,'' a spokesman for the budget
office said. ''The difference this time is we're not going to passive
acquiescence'' and absorb the overruns by raising the deficit, as President
Carter did, he said.

Mr. Anderson said there were several basic causes for the overruns, including
inflationary growth in programs such as Medicare and more precise estimates as
to the effects of cost-of-living increases in some programs. Moreover, he added,
''There were certain judgment calls where I think some of our estimates were
probably less optimistic'' than the Carter Administration's.

Mr. Anderson asserted that the Reagan Administration's basic projections and
goals for economic growth remained unchanged.  He noted that the new cuts in
1982 would necessitate reductions in 1983 and 1984 beyond those already
announced, if Mr. Reagan is to reach his goal of a balanced budget by 1984.
However, additional cuts in the 1981 budget will be ''minuscule,'' a White House
staff member added.

The White House initially declined to specify the amount of the underestimation
of spending and the new budget cuts. However, it later relented and confirmed
the size range of the cuts to forestall speculation that larger numbers might be
involved.

The modification in figures changes Mr. Reagan's agenda for his second budget
address on March 10 to the extent that he must now specify an additional $10
billion to $13 billion in spending cuts, rather than the $7 billion that was
called for when the $41.4 billion spending-cut figure was in effect.

Promised Further Cuts

In his Feb. 18 speech, Mr. Reagan specified $34.4 billion in cuts and promised
details as to the balance of the cuts in the March 10 speech.

The economic news overshadowed the visit to Mr. Reagan today of Foreign Minister
Jean Francois-Poncet of France, and it also diverted attention from the
speculation as to what course Mr. Reagan would follow in aiding the military
junta governing El Salvador.

Mr. Reagan said yesterday that fear of the ''Vietnam syndrome'' should not
prevent the United States from helping countries endangered by what he described
as Communist insurrection aided by transshipments of arms from the Soviet Union.

After talking with the President, Mr. Poncet seemed to give tacit approval of
American aid to El Salvador. He said that a ''political'' rather than a
''military'' solution was needed there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan, M.LK. Weidenbaum, and David
A. Stockman

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN FACING LIMITED DECISIONS ON SOUTHEST ASIA

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


As President Reagan begins his term, the people of Indochina - Vietnam, Cambodia
and Laos - live under the sway of the Hanoi Government and however uneasy most
of them may be, they see nothing on the horizon that presages change.

The United States may no longer affect the destiny of the region directly, but
the Reagan Administration will soon face decisions on its policy in Indochina.

Except for enclaves along the unpopulated border with Thailand, in which troops
of the former regime of Prime Minister Pol Pot are based, Cambodia has been
stabilized under Vietnamese military occupation. The Government of President
Heng Samrin is secure in Phnom Penh. The catastrophic famine that followed the
invasion by Vietnam in late 1978 has been allayed by international relief and
also a great improvement in domestic food production since the last monsoon
season.

China has not followed up its initial violent reaction to Vietnam's actions in
Cambodia with anything but a diplomatic campaign to withhold recognition from
the Vietnamese-sponsored regime and to preserve the former Government's United
Nations membership, even though it no longer controls significant territory or
population.

Peking, which had threatened ''a second lesson'' unless Hanoi changed its ways,
appears to have grudgingly accepted its present inability to dislodge Cambodia
from the Vietnamese realm.

The Soviet Union's continuing military and economic support of Vietnam appears
to have served as a credible deterrent against renewed Chinese use of force.

The Carter Administration overcame serious misgivings caused by the bad odor
surrounding the ousted regime of Pol Pot, which Mr. Carter had condemned as the
world's worst violator of human rights, to vote in the United Nations in favor
of letting it retain its seat in each of two General Assembly sessions that
followed its overthrow.  Administration spokesmen cited the principle of not
countenancing armed aggression.

Whatever the issue of principle, the United States' support of the Pol Pot
remnants, balanced somewhat by its principal role in financing famine relief, is
certainly welcomed by China and, in varying degrees, by the non-Communist
nations of Southeast Asia.

Mr. Reagan will, in the first autumn of his Administration, have to decide
whether to continue the Carter policy on Cambodia at the United Nations or risk
Chinese and Southeast Asian displeasure by supporting the new rulers in Phnom
Penh.

If United States policy changed, the principal criticism among the United
States' friends in Southeast Asia would come from Thailand, which has long
borders with both of Vietnam's satellites and feels itself at the edge of
possible confrontation in Southeast Asia.

Singapore, which has been the advocate for Southeast Asia's case against
Vietnam, would strongly support the Thai stand, but Malaysia, Indonesia and the
Philippines would probably show less unhappiness.

Malaysia and Indonesia, while supporting Thailand, are more amenable to striking
a bargain with Vietnam, possibly for a gradual withdrawal of some of Hanoi's
200,000 occupation troops, since they consider Vietnam a buffer against the
Communist power that they fear even more - China.

Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia has removed one problem with which the United
States had to wrestle: normalization of relations with Hanoi. Even before the
invasion, Vietnam's increasingly formal affiliation with the Soviet camp cooled
the Carter Administration's desire to take up Hanoi's offer of diplomatic
relations without a precondition of reparations payments. The march into
Cambodia put the issue on ice.

The United States made a major contribution to the stability of Southeast Asia
with the decision to absorb the brunt of the problem created by the huge number
of refugees from Indochina. In June 1979 the United States raised the quota for
accepting these people to 14,000 a month, thereby preserving the principle of
asylum in a region where it is not generally practiced and also removing a major
subject of contention.

The Communist victories in Indochina and Vietnam's subsequent alignment with the
Soviet Union against China introduced, for the first time, a Soviet base of
power in Southeast Asia that is being watched by the rest of the region for
indications of exploitation for military purposes. But other than frequent calls
by Soviet warships and flights by military transports to deliver arms and
equipment, no signs of a sizable or lasting presence have been detected.

Anti-American stirrings are most open in the most pro-American country, the
Philippines. The presence of two major military bases, the only ones the United
States has in Southeast Asia, provides a focus for the sentiments. Opponents of
President Ferdinand E. Marcos, now in his ninth year of authoritarian rule,
often concentrate their criticism on the naval and air installations, and in
that sense political upheaval in Manila might present Mr. Reagan with a major
Southeast Asian problem.

But Vietnam's rise to being perceived in Southeast Asia as a potential regional
menace has even further diminished Moscow's chances of gaining greater
acceptance in a region deeply suspicious of Communist powers.

As a corollary, the United States has, without a great deal of action on its
part, achieved in Southeast Asia as high a degree of popularity as it has
enjoyed since its involvement in Indochina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of people in Phnom Penh, Cambodia

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S MOVES ON SALVADOR MEET WITH MIXED RECEPTION;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


The Reagan Administration's first major international endeavor, to expose what
it calls ''a textbook case of indirect armed aggression by Communist powers'' in
El Salvador, has so far seemed to have produced mixed results.

Foreign governments have, by and large, given a sympathetic reception to the
missions from Washington touring Europe and Latin America with dossiers about
Soviet-bloc aid to the Salvadoran insurgents.

But the European and Latin American support has been muted, State Department
officials said today, by concern that the new Administration might be too
concerned about the military aspects of the problem, too interested in forcing
the issue with Moscow and Havana and not committed enough to curbing violent
acts by the Salvadoran right wing and to seeking a political solution.

Foreign Minister Jean Francois-Poncet of France, for instance, whose Government
is strongly opposed to Soviet-backed subversion, nevertheless combined his
public concern over the ''external interference'' in El Salvador with a
statement that the problem there could not be solved ''by purely military
means.''

Political Reconciliation Is Goal

''I think everyone recognizes that reforms have to be introduced,'' he said the
other day. ''Everyone recognizes that a political reconciliation must be
sought.''

Similar emphasis on nonmilitary assistance has been made by the El Salvador
junta's top officials as well. They have said that while they welcome American
efforts to cut Communist aid to the rebels, extensive economic support and the
need to accelerate social changes in the country are more important to them than
military aid.

Probably in response to such expressions of concern, not only from the allies
but from many members of Congress, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has
in recent days begun to justify the American policy in terms of insuring
''social justice'' in El Salvador.

''We Americans believe external intervention and involvement will jeopardize the
achievement of social justice which must be determined internally within the
resources of the Salvadoran people themselves,'' Mr. Haig said after talking
with Mr. Francois-Poncet on Monday.

Soviet 'Expansionism' Assailed

But Mr. Haig acknowledges that the motivation for the unprecedented dispatch
abroad of so-called ''truth squads'' and the publication of a ''white paper'' to
dramatize the Soviet-bloc involvement, flowed less from humanitarian concerns
than from an early desire by the Administration to call attention to Soviet and
Cuban ''risk taking'' around the world and to stop it.

Repeatedly, in private and in public, Mr. Haig has inveighed against Soviet
''expansionism'' in Ethiopia, Southern Yemen, Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia,
including the use by the Soviet Union of Cuban or Vietnamese ''proxies.''

The Communist involvement in El Salvador, Mr. Haig said recently, is ''another
manifestation in a very critical area at the doorstep of the United States.''

Mr. Haig's concern at the moment, however, seems more symbolic than real.
Despite the talk in Washington of increased military and economic aid for El
Salvador's Government to combat the rebels, the military situation has already
improved dramatically because of the apparent decision of the Nicaraguan
Government, under American pressure, to halt the flow of Communist-supplied arms
into El Salvador.

Moscow Denies Involvement

Thus, there is something of a contradiction. When the situation was most
dangerous for the El Salvador Government, little was said about it in
Washington. But now Washington's attention has been focused on El Salvador, the
subversion seems to have slowed.

Some experienced State Department officials believe that the Cubans may suspend
active backing for the Salvadoran rebels because of the failure of the
insurgents' uprising last month to win much public support.

The Soviet Union has denied any involvement in El Salvador and Leonid I.
Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, never mentioned that country in his long address to
the Communist Party Congress on Monday. In fact, the evidence of Soviet
participation on the side of the Salvadoran insurgents was one of the less
convincing aspects of the ''white paper.''

What seems indisputable is that Shafik Jorge Handal, the head of El Salvador's
Communist Party, stopped in Moscow twice last summer as part of a worldwide
mission to obtain arms and other supplies for the military campaign. Whereas the
Salvadoran leftists and Communists met several times in Havana with Fidel
Castro, and were received in Hanoi by Le Duan, the top Vietnamese Communist, Mr.
Handal was given a very low-level reception in Moscow.

30 Salvadoran Youths Trained

He met in June 1980 with Mikhail F. Kudachkin, a high official in the Latin
American section of the foreign relations department of the Communist Party
Central committee. When he asked for Americanmade arms, he was given a plane
ticket to seek them in Hanoi. When he returned to Moscow on July 22 he was again
received by Mr.  Kudachkin.

The Russians agreed to train 30 Salvadoran youths in the Soviet Union and ''in
principle'' to ship the arms from Hanoi, but the documentation does not record
if the Soviet Union did transport them.

One of Mr. Haig's aides said today that if the Soviet Union had wanted to, it
could have urged Cuba, Vietnam and other natiins alligned with Moscow not to aid
the insurgents. Certainly Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and East Germany
would not have done anything for Mr. Handal without Moscow's intercession, the
aide said. On the other hand, he added, the Russians probably felt that their
revolutionary ''manhood'' was being challenged by the Cubans and Vietnamese and
therefore offered no objections.

Some State Department officials said that the test of the Administration would
come in the next few weeks, if the arms flow into El Salvador remained stalled
by the Nicaraguans.

They said that they agreed with the Europeans that a major effort must then be
made to curb the right-wing violence, which stems in part from the Government's
own security forces. An equally energetic campaign, they said, should be waged
to try to persuade the less doctrinaire leftists to open negotiations with the
Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bomb damage in San Salvador

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Essay;
ESSAY;
The Savings of Salvador

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


A generation ago and half a world away, South Korea was chosen to be the place
where the line was drawn against Communist expansion. President Reagan has
chosen El Salvador to be this generation's and this hemisphere's South Korea.

The Reagan decision to make a strategic point in this country the size of
Massachusetts is based on two facts of international life: First, we must break
the Communist winning streak. Victories in Cuba, in Vietnam and Cambodia, in
Angola and Ethiopia and South Yemen, in Nicaragua and most recently in
Afghanistan, have implanted a dangerous hubris in the Kremlin.

Second, El Salvador is a place where we can win. The revolutionaries have been
supplied through Nicaragua, which may be susceptible to our economic pressure,
and from Cuba in a gunrunning operation that invites interdiction. Logistics,
for a change, works against the Communists and for us.

No government in this hemisphere is kidding itself about the reason for the
coming United States intervention: our purpose, after the Communist takeovers of
Cuba and now Nicaragua, is not merely to stop Western Hemispheric penetration
but to turn the global tide.

Mexico's President, Jose Lopez Portillo, who must make macho points at home by
taking a public posture to the left of the U.S., waggles his finger at such a
turning of Central America into a superpower proving ground. Yet he knows, and
Mexicans privately assure us, that unless anti-Communism ''wins'' somewhere in
this neighborhood soon, the stability of Mexico will be imperiled.

What is ''winning''? Is it supporting a military junta that kills the opposition
but by its repressive nature produces more opposition that becomes necessary to
kill? If need be, yes -considering the aggressive totalitarian alternative - but
such a draining victory is not necessary.

Victory for the West in El Salvador would be the establishment of a
non-Communist government capable of maintaining order and holding out the
promise of providing an improved standard of living for its people. Mexico is a
useful model.

Mexico is no democracy: six men secretly determine who the presidential
candidate will be; a mockery of an election is held; a docile press protects the
established political and social order, and stability is achieved. But this is
done with great rhetorical deference to the wishes of the people and with
skillful subsuming of the issues of the left.

How, then, do we turn El Salvador -a tiny nation under Communistsupported
terrorist attack - into a nonrepressive, functioning republic like Mexico?

* We should let it be known that we are determined to see to it that the
anti-Communists win. The anguish of American doves who cry ''another Vietnam!''
is helpful - it makes the point that what Mr.  Reagan calls ''the Vietnam
syndrome'' no longer paralyzes U.S.  policy.

* Give the Government the military supplies it needs - enough and on time -
along with unabashed advisers who can show them how to use them. Just as
important, use our intelligence system to track and target incoming Communist
arms so that our side in El Salvador can intercept them. Surveillance already
under way should determine within a week whether Nicaragua is lying about the
use of its territory to transfer arms to comrades in El Salvador; if so, we
should demand repayment of aid to Nicaragua fraudulently received.

* Make sure the generals know that they need a civilian government headed by
somebody like Jose Napoleon Duarte, a centrist politician with a catchy middle
name. He's their ticket to all those shiny new gunships that can carry the
battle to the terrorists.

* Buy off the peasants and the middle class. Together with Venezuela and if
possible Mexico, turn that 8,000-square-mile minicountry into a garden spot for
small businessmen and farmers. A billion dollars over the next two years,
audited by the United States Congress to make sure it all trickles down, will
make a hero out of a junta.

* Make El Salvador the showplace for the triumph of free enterprise (with gringo
help) and the political and military defeat of Communism. Teams of saved
Salvadorans and refugee Cubans should be encouraged to visit campuses and
churches throughout Latin America.  Give pro-Western propagandists a success
story to work with.

In the coming week, we will hear of much chin-pulling by the National Security
Council, loud bewailing of the strictures of the Clark Amendment and the
inability of the C.I.A. to undertake covert action, and worried head-shaking
that the terrorist infection may have already gone too far. All that is a
prelude to a commitment to save El Salvador and to break the Communist winning
streak.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR COMMUNIST DENIES AUTHENTICITY OF DOCUMENTS

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 26


Shafik Jorge Handal, the secretary general of El Salvador's Communist Party, has
denied the authenticity of documents made public by the State Department in
which he describes promised arms shipments from Soviet bloc countries to
Salvadoran guerrillas.

The documents, reportedly captured during a raid on a rebel hideout in San
Salvador in November, were said by American officials to contain reports by Mr.
Handal of his meetings with government and party officials in the Soviet Union,
Cuba, Vietnam, Ethiopia, East Germany, Bulgaria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and
Nicaragua.

These and other documents said to have been seized from El Salvador's People's
Revolutionary Army last month have become the principal support for the Reagan
Administration's charges of Soviet bloc interference in El Salvador's civil war.

In a statement dated Feb. 9 that was made available here today by Salvadoran
opposition groups, Mr. Handal ''categorically'' denied all reports that he had
reached an agreement with Socialist bloc governments on arms shipments to El
Salvador.

'Eventual Military Aggression'

''There is no doubt that this is a maneuver to justify the growing supply of
U.S. arms and military personnel to the genocidal Christian Democrat-military
junta and to prepare the ground for an eventual military aggression in Central
America,'' the Communist leader said.

He said that the Salvadoran people have been seeking democracy for 50 years, but
''time and again, the reactionary military tyranny, invariably aided by
successive U.S. Governments, has responded with massacres and repression.''

''The military dictatorship, the oligarchy and the Government of the United
States have thus pushed the Salvadoran people toward the armed struggle,'' Mr.
Handal added.

He went on to say, ''No one can honestly be surprised that this people has now
taken up arms to exercise its right to selfdetermination.''

Rebel Victory Predicted

''Nevertheless, other explanations are now being found in supposed conspiracies
of the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries with the Salvadoran Communist
Party,'' he said.

Saying the rebels ''will triumph today or tomorrow,'' he urged American
officials to think of future relations between the United States and a
revolutionary regime in El Salvador.

''In our case,'' he said, ''in no way do we want a future of hostile relations
with the United States, with whose people we feel much sympathy and among whom
so many of our compatriots live and work. On the contrary, we favor friendly and
constructive relations based on mutual respect and coexistence. But the U.S.
Government, it seems, prefers to work today to poison those future relations.''

U.S. Declines Comment

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, Feb. 26 - William J. Dyess, a State Department spokesman, said today
that he ''would not dignify with any comment'' the statement attributed to Mr.
Handal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of soldiers in San Salvador

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF STATEMENT BY SLAVADORAN COMMUNIST CHIEF

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 26


Following is the text of a Feb 9. statement by Shafik Jorge Handal, the
secretary general of El Salvador's Communist Party, and translated from the
Spanish by The New York Times:

Special to the New York Times

On Feb. 6, The New York Times published on its front page a commentary
mentioning documents supposedly captured from Salvadoran guerrillas which
suggest that leaders of Vietnam, Ethiopia, the Soviet Union, the German
Democratic Republic, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary reached an agreement
with me, in my position as secretary general of the Salvadoran Communist Party,
to send armament to the revolutionary movement in my country. In this context, I
make the following statement:

(1)

I categorically reject as false the published claims about the above-mentioned
agreement. There is no doubt that this is a maneuver to justify the growing
supply of U.S. arms and military personnel to the genocidal Christian Democratic
military junta and prepare the ground for an eventual military aggression in
Central America.

(2)

The Salvadoran people have been fighting for democratic freedom and, time and
again, the reactionary military tyranny, invariably aided by successive U.S.
Governments, has responded with massacres and repression. The military
dictatorship, the oligarchy and the Government of the United States have thus
pushed the Salvadoran people toward the armed struggle. It is a struggle
legitimized and justified by history. No one can honestly be surprised that
these people have now taken up arms to exercise their right to
selfdetermination. Nevertheless, other explanations are now being found in
supposed conspiracies of the Soviet Union and other Socialist countries with the
Salvadoran Communist Party.

(3)

I demand that the Government of the United States explain: With what moral right
does it question the right of the Salvadoran people to arm themselves and carry
out a war of survival, a just war of national liberation, against their
executioners? What is the legal and moral authority of the U.S. Government to
question this right, being, as everyone knows, the largest supplier of arms to
the bloody dictatorships of Latin America and other continents?

(4)

After so many experiences around the world, the U.S. Government should know by
now that revolution is a historical law of social development which, despite the
primitive desires of those who continue being our geographic neighbors, will
triumph today or tomorrow in El Salvador. We should therefore think of our
future relations. In our case, in no way do we want a future of hostile
relations with the United States, with whose people we feel much sympathy and
among whom so many of our compatriots live and work. On the contrary, we favor
friendly and constructive relations based on mutual respect and coexistence. But
the U.S. Government, it seems, prefers to work today to poison those future
relations.

(5)

Finally, the U.S. Government should clarify for U.S. and world public opinion:
How did its intelligence services and the State Department obtain documents
''captured'' from Salvadoran guerrillas?  Why were these supposed documents
published first in New York and not in El Salvador? And why has the State
Department rather than the fascist Christian Democratic junta assumed
responsibility for their publication? Whatever the circumstances of the
''denunciation'' that appeared in The New York Times, with its repeated
references to the State Department and U.S. intelligence services, it provides
further evidence of the blatant way that the U.S. Government is intervening in
the internal affairs of El Salvador, siding with the worst cause in favor of the
rabid slaughterers, torturers and corrupt executioners of the Salvadoran people.

Is this the way that the United States defends its national security?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BARS TALK WITH SALVADORAN LEFT

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The State Department today rejected an offer from El Salvador's leftist
opposition to open talks with the United States on a political settlement of the
armed conflict between guerrillas and the military-backed Salvadoran Government.

''This is not a matter into which we are injecting ourselves,'' William J.
Dyess, a State Department spokesman, said. ''If the insurgents want to talk,
they should address themselves to the Government of El Salvador.''

Guillermo Manuel Ungo, a Social Democratic opposition leader who heads one of
the two political fronts that speak for the guerrillas, said today that he had
no plans to meet with President Jose Napoleon Duarte, the head of the Salvadoran
junta.

The opposition also rejected the offer El Salvador's Roman Catholic bishops to
try to help start talks with President Duarte, a Christian Democrat.

Meanwhile, the Reagan Administration scheduled a meeting of the National
Security Council tomorrow to consider increasing military aid to El Salvador.

Role for Advisers

Pentagon officials said the Joint Chiefs of Staff were preparing to send about
50 noncombat military advisers to El Salvador if President Reagan gives the
order. They said the advisers would be primarily Spanish-speaking sergeants who
could help improve recruit training and instructors on operating and maintaining
new equipment, such as radar-equipped patrol boats and helicopters.

Officials said the United States has 27 servicemen in El Salvador, including
Marine embassy guards, the military attache group and 19 instructors on
temporary duty.

Robert E. White, the former Ambassador to El Salvador who was recalled by
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., told a House subcommittee hearing
yesterday that more United states military aid would make a political solution
of the Salvadoran conflict more difficult if it weakened civilian leadership of
the Government.

Mr. Duarte has said that El Salvador need economic help more than military help,
although he has said arms reaching the guerrillas must be offset.

In his testimony, Mr. White said security forces were involved in the killing of
four American Roman Catholic missionaries in December and repeated his earlier
charge that the killings had notbeen investigated seriously. He said he would
''not be part of a coverup.''

After his testimony, Mr. White said,''When you can see we are headed for a new
Vietnam situation, you have to take a stand.'' Mr. White, 54 years old, has
refused an assignment to the State Department's Inspector Corps, and his foreign
service career will end 90 days after his removal as Ambassador unless he is
given a new post.

Plan for Talks Is Denied

Special to the New York Times

MEXICO CITY, Feb. 26 - Guillermo Ungo has denied any plans to hold talks in West
Germany next month with President Duarte.  After reports that West German
political parties were trying to promote negotiations between the two men to try
to settle El Salvador's civil war, Mr. Ungo said he would see Mr. Duarte only if
he resigned from the junta.

''These calls for a dialogue issued by Duarte through the international press
for propaganda reasons are no more than political manuevers in the hope of
gaining legitimacy for a Government that is increasingly isolated at home and
abroad,'' said Mr. Ungo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Psychodrama in El Salvador

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 641 words


Can it be that there's method in the madness of tying President Reagan's
prestige to that of a junta in a coffee-bean republic?

In a flash, the El Salvador junta's struggle against 4,000 guerrillas has been
made front-page news. The Kremlin is told that fateful negotiations over nuclear
arms depend on that junta's success. Diplomats tour the world warning that
whoever does not side with America in this effort invites retribution. Cuba has
been threatened with blockade, and Mexico has been thus provoked into a show of
sympathy for Cuba. All this for El Salvador?

There can be only one rational explanation. Mr. Reagan foresees a quick win over
the guerrillas and wants to advertise American muscle by making an exhibition
game look like a World Series triumph.

Disconcertingly, his effort recalls our (ignored) advice to Jimmy Carter four
years ago: that new Presidents should demonstrate their machismo in a safely
controlled episode, to avoid having to prove it in a costly crisis. For in the
logic of nuclear deterrence, the more certainly a President is perceived as
daring enough to go to war, the less likely it is that he will ever have to. How
then can he prove himself? The Bay of Pigs, the slide into Vietnam, the rescue
of the Mayaguez have all been chapters in this psychodrama.

One can almost hear the Reagan calculus: if America is to regain respect, it
must rattle a few dishes somewhere. If the Russians are to be deterred from
hauling Cuban troops to places beyond America's reach, then threaten a blockade
of Cuba now, when it's not really needed. If allies are to be herded into line
in situations where they have divergent interests, test the prod in El Salvador,
where they have none. Don't just parade force in Central America by reasserting
a sphere of influence; declare the contest a metaphor for superpower competition
the world over.

The only trouble with the idea is that Salvadorans may not play their parts in
Washington's histrionics.  Given the country's geography, it should be easy
enough to deprive the guerrillas of Soviet-bloc weapons. But those recent arms
shipments did not ignite this rebellion. The totalitarian left feeds on profound
discontent. It can be defeated only by a progressive political program that the
present junta proclaims but has been unable to defend against the totalitarian
right.

The junta may need more economic aid. But to lavish weapons on it now will only
strengthen the right-wing extremists in its ranks, the ones who have been
frustrating social justice and land reform and turning peasants into rebels.

Perhaps there is still time to cobble together a democratic center to wage what
Mr. Reagan calls a three-way civil war. If so, the worst possible strategy
against the left is to make common cause with the violent agents of a deposed
oligarchy. And the worst possible strategy against the extreme right is to leave
it thinking it holds an American President hostage.

If the President really means to show his toughness in El Salvador, he has to
prove that Americans cannot be panicked into desperate alliances and military
responses to a fundamentally political challenge. He has to summon the skill and
patience that may still arrange a reconciliation betwen the democrats who serve
with the junta and those who have bolted to the insurgents.

That effort requires not bellicosity in Washington but shrewd diplomacy by all
the Caribbean democracies, notably Mexico and Venezuela. Without an effective
political program, Mr. Reagan's ostentatious strutting in a place of no
strategic moment will indeed impress the world, but not in the way he intends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REDUCING OUR FORCES IN EUROPE;
by William L.Hauser

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


We learned the lessons of Vietnam too well. As a result, we are today exposing
our country's vital interests to deadly peril.  After 50,000 deaths and untold
billions of dollars, we emerged from Vietnam with two truths burned into our
national soul. The first is that modern war is so costly in blood and treasure
that countries dare wage it only to secure interests truly vital. The second is
that lacking a national consensus about our vital interests, war cannot be won
against a determined foe. Before Vietnam, the United States intervened
militarily in Lebanon, in 1958, and the Dominican Republic, in 1964; since then,
we have recoiled from similar involvement in Angola, Ethiopia, and in Iran.

Whether these decisions were right or wrong is not the point. We have apparently
forsworn armed intervention in the third world. While rebuilding our ramparts in
Europe that were neglected as a result of Vietnam, we have dismantled our
ability to deploy forces elsewhere.  Even the so-called Rapid Deployment Force
is largely earmarked for wartime duty in Europe, its logistics dependent on
unready reserve organizations, its manpower replacement in disarray, and its
strategic transport pitifully inadequate.

By lacking a capability for intervention, we are risking truly vital interests.
If we were to be denied access to the energy and mineral resources of Africa,
the Middle East, and Southwest and Southeast Asia, our economic well-being,
physical security, and even domestic liberties would be endangered. Similarly,
if the Soviet Union could block our European and Japanese allies' access to
those same resources and markets, they would become Soviet satellites-infact,
however independent they remained in name. The United States would be isolated
in a Soviet-dominated world.

But is not Western Europe's defense against Soviet invasion our most threatened
vital interest? The answer is no, for the Red Army's Eastern European rear is
unreliable, West Germany has superb conventional forces, Britain and France are
nuclear powers, and United States escalation is feared by the Soviet Union's
planners.  Our North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies understand this, which
is why they are not ''doing their part'' to be stronger. They understand also
that the real threat -the endangered vital interest - lies elsewhere.
Nonetheless, they are reluctant to join us in a military coalition outside
Europe. They recognize the problems of allied operations, which are hard enough
on a single partner's territory and are next to impossible across vast
distances. They expect us to fulfill our global role while they limit themselves
to a regional one.

We cannot afford to provide major defensive formations in Europe and
simultaneously counter Soviet adventurism in the third world. We are already
maintaining overstructured, hollow forces that we cannot adequately man, train,
keep in repair, or competently control.  Experienced officers and
noncommissioned officers are leaving the military services in unprecedented
numbers. We are mistakenly viewing this ''leading indicator'' as a matter of
their benefits rather than as a vote of no confidence in an unviable profession.

If we want worldwide capability, we are going to have to reduce our forces in
Europe. We deployed there in 1949 to protect a warprostrated West from the
Soviet Union's massive armies. That forward, linear strategy, which made sense
then, has become nonsense in the face of European strength and Soviet global
mobility. The American fox has its paws stuck fast to the NATO tarbaby, while
Soviet-proxy rabbits scamper freely through the third world.

Today, we are an essentially ''island power,'' and our long-term access to the
Afro-Eurasian continent requires a mobile strategy. Our land forces must be
lean, highly trained, readily deployable, and sustainable by sea, air transport,
and firepower. Our formations in Europe can be much reduced and still be
adequate for deterrence.  Europe will (if it must) strengthen its own defenses.

Regrettably, the new Administration appears to be harking back to our
pre-eminence of yesteryear. Perhaps that is an attempt to signal, in familiar
language, a resurgence of national will; perhaps the new leadership recognizes
the need for a new strategy. Even so, changing the deployment of our forces will
engender opposition, for major elements have European defense as their principal
raison d'etre. Fears will also arise in some quarters that a capability to
intervene in the third world will tempt us rashly to do so. That is a risk that
we as a nation must take, or we are going to concede the battle without a shot's
being fired.

It is unrealistic to expect ever again to be militarily preeminent. But if we do
not bestir ourselves, we are going to be irrelevant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
William L. Hauser, a business executive, is a former Army officer and a writer
on national security matters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MORE TOXINS FOUND BY STATE AT ITS BIRMINGHAM BUILDING

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Feb. 26


The New York State Health Department has discovered additional and deadlier
toxins in a state office building known to have been contaminated with
polychlorinated biphenyls. A cleanup of the building in downtown Binghamton was
halted today by the department.

Dr. Glenn E. Haughie, deputy public health director, said at a news conference
that dioxin and dibenzofuran, which are among the most toxic manmade chemicals
known, had been found in samples of the poisonous soot that permeated the
building following a fire in a basement transformer before dawn on Feb. 5.

The Binghamton building, which is part of a $24 million complex opened in 1973,
is believed to be the first office building in the world to have been totally
contaminated with these chemicals.

File cabinets, desks, papers, telephones and other office equipment all received
a fine dusting with the chemical-bearing soot circulated through the building's
exhaust system.

Company Proposals Sought

State officials, now uncertain how to decontaminate the building and its
contents, are seeking proposals from private companies specializing in
contaminant removal.

The 18-story building, in which 750 state employees work, has been closed since
the contamination was discovered. Until now, the New England Pollution Control
Company had been removing the soot, sending in workers wearing protective
equipment.

Dr. Haughie said he had ''no information to believe the dioxins or dibenzofurans
are in the air.'' While there are Federal safety standards for polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCB's), no standards exist for long-range exposure to either dioxin
or dibenzofuran, which are known carcinogens.

A Factor in Decision

Assemblyman James R. Tallon Jr., Democrat of Binghamton, who is chairman of the
Assembly Health Committee, said the procedure that the state uses to remove the
additional chemicals in the building would ''weigh on the ultimate credibility
of a decision to go back in.''

Mr. Tallon's regional office is in the building, as are those of the Senate
majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, Republican of Binghamton, and Assemblyman
James W. McCabe Sr., a Binghamton Democrat.

John C. Egan, the state's Commissioner of General Services, said: ''We are
plowing new territory in this case. If it appears we may be a little
supercautious on this one in Binghamton, we're doing it for good reason.''

He said that the building would be closed for a minimum of six months.  The
Health Department's analysis showed tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) in amounts of
about 200 parts per million by weight and tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) in
four parts per million.

Dr. Steven Stellman, assistant vice president for epidemiology at the American
Cancer Society, called that dioxin level ''a very high amount.'' He said it was
''higher than the average range of dioxins present in Agent Orange and much
higher than the level present in commercial herbicides.''

Dioxin and dibenzofuran are the active chemicals in Agent Orange, a defoliant
used in the Vietnam War. A study of Agent Orange is being made by a temporary
state commission created last year.

Dr. Stellman said there was ''no question'' that dioxin is a carcinogen,
although there was ''no good evidence'' on what levels cause specific illnesses
in humans. He said there was ''ample evidence that industrial exposure to dioxin
causes a whole range of conditions such as skin conditions, neurological
disorders and possibly psychological and gastrointestinal disorders.''

Dr. James Allen, a former professor of pathology at the University of Wisconsin
who has done extensive research on dioxin, calls it ''at least a million times
more toxic than PCB's.''

Periodic Blood Tests

According to the state's Office of General Services, Lois Wittemore, a security
guard, was the only person in the Binghamton office building at the time of the
fire. The Health Department is giving periodic blood tests to the guard and the
dozen or so firefighters who put out the fire as well as the cleanup workers.

Mr. Egan speculated that the dioxin and dibenzofuran could have been released
from the melting of the insulation around the transformer.

The director of the Governor's Office of Employee Relations, Meyer S. Frucher,
has recommended that state employees displaced by the building's closing not be
charged vacation time for the days they missed as the state searched for
alternate locations.

Contaminated papers impounded in the building include 13,000 active case files
belonging to the Workers' Compensation Board. The board is distributing
emergency information reply cards for claimants to begin reconstructing their
cases from other sources.

Commissioner Egan said the cleanup had already cost the state $500,000, not
including the cost of relocating the 750 state workers, and could eventually
total millions of dollars.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of workers in state office building

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN TO PROPOSE BATTLESHIPS' RETURN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


The Reagan Administration plans to request funds to reactivate two World War II
battleships as soon as possible, and possibly two more later, when it submits a
new military budget authorizing nearly $223 billion for the fiscal year 1982 to
Congress next Wednesday, Pentagon and Congressional officials disclosed today.

The Administration, those officials said, has decided to build a much larger
fleet than previously planned. The budget request will be the first tangible
evidence of the course it has set to counter what a senior naval intelligence
officer has described in Congressional testimony as ''unbelievably ambitious''
Soviet program of naval construction.

The revised budget, which has grown by $3 billion in recent weeks, would include
about $9 billion more for the Navy to buy new ships and aircraft. That would be
about 40 percent more than the Carter Administration requested for naval
procurement. The new military budget, on which finishing touches are still being
applied, also calls for funds to begin construction of a new class of
nuclear-powered battle cruisers to be fitted with the Aegis system of radar and
computer-controlled weapons for fleet defense.

In addition, the naval budget will request money for a fifth nuclear-powered
aircraft carrier, for the reactivation of a World War II carrier, and for 75
more aircraft than the 121 that President Carter requested in his final budget.

Other funds would go for an additional smaller cruiser with the Aegis system, a
new amphibious ship, another attack submarine and lesser purchases to bring the
total procurement budget to $30 billion.

The Reagan military budget is scheduled to go to Capitol Hill a week before the
full budget presentation on March 10. That is because John Tower, chairman of
the Senate Armed Services Committee, has been eager to move a bill through the
committee and the Senate as quickly as possible.

Congressional officials said that Mr. Tower, a Texas Republican, wanted the
military authorization bill voted before the Senate was caught up in debate over
Mr. Reagan's proposals for budget and tax cuts, which might turn attention to
the swiftly rising military budget.

There are currently no battleships in commission in any navy in the world. In
the United States Navy, the battleship was supplanted as the capital ship of the
fleet by the aircraft carrier after the Korean War. Battleships became
vulnerable with the advent of air power and then missiles. However, the Reagan
Administration's concept is to use the battleship in a supporting role rather
than as the main striking force of the fleet.

The first battleship that the Administration proposes to reactivate would be the
45,000-ton New Jersey, which was commissioned in 1943, brought back into service
for the Korean War and again for the Vietnam War.

The battleship, now laid up in Bremerton, Wash., is expected to take two and a
half years to be brought back into commission. The proposed budget calls for $92
million to be spent in the current fiscal year and $162 million in the fiscal
year 1982. which begins next October.

The second ship would be the Iowa, first commissioned in 1943 and brought back
in the Korean War. She is laid up in Philadelphia and would cost more, about
$500 million, and take longer to bring back into commission because she has been
out longer.

Study Is Planned

The officials said that funds would be requested to study the feasibility of
reactivating the Missouri, on which the surrender of Japan took place, and the
Wisconsin. The Missouri is mothballed in Bremerton, and the Wisconsin is in
Philadelphia. Naval officers said that the Navy wanted the ships back, although
not at the price of postponing new construction to bring heavy firepower to bear
in a relatively short time. The Marine Corps is particularly eager to have them
back to provide bombardment for amphibious assaults.

The plan calls for retaining each ship's three turrets of three 16-inch guns
that can hurl a round more than 20 miles. The conversion would include modifying
the boilers to shift from heavy bunker oil to more efficient distillate fuel,
adding surface-to-surface and cruise missiles, and installing modern radars and
weapons controls.

The main problem would be to provide personnel for the ships, each of which
would require 1,600 to 1,800 men. The Navy already has a shortage of 20,000
petty officers, the skilled personnel who drive the ships, operate the machinery
and keep everything in repair.

The new cruiser to be proposed would be similar to the four Virginia-class ships
of 10,000 tons each that are armed with guided missiles. But it would also have
the Aegis system of sophisticated sensors and weapons controls that is currently
planned for 6,000-ton cruisers.

The Reagan naval budget appeared to be in response to the pleas of admirals that
the Soviet Union has taken long strides toward becoming a strong naval power. An
official assessment of that came yesterday when Rear Adm. Sumner Shapiro
described Soviet naval construction as ''unbelievably ambitious.''

Admiral Shapiro, the Director of Naval Intelligence, said that ''the Soviet Navy
has embarked upon an aircraft carrier program of major proportions.'' He said
that ''the Soviets are well along in the planning for a larger, nuclear-powered
aircraft carrier much like our own.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of battleship USS New Jersey (page 9)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Sihanouk Cancels His Plan For Anti-Vietnamese Front

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 27


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the one-time Cambodian head of state, said today that
he had been forced to cancel his plan to form an anti-Vietnamese united front in
his homeland.

The Prince said in a telegram from exile in North Korea that he had canceled the
project because of the opposition of many Cambodian exiles in France to
cooperation with Pol Pot guerrillas. He said that followers of his political
rival, former Prime Minister Son Sann, had sabotaged his plan to oust the Heng
Samrin regime.

Prince Sihanouk said he still intended to meet with guerrilla leaders ''to
examine the problem of Cambodian liberation together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

UNFLATTERING BOOK UNWELCOME IN NAVY

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


Prentice-Hall says the United States Naval Academy bookstore canceled a large
order for a novel because the book is critical of some aspects of the academy,
but the academy denies that this was the reason for the cancellation. The book,
''A Sense of Honor,'' was written by James Webb, a 1968 graduate of the Naval
Academy who become one of the most decorated marines of the Vietnam era.

''Bookstore officials told our sales representative they were canceling the
order and will neither advertise nor sell the book,'' said Patty Neger,
publicity director for Prentice-Hall. She added that the bookstore, the only one
at the academy, sold more than 700 copies of Mr. Webb's first novel, ''Fields of
Fire,'' about a platoon of marines in Vietnam.

The store ordered 30 copies of ''A Sense of Honor'' in advance of its March 30
publication date, and those books arrived Wednesday. The next day Gerard
McDonnell, the Prentice-Hall salesman, obtained an order for another 175 copies
from Robert Inzer, the bookstore's manager.

''I telephoned the purchase order into the company,'' said Mr.  McDonnell, ''and
about 20 minutes later I received a call from Inzer saying the officer of the
store told him to cancel the order because the book was too controversial.'' He
added, ''I've been in the publishing business almost 14 years and had other
controversial books, but nobody ever refused to sell books addressed to their
special audience.''

'Less Than Accurate'

''What we did was cancel a particular order,'' said Lieut. Comdr.  Robert N.
Burton, the officer in charge. ''When I learned about the re-order I said I
don't want all those books in the warehouse.'' Commander Burton is the military
manager of the Midshipman Store, of which the book store is a division.

The initial 30 copies of the book are in the bookstore, said Commander Burton,
''and if the midshipmen want the book we'll sell it to them, but it's not being
displayed and pushed.''

He added, ''In the opinion of most people who read it, there's a large amount of
vulgarity and a less-than-accurate picture of the officers, midshipmen and
faculty of the academy.'' Commander Burton said that he had read about 180 of
the book's 308 pages, and that he tended to agree. ''I think it takes an extreme
position,'' he said.  ''It takes the worst of an organization and portrays as
commonplace things that are not commonplace.''

The officer acknowledged that this was the first time during the one and a half
years that he had been in charge of the bookstore that he had rescinded a book
order.

The novel, set at the academy in February 1968, was described by Publisher's
Weekly as ''a vivid picture of heroes and martinets.'' Mr. Webb taught
literature at the Naval Academy in 1979, when he put the finishing touches on
the book. He previously served on the staff of the Secretary of Navy, for which
he was awarded a Navy Achievement Medal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE DEMOCRATS SEEKING TO LIMIT INVOLVEMENT BY U.S. IN EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


A group of House Democrats is maneuvering to dissuade the Reagan Administration
from military involvement in El Salvador's guerrilla conflict, but its members
concede they lack the strength to block President Reagan if he wants to send
arms and military advisers to the Central American nation.

In the Senate the Democratic opposition is scattered, bowing to a fairly solid
Republican majority, to the conservative mood of the moment and to the momentum
of Mr. Reagan's political honeymoon. It is in marked contrast with the situation
of December 1975, when a Democratic majority blocked President Ford's effort to
aid Angolan anti-Communists.

The momentum in President Reagan's policy was illustrated today by a State
Department announcement that a Navy training team had been assigned to El
Salvador to help maintain patrol craft equipment.  (Page 14.)

Typical of the changing currents of sentiment on Capitol Hill was a comment by
Senator Alan Cranston, the Democratic whip from California, who was among those
opposing military aid to Angola in the immediate aftermath of the Vietnam
defeat.

In a statement last week, he endorsed sending arms to El Salvador but questioned
''the advisability of sending advisers since that could lead to an escalation of
our involvement.''

Acquiescent Mood in Senate

Senator Cranston acknowledged, however, that the President could probably get
his way. ''If President Reagan strictly limits the number and activities of
American advisers and if he maintains the U.S. commitment to support land and
political reforms in El Salvador, I do not think he will encounter strong
Congressional opposition,'' Mr. Cranston said, reflecting what other Democrats
and Republicans describe as the acquiescent mood of the Senate.

''That last election changed things,'' said Senator Paul E.  Tsongas, a liberal
Democrat from Massachusetts. ''Not only did we lose Democrats and liberals, but
those who are left are so weary.  Everyone is running for cover from Reagan and
the conservative trend. Some people say, let the Administration go ahead and
make its mistakes; that's the only way the public will understand.''

In the House, critics of the Administration's sharp language and apparent
intentions to send military aid to El Salvador are more active and hopeful.

Sponsors Sought for House Bill

Gerry E. Studds, a Massachusetts Democrat, has gathered 52 cosponsors for a bill
he introduced Jan. 29 to end American military aid to El Salvador, begun under
the Carter Administration.

Clarence D. Long of Maryland, chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee
on foreign operations, is gearing up to stall any Administration effort that
comes before his committee seeking more funds for military aid to El Salvador.

Each of them and other Democratic critics voice concern that sending up to 150
military advisers to El Salvador, as advocated by some Administration officials
and the Senate majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, could risk
escalation and even direct American involvement.

''That rings bells, it scares people,'' Mr. Studds said in an interview. ''You
don't have to be imaginative to think what would happen if one of those advisers
gets shot. If there is someone in the Administration looking for a pretext for
military intervention, the kind of policy we're following now would provide it,
probably sooner rather than later.''

''I think Reagan needs to be protected against himself,'' added Mr. Long. ''He
would be an awful fool to louse up his honeymoon over a thing like this. I'd
like to deny any arms. I think it's a waste of money. There's no sense in using
it on a country whose own leaders say they don't need military aid. From the
response I get, there's a strong feeling around the country against our getting
involved down there.''

Both Mr. Studds and Mr. Long concede that there are not enough votes now to stop
Administration moves. Mr. Long estimated that enlarged military aid
appropriations for El Salvador in 1982 might be beaten in his subcommittee but
predicted the Administration would win in the full Appropriations Committee and
on the House floor.

Some Key Members Stand Aside

The Studds effort, other Democrats said, is hobbled by the reluctance of some of
the senior Democrats in the House Foreign Affairs Committee to get involved,
even though they have been active in the past in trying to curb American
military aid and advisory roles abroad.

Among the senior Democrats who have so far declined to co-sponsor his bill are
Dante B. Fascell of Florida and three New York members: Benjamin S. Rosenthal of
Queens, Jonathan B. Bingham of the Bronx and Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn.

Mr. Studds said that while a number of Democrats said they agreed with him in
principle, they did not want to buck the new Administration at this time,
particularily on this issue. Republicans are reported to be sticking solidly
with Mr. Reagan. Only one freshman Republican, Thomas F. Hartnett of South
Carolina, has signed to co-sponsor the Studds bill.

The opposition not only finds itself outnumbered at the moment but also lacking
much leverage for affecting Administration policy, except through hearings that
raise critical questions about El Salvador.

Ousted Envoy Opposes Arms Aid

Last week Mr. Long's subcommittee heard testimony from the dismissed Ambassador
to El Salvador, Robert E. White. He vigorously opposed military aid for El
Salvador and charged Government security forces there with being the chief
killers of Salvadorans.

The Inter-American subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, under
Michael D. Barnes, a young Maryland liberal, will hold hearings on Thursday,
with Mr. Studds and other opponents of military aid attending.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS IN BUFFALO FIGHTING TO SAVE A MEMORIAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


The Federal Government and a group of Vietnam veterans have become involved in a
confrontation over a chunk of granite that the veterans installed in the lawn of
the Federal building in downtown Buffalo as the pedestal for a war memorial they
hope to erect.

The Government had required the group, the Vietnam Era Veterans Association, to
take out a $500,000 liability insurance policy on the pedestal, which was put in
place nearly two years ago.

The policy lapsed after the veterans failed - inadvertently, they say - to make
the last two quarterly payments of $100 each and the Government has threatened
to remove the pedestal.

Decided Not to Pay

''We were outraged that they could even think of taking the monument out,'' said
Mark J. O'Connor, the general counsel for the veterans group and one of its
founding members.

''Then,'' he continued, ''we decided to take a stand. We decided we're just not
going to pay the premium.'' The veterans had planned a rally for yesterday
morning to protest the removal of the pedestal. But they said only ''40 or 50''
protesters came out and they felt that with more time and more publicity they
could attract veterans from around the country for a demonstration ''sometime in
the coming week.''

Possible Compromise

Officials of the General Services Administration, which has authority over the
building and its grounds, said they were looking into the matter. But one of the
officials, Charles LeDuc, said he thought it was unlikely the pedestal would
actually be removed.

He said he felt certain a compromise could be reached. ''Either they'll agree to
pay the insurance,'' he suggested, ''or the insurance requirement will be
waived.'' Mr. O'Connor said the veterans group began raising funds for a war
memorial statue when they installed the pedestal. But he said most of the money
had been spent on programs to help veterans readjust to civilian life and that
lately contributions had been ''just trickling in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

L. C. Blount Weds Susan A. McDaniel

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 56, Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


Susan Alane McDaniel and Lawrence Clare Blount were married yesterday at St.
Martin's Lutheran Church in Annapolis, Md. The Rev.  Richard Reichard, executive
director of the National Lutheran Home in Rockville, Md., performed the
ceremony.

The bride is a daughter of Mrs. Gerald E. McDaniel of Ridgewood, N.J., and the
late Mr. McDaniel, who was treasurer of Rosario Resources in New York, a
natural-resources concern in mining, oil and gas. Mr. Blount is a son of Mr. and
Mrs. Wayne L. Blount of Old Saybrook, Conn. Before his retirement, his father
was a sales engineer with the Emhart Corporation in Farmington, Conn.

The bride is a management analyst with the Veterans Administration in
Washington. Her husband is a branch chief with the Bureau of Health Planning in
the Department of Health and Human Services in Hyattsville, Md. He served with
the Peace Corps in Panama and as a lieutenant with the Army in Vietnam.

The bride was graduated from Goucher College and received master's degrees in
occupational therapy from Columbia University and in public administration from
New York University. Mr. Blount, an alumnus of Wabash College in Crawfordsville,
Ind., received a master's in social anthropology from the University of Texas at
Austin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AID: DEBATING THE USES AND ABUSES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2361 words


M. Peter McPherson, confirmed last week by the Senate as administrator of the
Agency for International Development, will hit the ground worried. As the annual
battle over foreign aid warms up in Congress, Mr. McPherson will defend funding
levels won by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. Federal budget director
David A.  Stockman and a transition team headed by Edward J. Feulner Jr.,
president of the Heritage Foundation, favored deeper cuts.

For a discussion last week of the merits and limits of foreign aid, Mr. Feulner
joined Senator Alan Cranston of California, Democratic whip and a member of the
Foreign Relations Committee, Hollis B.  Chenery, vice president of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank), Juan de
Onis, a reporter in The New York Times Washington Bureau, and Milt Freudenheim,
an editor of The Week in Review.

Excerpts from their conversation follow.
Is Aid Necessary?

Question. Is United States foreign aid essential to peace and development?

Mr. Chenery. Foreign aid is the central component of world development. The
poorest countries, even before the oil crisis, were dependent on a long-term
inflow of capital and the U.S., until 10 years ago, was the leader in supplying
them. It has (since) been lagging behind. Contributing to capital formation,
technical assistance, transfer of technology to the least-developed countries,
is essential, whether your goals are purely economic, or political or security
objectives.

Senator Cranston. The U.S., a very rich country, is able to help people, to
reduce the anguish of great poverty. Secondly, aid is a very important
instrument of foreign and defense policies. The Soviets, with their Cuban and
Vietnamese satellites, find their greatest targets of opportunity in lands of
great poverty. As we help reduce those problems, we lessen the opportunities for
Soviet aggression and adventure. Thirdly, aid serves to reduce conditions that
threaten stability on a worldwide scale - poverty, hunger, disease. We can't
expect to live on our continental island in serenity, unchallenged, with the
turmoil not reaching us.

Finally, foreign aid is of great benefit in developing markets. A substantial
proportion of aid is used to purchase American goods, grain, medical supplies,
providing job opportunities and profit opportunities for Americans.

Mr. Feulner. Aid is neither a necessary or a sufficient condition for economic
development. I can cite a number of countries that did not have it. A number of
countries that have had it have not advanced into the developed arena.

Foreign assistance too often encourages wrong attitudes, wrong developments. It
tends to be from government to government; the most able, skilled individuals in
third world countries generally end up working for government instead of the
private sector. It ends up reinforcing government as opposed to private
structures.  Governmentto-government aid in the food area has led to decreasing
local food production. Government transfers of technology have built up the
local government at the expense of the private sector.

We ought to have bilateral foreign assistance in terms of our economic interests
and our foreign policy objectives, but that's a different argument. I would not
yield to anyone in terms of moral concern about individuals in the third world
in dire economic straits. But we have to sort out the objectives versus actual
implementation.

Senator Cranston. Would you abolish it totally?

Mr. Feulner. I'd reform it and make it a tool of our foreign policy, promoting
our interests.

Senator Cranston. How would you reform it?

Mr. Feulner. Abolish the International Development Corporation Agency (a
coordinating office established by the Carter Administration), a useless,
bureaucratic appendage. Substantially increase the trade development program,
which encourages U.S.  exports. I would probably continue the Overseas Private
Investment Corporation (offering U.S. Government insurance against
expropriation). I would substantially cut back on Food for Peace, making food
programs more responsive to local needs by having them more substantially
administered through private voluntary organizations. Voluntary organizations
have a much better track record in the third world.

Q. What is the case for multilateral aid?

Mr. Chenery. It's useful to have a mix of multilateral and bilateral. The U.S.
took the initiative in building up the World Bank and other multilateral funding
agencies, for economic, humanitarian and security objectives. The multilateral
banks administer on a strictly nonnational basis. The borrower gets a loan based
totally on evaluation of effectiveness in increasing income, reducing poverty -
economic tests. Carrying it out is done by competitive bidding, instead of
''tied'' aid, which often results in projects 40 to 50 percent more expensive.

Multilateral agencies take the lead in evaluating situations. In India,
Pakistan, many African and Asian countries, aid is provided by a consortium.
Multilateral agencies make an evaluation of need.  Bilateral donors, which
contribute 90 percent of the total, then coordinate their efforts; this reduces
waste.

Senator Cranston. Bilateral aid permits us to give where it will serve our
national interests. Multilateral aid can develop and strengthen international
institutions essential to stability and peace. When aid comes through a
multinational agency, the recipient's suspicion that it comes to serve some
purpose elsewhere is reduced.

Q. Do you agree, Mr. Feulner?

Mr. Feulner. Our role in multilateral institutions should be deemphasized.
Economic assistance is basically political. It's very political when the World
Bank makes substantial loans to Tanzania to collectivize farms, when it loans
Vietnam $60 million to collectivize rice farms. They are not decisions in the
best interests of the United States. I don't think the Senate or House would
vote for them if they were done on a bilateral basis. We talk about the United
States, with 20 percent of the voting power in the World Bank, being able to
exercise an effective veto, but apparently we haven't (done so).
Looking for a 10 Percent Return

Q. Have loans been made to collectivize agriculture?

Mr. Chenery. I don't know the individual loans, but out of thousands of
individual loans, you can get a very distorted picture by picking one or two.
Neither World Bank lending nor U.S. Government bilateral lending strengthens
public sectors as against private sectors. The great bulk of recent World Bank
lending has been to small farmers, through institutions at the grass roots. The
beneficiaries are private individuals.

Q. Does foreign aid work in less-developed countries?

Senator Cranston. It has worked very well in some places. Other programs have
failed because of poor administration, poor planning, or misuse of funds. You
can cite tremendous developments in world health, wiping out killer diseases
such as malaria. We have seen the level of poverty slowly dealt with in a great
many countries.

Mr. Chenery. There are two levels to consider. Was a particular project carried
out the way you expected? Does the contribution of all aid-supported projects
add up to effective national development?  The World Bank is the only
institution which evaluates every project and publishes the results. Our
anticipation is that there will be a real return, allowing for inflation, of
around 15 percent, a minimum of 10 percent. (That would mean that) if you invest
$10 million, you get a return of 10 percent - $1 million a year in benefits to
producers, in taxes, an increase in economic returns. We estimate that 94
percent of our large projects, evaluated seven or eight years later, yield the
expected average return - a very high proportion.

Q. And the second level...?

Mr. Chenery....is what did it do for overall development. I wouldn't argue that
aid is the sufficient condition. There are no single sufficient conditions. It's
not sufficient to be a democracy, or to have private enterprise, or to have aid
or good exports. You need some mix of good management and good objectives. But
for poorer countries, aid is crucial even though it's small.

Senator Cranston. It is noteworthy that President Reagan and Secretary of State
Haig, who are not exactly bleeding hearts, have come to the support of a
reasonable level of foreign assistance.

Mr. Feulner. Foreign aid did not take an appropriate cut when the President came
up with his budget program. Despite press reports indicating a major cutback,
the figures indicate that the cut from the fiscal 1982 proposal, compared to
fiscal 1981, is only 1.7 percent.
Agreement on Helping the Poorest

Q. For several years, Congress hasn't passed the foreign aid appropriation bill.
What's the outlook now?

Senator Cranston. It probably would go through at the new level.  Many will
welcome the proposed cuts. Others are concerned about the depth of the cuts, but
we recognize that virtually every (Federal) program is going to have its share
of reductions.

Q. Aren't some recipient countries in a debt crisis?

Mr. Chenery. The main financing - 70 or 80 percent -of the effects of the rise
in oil prices is through the private banking system.  There is not a general
crisis. There are individual debt problems - one or two a year become prominent.
A country which refuses to raise the price of energy, goes on consuming, refuses
to absorb the effects of higher prices, will borrow too much and the banking
system seems to be willing to lend up to a certain point.

Q. Are they reaching a limit?

Mr. Chenery. Two or three countries a year get overextended and there has to be
a readjustment - managed largely by the private banking system. Some countries
don't want to borrow from I.M.F.; they borrow from private banks where there's
less control. The only corrective is to have some warning, then lending is
closed down and a readjustment in policies takes place. In the ideal system, the
monetary fund would be more heavily involved; warnings would come earlier and
there would be less of a debt-rescheduling problem.

Mr. Feulner. I would hope we would not find the fund becoming a safety net under
the commercial banking system. The commercial banks have gone in and made loans,
presumably with their eyes open, and they really ought to be held accountable.
As a conservative, one thing I object to strenuously is the idea that there
ought to be more government subsidies or safety nets for major corporations or
banks.  They ought to suffer the results of their bad decisions.

Mr. Chenery. I would not disagree.

Senator Cranston. Nor would I.

Mr. Chenery. Our projections show the increase in debt slowing down. Between
1980 and 1985, we suggest, it will be still less; countries are adjusting to
higher oil prices and expectations of future increases.

Q. The problems are manageable?

Mr. Chenery. Not easy, but manageable. The effect of the present system is to
cause balance-of-payments deficits for some of the poorer countries much larger
than the total amount of development assistance or foreign aid. Most
industrialized countries are also in deficit and have reduced long-term
development aid. Sustaining the growth of the world economy is the best way out
of the crisis for all.

Some countries are able to adjust fairly rapidly to higher oil prices, with
private recycling lending. But there is no such mechanism for poor countries;
they're not creditworthy. So this part of the aid flow, whether bilateral or
multilateral, has to go on - unless we're going to have a (drastic) decline in
incomes. Per capita incomes in Africa have been declining for 10 years; part of
it is not very good economic management, but the other part is the phenomenon
I've mentioned.

Q. Mr. Feulner, how did your transition team view aid to the poorest countries?

Mr. Feulner. We favored continuation, to be done more efficiently through
private voluntary organizations. That and disaster relief are clear humanitarian
requirements.

Senator Cranston. Aid is never totally humanitarian, except perhaps disaster
relief. It contributes to stability we need.  Q. You would include refugee
assistance?

Senator Cranston. Absolutely. Also, the Export-Import Bank is a classic example
of a program in the foreign aid budget designed to serve our self-interest,
increase exports, strengthen the dollar and provide jobs and profits.

Mr. Feulner. A lot must be done in conjunction with our allies. If Japan was
doing what it should in terms of defense, it would be much easier for the United
States to do more in foreign aid.

Also, I mentioned collectivizing farms in Tanzania. If they want to try their
little experiments in so-called social progress, let them do it. But I don't
think they ought to ask American taxpayers, directly or indirectly, to subsidize
their utopianism.

Mr. Chenery. Let me give the other side of that. In any international system,
there has to be compromise. Each country has to give up a bit of its national
interest for the international interest. The international lending agencies are
a pretty good deal for the United States. The objectives are pretty close to the
objectives of the countries with which we have military alliances and these
countries are still the dominant element in many agencies.  Other countries give
up something for our point of view as well as our giving up something for
theirs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of economic help from U.S. Photo of Hollis Chenery
Photo of Alan Cranston Photo of Edward Feulner

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FORMAN FORMULA

BYLINE: By Tom Buckley; Tom Buckley is a member of the cultural staff of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5178 words


Terrorists have seized the Morgan Library. They have planted dynamite. The touch
of a plunger will destroy the building and its precious contents. Police and
troops line the streets outside. New York City is in turmoil. Coalhouse Walker
Jr., the leader of the terrorists, has sent away his confederates. He holds the
library alone. A man who befriended him long before has entered under a flag of
truce.  They sit, facing each other on gilded Renaissance thrones, while the man
begs Coalhouse to give himself up.

But the year is 1906, and they speak across an unbridgeable gulf - this young
black man, a pianist, driven to terrorism by injustice and outraged pride, and
the prosperous, decent, baf-fled white - and not so much in words as in stares
and pauses.

This is the next-to-last scene of the movie adaptation of ''Ragtime,'' the E.L.
Doctorow novel. It is being filmed at the Shepperton Studio outside London. The
vast sound stage is deeply shadowed, as though penetrated by the early December
darkness, but the set, a box within a box, is bathed in textured light.

Behind the camera stands Milos Forman, the director of the film and the man who
is trying to transform Doctorow's panorama of New York in the early years of
this century - a romantic pastiche of historical facts and personages and
fictional fancy - into a commercially successful motion picture.

This expatriate Czech may seem at first glance to be an odd choice for such an
assignment. He began making small-scale, gently satirical comedies that had to
pass hard-eyed Communist studio bosses and censors. Since coming to the United
States 12 years ago, he has made only three films - ''Tak-ing Off,'' ''One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' and ''Hair.'' All three, not coincidentally, have been
celebrations in one way or another of human freedom; each has been beautifully
crafted and has shown a remarkable grasp of the texture of American life.
''Cuckoo's Nest,'' moreover, was a critical as well as box-office hit that also
won five major Academy Awards. orman stands there, in the dimness beyond the
lights, gazing at Howard E. Rollins Jr., who plays Coalhouse Walker, and James
Olson, who plays the other character, identified only as Father, and murmurs,
''O.K., action.''

Olson leans forward in his chair. He waits a beat, two beats, three. Then,
tentatively, to Coalhouse: ''Shouldn't we tell them that we're coming?'' In a
rush of rage, Coalhouse exclaims, ''Get the hell out of here. Don't you
understand anything, white man?''

Olson must rise quickly, grab his hat and stumble out of the library. It is a
difficult series of movements. His first attempt is spoiled by the wobbling of
his chair. Sandbags are placed around the legs, out of camera range.

In the second take, Olson trips over his lines. Forman, puffing on a long cigar,
walks onto the set and puts his arm around Olson's shoulders. ''Give it a bit
more time,'' he says softly, ''like this.'' He leads Olson through the rising
and turning movement.

But another five takes are required before Forman is satisfied.  ''Good, very
good,'' Forman tells Olson and Rollins.  ''Ragtime'' was the publishing event of
1975 - enormous promotion, Book-of-the-Month Club main selection, best seller
for months, a $1.85 million paperback auction, awards and sale of the screen
rights for a reported $500,000 to Dino De Laurentiis, a producing colossus whose
films include the remake of ''King Kong'' and ''Superman.'' Robert Altman,
glowing with the success of ''Nashville,'' was signed to direct. The only
problem remaining, it seemed, was how to shelter the profits.

Within a year, despair replaced euphoria. There had been problems with the first
screenwriter and Doctorow was reluctantly adapting the novel himself. He and
Altman agreed that it would take several films to do justice to a cast of
characters that included such personages as J.P. Morgan, Henry Ford, Sigmund
Freud, Emma Goldman, Stanford White, Harry K. Thaw, Evelyn Nesbit and Harry
Houdini, along with Doctorow's own creations and Coalhouse Walker, who was
borrowed from Heinrich von Kleist's novella of 1808, ''Michael Kohlhaas.''

But then, when Altman refused to make changes in another film he and De
Laurentiis were working on together, ''Buffalo Bill and the Indians,'' De
Laurentiis dismissed Altman from ''Ragtime.'' Forman was hired, in part because
of the success of ''Cuckoo's Nest,'' to replace him. He brought in Bo Goldman,
who had collaborated on the rewrite of the ''Cuckoo's Nest'' screenplay. The
word soon began to go around that they were going to make Coalhouse Walker the
central figure of the film -which was scarcely astonishing since he is the
central figure of the novel -and that they believed they could do justice to the
subject in only two and a half hours.

Hearing this, Doctorow began to worry. Altman had given him a bit part in
''Buffalo Bill'' and despite the fact that it had turned out to be a gassy
critical and commercial failure, the two had formed an artistic alliance. They
tried to buy ''Ragtime'' from De Laurentiis.  He refused to sell. Doctorow then
announced that if his novel were to be turned into a virtual short subject he
would denounce the entire project.

Doctorow has now cooled off enough to reserve judgment until he sees the
completed film. In fact, he and Forman have since debated the subject of the
novel's film treatment before students at Columbia University, where Forman is a
professor and co-chairman of the film division. ''The final screenplay reflects
some suggestions I made,'' said Doctorow. ''Others were rejected. Milos and I
simply agreed to disagree.'' From the set Forman walked to the camper, one of
his perquisites, that stood in a corner of the sound stage. ''I tell Ed Doctorow
I will deal with the novel as he did with the historical material on which it is
based,'' he said as he sprawled on a couch, ruffling the ears of his Labrador
puppy. ''I tell him I am not going to illustrate 'Ragtime' as it is. It is too
sprawling,'' he continued. ''It must be focused. I decide we will concentrate on
three characters -Coalhouse Walker, Younger Brother and Evelyn Nesbit. We will
build them up, strengthen their mutual relationship, make it into a story.

''Once you decide to do a film, it becomes part of your life and you must do it
for your reasons, right or wrong. The less freedom you have to do this - to
shape it as you want according to your own imperatives - the more you are
destroying the movie.''

Forman spoke forcefully but dispassionately, not as the winner of an argument
but as a film maker dealing with a script problem. It is typical of him. In an
industry in which megalomania, ingratitude and duplicity are not uncommon,
Forman has a reputation for fair dealing and an absence of temperament that
borders on the phlegmatic. He even looks phlegmatic. He stands a burly 5 feet 11
inches and, at the age of 49, his appetite for good food, wine and the Pilsener
beer of his homeland tends to push his weight past his desired 170 pounds. He
has thick, curly dark hair and a strongly modeled face in which lines and
pouches are beginning to form. His expression is likely to be one of wary
amiability. While making a film, Forman usually wears, as he was that day, a
sweat suit and running shoes.

Forman's English is fluent, if not quite idiomatic, and his rumbling baritone
will probably always be covered, as though by a rich sauce, with a
middle-European accent. He pronounces his own name correctly - MEE-losh
FORRR-man - but ''love'' becomes ''luff''; ''pen'' becomes ''pan''; ''way,''
''vay'' and ''had,'' ''hat.'' Terminal ''g's'' are transformed into ''k's'' and
he rolls his ''r's'' like a snare drum.

''I read Doctorow's version,'' Forman said. ''Frankly, I found it very
confusing. So I asked Bo Goldman to rewrite it. Michael Weller was at that time
writing the 'Hair' screenplay. It is ready first so I do it. When I finish
'Hair,' Bo tells me he has lost interest in 'Ragtime,' so then I bring in
Michael.''

Weller, a 38-year-old playwright whose works include ''Moonchildren'' and
''Loose Ends,'' finished the first draft of ''Ragtime'' before showing it to
Forman. ''That way Milos is fresh and objective about it,'' Weller said.

They worked together for three months, mostly at Forman's country place in
northwestern Connecticut, on what became the final draft of the screenplay. ''We
never put on paper anything we don't both agree on,'' Forman said. ''In this
respect we are absolute equals. I wanted the Sunday sexual ritual between Mother
and Father, but Michael was not keen to show it, so it is not in the movie.'' he
script completed and with $28 million in production money lined up, Forman began
casting. ''I could have had O.J. Simpson as Coalhouse and George C.  Scott as
Father,'' Forman said. ''They both wanted to be in the movie, but I turn them
down. Not because I don't think they can play the roles. The trouble is the
opposite. They are too strong. They are not vulnerable enough.''

Once again, as he did in ''Hair,'' Forman bypassed big box-office names. Brad
Dourif, who plays the central role of Younger Brother, had made several films
besides ''Cuckoo's Nest,'' and Mary Steenburgen, who plays Dourif's older
sister, had done well in ''Goin' South,'' ''Time After Time'' and, more
recently, in ''Melvin and Howard,'' but theirs are not names that sell tickets.
Rollins had only a few stage credits before being cast as Coalhouse, and
Elizabeth McGovern, who plays Evelyn Nesbit, had had one previous movie role, as
the high-school friend of the troubled boy in ''Ordinary People.''

''You are trying through casting to find the performer who was born for the
part, and you know it as soon as he or she opens his mouth,'' Forman said. ''If
you are right, you practically don't have to talk to them anymore. You give them
the script, set them on the right track and away they go.''

Actors respond to Forman and his low-key methods. ''You get plenty of chance to
rehearse and become comfortable with your lines,'' Dourif said. ''If you're on
the money, he doesn't say much.''

Forman's great casting - and publicity - coup was to persuade the 76-year-old
James Cagney to end his 20-year retirement and play the important cameo role of
Police Commissioner Rhinelander Waldo.

''James has a farm in Stanfordville, N.Y., not very far from my place in
Connecticut and I used to see him socially,'' Forman said.  ''I knew that his
doctors had told him he ought to be more active, so I used to say to him, 'When
are you going back to work, James?' He would just be laughing. I showed him the
'Ragtime' script and I told him I thought he would be just right for Waldo. 'If
you decide to do it, you can still change your mind right up to the first day of
shooting,' I told him. That way he wasn't under any pressure.''

Norman Mailer was cast as Stanford White, architect of genius and the period's
leader of New York's haute Boheme. ''I am not afraid to use nonprofessionals,''
Forman said, ''and you must understand that what Stanford White was, socially
and culturally, at the beginning of the century, Norman is now. And with a
mustache and a wig Norman even looks like White.''

''Ragtime'' went into production in late August, with location shooting on the
Lower East Side, in the suburbs and on the Jersey Shore. In October, the company
moved to England for the filming of interiors and the major exterior, the Morgan
Library and Madison Avenue, where De Laurentiis believed it could be done more
cheaply.  In late December, Forman returned to New York to supervise
postproduction work for a scheduled release laterthis year.

Forman is well past the stage when his reputation or his hopes of prosperity are
riding on a single picture, but he is aware that the theme of ''Ragtime'' does
not automatically resonate in the breasts of young people from 16 to 30, who
make up the bulk of the audience for motion pictures in this country. ''So I'm
taking a chance,'' he said. ''Any movie you make you're taking a chance.''
Having lived under Nazi occupation and Communist dictatorship, Forman is perhaps
less worried than most directors about the vagaries of cinema success. He was
born, the youngest of three sons, in Caslav, a Bohemian town about 45 miles from
Prague, in 1932. His father was a professor at a teachers' college, an army
reserve officer and an official of the Boy Scouts. In 1941, he and Forman's
mother were arrested by the Gestapo. They never saw each other or their children
again. Both died in extermination camps in the 1940's. Milos and his brothers
were raised by an uncle and in foster homes.  Forman discussed the death of his
parents reluctantly and vaguely.  One or both of them, he said, may have been
part Jewish. Then again, they may not have been. In any event, the family was
not religious.  His father may have been seized because of membership in an
anti-Nazi group, and his mother, only because she was his wife. Or perhaps it
was all a mistake.

He seemed almost to dismiss the anguish of a 9-year-old boy separated from his
parents under such dreadful circumstances. ''When you are young, you adapt,'' he
said. ''I just was not aware of the tragedy at the time. For me the big
emotional revelation was when I read my parents' letters from the camps after
the war.

''I never wanted to seem to be taking advantage of what happened to them in any
way,'' he said. Then, apparently surprised by his next thought, he continued:
''I remember right after the war that some organization in England invited the
hundred most deprived children in Czechoslovakia to go there for a holiday. From
Caslav, the son of a Communist politician who had survived the war was picked. I
was ashamed - ashamed! - to find myself thinking, 'I deserve it more.  Both my
parents were killed.' ''

The war touched Caslav lightly, Forman recalled. There was little real hunger
and no fighting or bombing. From 1945 to 1948, when the Communists seized power,
Czechoslovakia had a coalition government, a mixed economy and a considerable
degree of freedom. ''I was lucky to be in high school at that time,'' Forman
said. ''You could see movies from the West, read any sort of books. You could
learn about everything.''

As a child, Forman said, his parents had taken him to see touring companies, and
ever after he had wanted a career in the theater, as a playwright or director.
When he was rejected by the drama institute of the University of Prague, he
enrolled in its film institute instead. Not long after his graduation in 1955,
he joined the staff of Laterna Magika, the combination of slides, wide-screen
film and live performance that became one of the hits of the Brussels World's
Fair in 1958.

''In 1961, we were all fired,'' Forman said. ''We were told we didn't have high
enough artistic and political goals. The real reason was that Laterna Magika
produced a lot of royalties and there was a new group in power that wanted to
put the money in their pockets.''

Forman bought a 16-millimeter movie camera and began filming his friends at an
experimental theater, merely to have a record of their work. Then, Nikita
Khrushchev, the ebullient Soviet leader, made a speech about providing
opportunity for youth. ''Naturally, they were listening very carefully in
Prague,'' he said with an edge of irony.  ''I took my little movie to the state
film studio. The door had always been closed before that, but now, thanks to
Khrushchev, I was hired.''

''Competition,'' as the movie about his actor friends was titled, was praised at
film festivals around the world. In 1963, Forman made ''Black Peter,'' which
dealt with a teen-ager growing up in a provincial town much like Caslav. Its
showing at the Montreal Film Festival led to his first trip to North America.

''I came with Ivan Passer, who is one of my oldest friends and who is now also a
director in the United States,'' Forman recalled. ''He and I had collaborated on
the script of 'Black Peter' at Karlovy Vary (Carlsbad). There are only two golf
courses in Czechoslovakia - one at Karlovy Vary and one at Marienbad. Passer and
I learned how to play golf while we were writing the script. We weren't very
good, but we loved it.

''When we got to Montreal we were greeted by a committee of leftists, naturally.
They asked us, 'How can we entertain you?' When Passer and I said we wanted to
play golf, the total capitalist sport, they looked at us like we fell out of the
moon. Well, they wanted to be good hosts, so they got us a game and walked
around the course with us, but they didn't like it. I will tell you something
else. I saw several of them again the last time I was in Montreal.'' Forman
paused and then added with a robust laugh, ''Now they play golf, too.''

Forman's international reputation was secured with ''Loves of a Blonde'' and
''The Fireman's Ball,'' which were shown at the New York Film Festival in 1966
and 1968, respectively. Like ''Black Peter,'' they cast an affectionate eye on
the lives of ordinary people and sank a satirical harpoon into pompous
bureaucrats. Too deeply, as it turned out. The country's firemen thought it
lacked respect for them. Worse yet, the Czech President, Antonin Novotny, hated
it and refused to permit it to be shown at home.

The ''Prague Spring,'' that period of artistic and political liberalization in
which Czech film makers flourished, was ending, and it was Forman's good fortune
that in August 1968, when Russian tanks rolled into the capital, he was in
Paris.

Even so, Forman said, he might well have gone back. His first marriage had ended
in divorce and he was separated from his second wife, Vera Kresadlova, one of
the country's leading singers and actresses, but their twin sons, then 4 years
old, were with her and Forman did not want to be separated from them, perhaps
permanently.

''It turned out that it was not my decision to make,'' Forman said. ''My studio
sent me a letter saying I was fired. If I go back, I will be a nonperson, so I
have no choice, and I decide to stay in the West.''

Forman soon headed for New York, where he rented an apartment on Leroy Street in
Greenwich Village. ''After I am here for a few months, I apply for a green card
so I can work,'' he said.  ''Immigration asks the Directors Guild for its
opinion. The guild says there is not enough work for the directors who are here
already. It is a terrible situation. Then Mike Nichols and Paddy Chayefsky and
Buck Henry and Sidney Lumet did a wonderful thing for me. They wrote letters and
went to see important members of the guild, and finally it reversed itself and
Immigration says I can work here.''

It was the time of protests over the Vietnam War, of hippies and flower power,
of marijuana, psychedelic drugs and sexual freedom.  Forman's observations of
the life around him produced the idea for his first American film. It was
''Taking Off,'' an amusing and touching account of a young woman who leaves her
suburban home to live in the East Village, and Buck Henry was a member of the
cast.

Originally, Paramount Pictures wanted to make the movie but eventually lost
interest in it. To Forman's dismay, the studio made what he said was the highly
unusual demand that he return $140,000 in development costs, only a small
fraction of which had even gone to him. Indeed, he said, Universal, which
finally made ''Taking Off,'' had to settle Paramount's claim for $70,000.

By and large, the critics liked ''Taking Off,'' and it won the special jury
prize at the Cannes Film Festival in 1971. However, it failed to find an
audience, and though it cost less than $1 million, it lost money.

This disappointment, combined with the difficulties of adjusting to a new life
and learning to speak a new language, led Forman to something close to a nervous
breakdown. ''I stayed in bed, but I had insomnia,'' Forman said, with
uncharacteristic emotion. ''For the first time in my life, I couldn't sleep. I
was terrified. I didn't know who to trust. I felt cheated, betrayed. I was 38
years old and I thought I had collected the necessary information to live my
life.  Suddenly I learned that it is worth nothing. Nothing!''

And yet, Forman cannot resist laughing at himself when he recalls this difficult
period. While he stayed in bed in the flat on Leroy Street, Ivan Passer kept
urging him to consult a psychiatrist. ''I wouldn't do it, but Passer, without
telling me, used to go. He would pretend that he had my symptoms. Then he would
come back and give me the advice the doctor gave to him.''

''Taking Off'' at least proved that Forman could make a picture on schedule and
on budget, and scripts continued to arrive at his apartment. His depression
probably made the scripts seem worse than they were. He turned everything down,
and his own projects rose, expanded and popped like so many soap bubbles.

''I was penniless, living mostly on canned chili, and I needed desperately
$5,000 to pay bills, but I could not persuade myself to make these junk
scripts,'' he said. ''It was a paralyzing dilemma.

''One day I got a call from a rich Czech in Houston,'' he went on.  ''He asked
me if I wanted to make $500 and expenses giving a lecture at the university
there. I flew down the next day. I gave the lecture and afterward this man asked
me if I wanted to fly with him to Las Vegas in his private plane. He said I
could fly back to New York from there the next morning. I said, 'No, I want to
go back to New York.' He said, 'You can fly back from Vegas tomorrow morning.
Come on. It won't cost you a penny.'

''So there I am at midnight at Caesars Palace. I have the $500 check in my
pocket, but I promise myself I will not touch it. At 1 A.M, I can't resist any
longer. I cash the check. By 3 A.M., I am broke again. I find my rich friend at
the baccarat table. I tell him I have lost everything. He says he is losing
$7,300 himself. I say to him, 'Give me $500 to bet on red. If I lose, you are
out only another $500. If I win, I will give you back your $500 and I will have
the $500 I started with.' He turns me down, and I fly back to New York with my
pockets empty. I have to borrow cab fare from him.''

Although these anecdotes seem to come right out of a Middle European farce,
Passer, who came to the United States with Forman and is himself a busy film and
television director, insists they are true. ''It was even funnier,'' he said.
''When I finally told Milos what I was doing, he wanted to know what we were
talking about. I would tell him and he would say, 'No, I wouldn't say that.' It
got so that he would rehearse me before every visit. 'Tell him this, tell him
that.' By then I knew he was O.K.''

Passer said that he and Forman had been friends since school days.  ''He was 14
and I was 12 1/2,'' he said. ''He was always first in everything. I never knew
anybody who had 'winner' painted on his forehead the way Milos did. Even then,
he spoke little of his parents, but it must have been a very traumatic
experience for him.  You can see it. At the heart of his pictures is almost
always a family or the lack of it, and the parents are inadequate in one way or
another.''

By 1974, Forman said, he had roused himself sufficiently to drive to the West
Coast and back to see the parts of his adopted country that lie between
Hollywood and the Village. He moved to the Chelsea Hotel on West 23d Street and,
he said, ''one morning I received a book in the mail. It came from Michael
Douglas. It was Ken Kesey's 'One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.' This was an
amazing coincidence, because in 1965 or 1966 I met Kirk Douglas, Michael's
father, when he was on a good-will visit to Prague, and he saw one of my movies.
A couple of weeks later I got a letter from Kirk, who had appeared in the stage
adaptation of 'Cuckoo's Nest,' saying that he was sending me a copy of the book,
but it never arrived. So here I had it at last, almost 10 years later. Michael
had liked 'Taking Off,' and he asked me if I wanted to do 'Cuckoo's Nest,' which
he was coproducing, and I said I did, very, very much.''

The film made a sweep of the top Academy Awards in 1975: best picture, best
director, Jack Nicholson for best actor, Louise Fletcher for best actress and
Lawrence Hauben and Bo Goldman for best screenplay adaptation. In 1979 came
''Hair,'' a brilliant restaging of the long-running stage success of 1968 that
had seemed as dated as ''Blossom Time.'' The reviews were generally splendid,
but receipts for the movie were disappointing, although Forman thinks that it
will eventually make a little money.  Whenever he can spare an hour or two,
Forman supervises the selection and assemblage of scenes made earlier, and late
one afternoon, while a new shot was being set up, he hurried to the editing
room.

Images danced across the screen on the Steenbock editing table and then danced
back as the film was reversed. There was Cagney, wearing a handlebar mustache
and wire-rim spectacles, in command of the siege of the library. His features
have thickened but his voice still vibrates with the energy of the Cagney of
old.

''I am not saying that James should be President of the United States. I am
saying he should be king of the United States,'' Forman exclaimed. ''I thought
he was wonderful since I was in film school in Prague, but I don't know how
wonderful. He is a performing genius!  Ask him for any little variation in a
scene and he is right on the mark. And a pleasure to work with. He never wanted
to inconvenience anyone. I knew he has sciatica, so I say to him, 'James, you
must tell me if you are having any pain and then we stop.' But he works five,
six hours at a stretch and he never complains.

''The most inspiring thing is his generosity to other performers,'' Forman
continued. ''I wish every young actor and actress could learn it. He can be so
moved by a good performance.  After his scene with Moses Gunn, who plays Booker
T. Washington, James was almost in tears.''

Back on the set, Miloslav Ondricek, who taught Forman how to use his first movie
camera and has been the cinematographer on all of his movies but ''Cuckoo's
Nest,'' was not yet ready to begin filming.  While he waited, Forman began
talking about the development of his film technique, in which pragmatism has
gradually come to replace theory.

''When I was a teen-ager, I loved poetry,'' he said. ''I read it and I wrote it.
Then I read Balzac, Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky. That was for me it. It is the same
thing when you make films. At first you are fascinated to get on the screen
things you don't usually see.  Gradually you understand the importance of having
a good, interesting story. The great danger in a movie is to be boring. Without
a story, even with the most incredible artistry, you will be boring. Without a
story there is no movie, but you can enhance the story with the choice and size
of the images, the angles, and so on, but it is very difficult to explain why
you pick one shot over another.

''I still don't write the camera angles into the screenplay,'' he continued.
''It's too theoretical. Before I decide how I'm going to make the shot, I want
to see the set, rehearse the actors, talk to Ondricek, who is a brilliant
technician with an innocent, poetic eye. Almost always it will be the simplest,
most direct, to the me the most cinematic way. You will never see me showing
someone's face reflected in a doorknob or anything like that. Such things call
attention to themselves. They are distracting to the audience.''

In Czechoslovakia, Forman said, he never showed the entire script to his actors
before filming began and, indeed, would give them their lines for each scene
only on the day it was to be shot. ''I did this partly because the script was
always such a mess that they wouldn't believe I could make a picture out of
it,'' he said with a gust of laughter. ''Also I didn't want them to lose their
spontaneity by spending hours memorizing their lines.''

As his style has become, in his words, ''more classical,'' he has abandoned this
technique, relying instead on the skills of his performers and on his own
direction to preserve the sense of spontaneity in speeches that may have to be
repeated five or 10 times.  Forman became an American citizen in 1977. The
framed certificate of naturalization hangs in his apartment on Central Park
South. It merely formalizes the completion of an internal process.  Even in
Czechoslovakia, it might be said, Forman was an American at heart, distrustful
of authority, of all-embracing social doctrines, of the crippling insistence
that art conform to ideology.

Forman says that he is often asked how he could have learned so much so quickly
about his adopted country. One reason, he thinks, is that he has never immured
himself in Hollywood. Instead, he has continued to live in New York and to
travel widely.

Another reason may be that until ''Ragtime'' he limited himself to subjects
about which he had personal experience. ''Taking Off'' grew out of his days in
Greenwich Village. ''Hair'' deals with the same period and the same sort of
young people. In ''Cuckoo's Nest,'' McMurphy, who is confined in a mental
institution, remains unawed by authority. For that matter, the leading
characters of ''Ragtime'' - the black man driven to terrorism, his idealistic
white accomplice, the reckless young woman - all have had their analogues among
the Weather Underground, the Black Panthers and other organizations of the
recent past.

Then, too, there is Forman's belief that rebellious young people and their
baffled parents, for example, are not widely different, whether encountered in
Prague, Paris, New York or the West Coast, and that sympathetic observation and
imagination can extract the universals in human conduct no matter where his
characters happen to find themselves.

After all of his vicissitudes, Forman himself seems to have sailed into water as
calm as a film director is likely to find. ''Cuckoo's Nest'' gave him financial
security, he is in demand, he lives a happy bachelor's existence, enlivened by
the presence of many young women much good food, and skiing at Lake Tahoe, where
he has a rented pied-a-terre.

He remains close to his sons, Matej and Petr, who are now 16. He visits them in
Prague and they spend their summers with him in this country. For this reason,
he has tried to stay on good terms with the Czech Government, declining to make
public comments about its policies or about politics in general, aside from his
devotion to the United States.

''It is people like us, the ones who were not born here, who really appreciate
this country,'' he said. ''When you have an idea for a movie and you get turned
down by one studio you can always go to another. You can argue. You can fight.
In Czechoslovakia, 'no' means 'no.' I was moved to tears when I found those
magical words 'the pursuit of happiness' in the Declaration of Independence. I
knew exactly what the men who wrote it meant. Not 'the right to happiness,'
which doesn't exist, but the right to pursue it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Forman and James Cagney photo of Forman and
Eliabeth McGovern photo of Forman and Norman Mailer photo of Miroslav Ondricek
photo of Jack Nicholson photo of Buck Henry photo of Forman and his sons photo
from 'Ragtime'

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LAOTIANS IN A NEW LAND

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5266 words


Mike Norman is a writer based in Lawrenceville, N.J. By Mike Norman The
Sithavadys are here. The Laotian family arrived at 2 A.M. on Feb. 29, the
coldest day of the winter, but their apartment in the Robert Lee (formerly
Lawson) House is cozy and warm.  - The Lyme Church News, Lyme, N.H., March 1980.
One winter has passed and another is almost spent, but still she cannot seem to
bear the chill from the frozen road beneath her feet.  On this particular raw
and frigid afternoon, Paphanh Sithavady is on her way to pick up some groceries.
She walks quickly. Her arms are clutched to her chest and her neck is drawn down
into her jacket, as if she were trying to take refuge inside herself.

Turning onto Main Street, the center of town opens before her. On the left is a
long oval common with a cannon at one end, a Civil War monument at the other and
a flagpole in the middle. On the right is the Congregational Church, and just
beyond that is her destination, Zane Campbell's Country Store. She mounts the
steps and passes quickly through the door. Campbell, a burly, imposing man, is
behind the cash register. Paphanh collects her items and presents them for
payment. She is a short, dark woman with a gentle, almost serene, countenance.
She smiles at the proprietor and offers him a friendly nod, but does not, as is
the custom in these parts, make small talk about her family or the weather. When
the English language is still somewhat of a mystery, idle conversation is
awkward, and it is sometimes better to say nothing at all than to make your new
neighbors uncomfortable. She completes her business quickly and politely, trying
to remain as unobtrusive as a Laotian refugee possibly can in a small New
England town.

Later, when she is gone, Zane Campbell turns from his register and says, ''You
know, we had a fire last year and she was here with the others helping us clean
up. When we built the new place, her husband offered to help paint it. I'm a
hard-nosed Yankee, but I appreciated that. Guess I'm not a great approver of
foreign people coming into this country, but that family has proved they have
courage. They've won people's respect.''

Many in this place of rolling hills and deep hollows share the storekeeper's
sentiments, but others are less enthusiastic about having Laotian refugees -or
any refugees, for that matter - as neighbors. And a few people are still
downright angry about it.

Paphanh Sithavady, her husband, Thongdam, and their three children came to Lyme,
N.H. - a town of 1,290, just across the Vermont state line, hard by the
Connecticut River - a year ago today. They are among the more than 450,000
Indochinese refugees who have emigrated to America since the fall of South
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos to Communist forces in 1975. These displaced people
can now be found in every state in the country. The Government officials who
monitor the refugees say that, while 49 percent of them receive some form of
public assistance, they have for the most part easily worked their way into the
current of American life.

Like many of their fellow refugees, the Sithavadys made a perilous escape from
their country and lived in the squalor of a displacedpersons camp. In their year
in the United States, they have struggled with loneliness and isolation, with
sickness and disease, with the enigmas of a new culture and with a climate that
tests even those who have lived in it all their lives. They have been the
objects of suspicion, fear and a general anxiety caused by hard times, but they
have also been the beneficiaries of generosity and kindness, and have come to
look upon this small New Hampshire village as home.

Since they've been here such a short time and speak only enough English to get
them through the day, their impressions of this country and their memories of
the past have been supplied by others - an interpreter and their American
sponsors who have worked with them daily for months. From what everyone says, it
is clear that Paphanh and Thongdam have changed, but then, so has the town to
which they came that icy winter morning 365 days ago.  As happens so often in
the north country, the elements affected the course of events. ''The gasline in
our car froze, so we were about half an hour late getting to Logan Airport (in
Boston) to pick them up,'' recalls Maura High. ''On the ride down, I felt more
an expectant mother than a sponsor. I was anxious about how they'd turn out,
what they'd be like, what sort of state they'd be in.''

Maura High and her husband, Colin, have lived in Lyme for four years. She is 33
years old, an energetic Welsh immigrant with two small girls and a master's
degree in teaching English as a second language. The pictures of wan, sick and
frightened refugee children she saw on posters and television prompted her to
help organize the Lyme Refugee Sponsorship Committee, an organization of
community volunteers.

Driving to the airport that night of Feb. 28, 1980, Maura realized how little
she knew about the family waiting for her. It had been selected by the American
Fund for Czechoslovak Refugees, one of 10 international agencies that arrange
for the resettlement of Indochinese refugees. A representative of the fund had
told Maura that the family was ethnic Lao, one of several ethnic and tribal
groups that populate Laos. Thongdam, the father, was 35 years old; Paphanh, the
mother, 31. He had worked as an electrician in his own appliancerepair shop in
Vientiane. She had hawked vegetables in an open market. They had three children:
Sinprasath, a 6-year-old boy, Phonprapha, a 5-year-old girl, and Khanthana, a
2-year-old boy. They were scheduled to arrive on the East Coast of the United
States shortly before 10 P.M.

It was almost 11 P.M. by the time Maura and Colin High parked their car. They
made their way to an airport waiting room in which roughly 40 people, mostly
Laotians, were milling about. Seated in the middle of this gathering was what
Maura recalled as ''a forlorn figure'' holding a white card with the markings
''T-18260'' on it. ''It was Thongdam,'' said Maura. ''He was holding the number
the refugee fund had assigned so we could identify the family. We walked up to
them and said hello. I was surprised they didn't look more like the famine
posters. Thongdam even had on a watch. I guess I was a little disappointed, but
then it seemed it wouldn't be so hard to Westernize them.'' Paphanh Sithavady,
too, recalled those first few hours: ''I remember when I stepped out of the
airplane, I was excited, but I was scared. It was so cold. I remember the cold
most of all. Everything was so different. I didn't know what our future would
be. I thought about home, about Laos, but I knew I could not go back.''

Not that she wanted to. By the spring of 1979, when the Sithavadys decided to
make their escape, Laos had been under Communist rule for nearly four years.
Thongdam, who had once served as a soldier in the former Royal Laotian
Government, feared he had been marked for ''political re-education.'' He and
Paphanh planned their flight carefully. They agreed that Thongdam should go
first, that with a friend he would try to swim the Mekong River to Thailand and
safety.  If he survived, he would somehow send word back and Paphanh and the
children would follow. If not, they would stay in Vientiane, alone but alive.
They knew that escape was a dangerous enterprise.  Paphanh's younger brother and
sister had attempted to flee and had been killed. The girl had been gunned down
in a boat, her corpse dumped on the bank of the river. The family cremated her
there, chanting prayers on the sand. The boy's body was still missing.

Early one evening, Thongdam left for the river. A month and a half later,
Paphanh received word through a smuggler that he was safe in the camp at Nong
Khai. Now it was her turn. On May 13, 1979, she packed a few things, gathered
her three small children together and, after a nine-hour walk, arrived at the
banks of the Mekong. In the darkness, she stole a small fishing boat and loaded
her family aboard. She remembers that there were bodies floating nearby in the
river. Her youngest son started to cry. She stuffed his mouth with rags to
muffle the noise.

The reunited family spent nine months in the camp at Nong Khai.  There was talk
there about California and the Lao who had gone there. People said it was a warm
place filled with lush orchards and valleys. Thongdam told his wife they should
go to California. But the American refugee agents in the camp, who place
refugees where there are openings, had scheduled his family for a trip to a less
hospitable clime.  Do you want to offer major help (to resettle a Southeast
Asian refugee family)? That is indeed a major undertaking. We would have to
begin by finding a house and a job for the family. But the undertaking seems to
me very worthwhile ... Is sponsoring a family a good idea? A bad idea? Are you
willing to help? Please call me at home -Carola Lea.  - The Lyme Church News,
November 1979.  Carola Lea, now 36 years old, is a tall, outwardly shy woman who
has lived in Lyme for 11 years and has a way of persuading others to do things
they might normally resist. In 1966, after she was graduated from Sarah Lawrence
College, she married Sydney Lea, founder and editor of the literary quarterly
The New England Review.  Two years later, she had an automobile accident and lay
in critical condition in a coma for three weeks. She recovered, but the process
was long and slow and, in the end, the accident left her with a speech defect.
It was this brush with death and its aftermath, says her husband, that gave
Carola Lea ''an enormous capacity to empathize with people in trouble'' -people
like homeless refugees.

Thus it was that she came to write an item for The Lyme Church News, the monthly
bulletin of the local Congregational Church and the Baptist Church, and the
town's unofficial newspaper. Almost everyone in town reads the newsletter, and
it seemed as if Lyme might be the kind of place where a family in need would be
welcome.

Like other small towns and villages in New England, Lyme long ago ceased to be a
closed enclave of Yankee farmers and woodcutters. But it is still a homogeneous,
virtually all-white community. The natives, many of whom are descendants of the
town's original settlers, have been joined in recent years by newcomers -
doctors, lawyers, professors and skilled workers -who hold jobs in the larger
cities south of town, among them Hanover, N.H., roughly 10 miles away and the
home of Dartmouth College and Mary Hitchcock Hospital.

By everyone's account, Lyme is a nice place to live; idyllic, say some. The town
sponsors a full program of community activities and both native and newcomer
alike keep alive the small-town tradition of being neighborly. Last July, after
Zane Campbell's store burned to the ground, his neighbors got together and
raised $8,000 to help him rebuild and start over. And when two farmers lost
their barns to fire, people came running with strong backs, tools at the ready
and livestock to replace what was lost.

But when a town faces the prospect of change, its reputation and traditions are
often put to the test, and the idea of opening their doors to a family of
frightened and bewildered refugees did not sit well with some of Lyme's good
neighbors.

The item that Carola Lea wrote for The Church News drew only one telephone call.
She was disappointed but hardly deterred, and managed to persuade a small group
of people, among them Maura High, to work with her. Quickly, the two became
friends and a very effective team. In short order, they formed the Lyme
Community Sponsorship Committee. Though more than 60 people volunteered to work
on the committee, it remained in Carola's and Maura's control, and when trouble
first appeared, it came directly to them.

In December 1979, Syd Lea received an anonymous telephone call at his office
telling him that if his wife insisted on pursuing her idea, the Leas would one
day come home and find a pile of charred rubble where their house used to be. No
one took the threat seriously, ''but that incident'' said Maura High, ''made us
extremely cautious about public opinion.''

To win some of that community approval, the two women turned to the Lyme
Congregational Church. Neither was a member, but like almost everyone else in
town, they had been there often. The church, with its potluck suppers four times
a year and other activities, serves as a kind of town center and gathering
place. It is Lyme's foremost institution, and Maura and Carola wanted its
sanction, wanted its cloak draped around the committee.

The pastor of the Congregational Church (and the Baptist Church), the Rev. Dr.
Jeffrey Atwater, at first supported the project but then seemed to pull back.
''Maybe it's a cop-out,'' he said, ''but I had rationalized in my own mind that
people from Southeast Asia just wouldn't want to come this far north.'' And
Maura High got the impression from the church members she talked with that they
felt ''the project was too difficult, would take too much time, too much
expertise and was too alien.'' As for the church's board of trustees, its main
objection was money. It did not want to be held financially responsible for a
refugee family. ''Our budget did not have the stretch to support them,'' said
Dr. Atwater. But at a December 1979 meeting of the board, a lawyer working with
the committee managed to convince the trustees that all his group wanted was the
use of the church's name, its good will in the community and its tax-exempt
status to collect donations.

The commitee's fund drive went well. More than a hundred people, most of them
from town, donated more than $4,000 to rent an apartment and provide the support
the refugees would surely need during their first months in Lyme. But church
backing did little to still the voices of fear and discontent. One such voice
belonged to someone whom Carola Lea had known for years. ''First it was the
blacks in this country,'' the person said, ''now these people. Pretty soon
there'll be nothing left for the folks this land really belongs to.''

Then, a few weeks later, Betty Lee, a volunteer tutor on the committee, was
shopping in the Country Store and overheard a conversation in the next aisle:
''Someone was saying, 'Why can't we just send the money to the refugees and let
them stay in their own country? For God's sake, why do we have to bring them
over here?' Well, I went over to the person and said, 'Look, they've lost their
country. There's no place but here for them to go.' '' The apartment is small
and crowded, the furniture worn, and the rug tattered in places, but the
Sithavadys have said that this is their haven, their first home in a new land,
and for now they want to stay where they are. The five of them sleep on two
double beds in the bedroom and take their meals around the corner on a kitchen
table in a long hallway. On the mantel in the bedroom is a gold frame that holds
two pictures of Buddhist monks cut from an old copy of Time magazine. The
Sithavadys can no longer practice Theravada Buddhism, but they have not
abandoned its precepts. One such tenet holds that a misdeed in this life can
affect the shape and course of the next.  In the language of a New England
Christian, a man reaps what he sows. For a year now, the Sithavadys have been
trying to sow good things and, says Pathanh, they have often looked to Buddha
for help.

The first days were the hardest. One night, Paphanh decided to do some wash and
scurried to hang it up, outside in near-zero-degree weather. The next morning,
when she went to collect it, she screamed. Her clothes were wood hard and welded
by ice to the line. Nothing like that had ever happened in Laos.

Even the most basic matters seemed to carry complications. The Sithavadys were
able more or less to duplicate their traditional diet - with Oriental cooking in
fashion, most items were available in the supermarkets in Hanover - so they did
not have to subject their systems to the test of alien cuisine, but they had
carried with them from the camp an array of intestinal parasites and for several
weeks were beset with cramps and internal frenzy. Then, a routine state health
examination that all refugees are required to undergo indicated that Paphanh had
recently come in contact with tuberculosis. X-rays showed that she did not have
the disease, but health officials ordered her to take a course of preventive
medication anyway.

No one in town, other than Maura, Carola and a few committee volunteers, knew of
these matters. ''We kept that to ourselves,'' said Maura. ''There was no point
in causing undue alarm.'' A few weeks later, however, the lid came off.
Phonprapha, the 5-year-old girl, contracted infectious hepatitis and was
hospitalized in nearby Hanover.

Everyone was worried: the Sithavadys, the committee and, most especially, the
parents of Phonprapha's kindergarten classmates, who were advised by the school
nurse to have their children take precautionary injections of immune serum
globulin to prevent the spread of the disease. As it turned out, Phonprapha was
the only one infected. She recovered quickly, the crisis passed and health
officials assured the town it was safe for the young refugee girl to return to
school.

The months that followed were less dramatic. The Sithavadys worked at part-time
jobs in a warehouse and cleaning homes, but they still needed help from the
committee to pay their rent and meet expenses.  In school, their children seemed
to thrive. Teachers reported they were eager and bright, and, with a little
extra help, they quickly picked up the basic rudiments of the language. Paphanh
and Thongdam took English lessons several times a week from volunteer tutors and
were shuttled about Lyme by Carola Lea, who was determined to introduce them to
the town and vice versa. Along the way, they encountered people who reached out
to them. Each act of kindness, no matter how small, was recorded in items Carola
wrote for The Lyme Church News. ''It was our way of keeping the town feeling
good about the project,'' said Maura. Though written to win hearts and minds,
these items also provide a glimpse of life in small-town America, a life the
Sithavadys seem to have embraced: ''We had a welcome party for the Sithavadys at
this month's potluck supper.'' ''Caryl Miller made the family feel at home when
we went to observe ice fishing. Wayne and Shirley Tullar welcomed them during a
visit to Berway Farm.'' ''Margaret Putnam will take Paphanh to the laundromat
and Ethel Woodward will take her grocery shopping.'' ''Bob Wickware has begun
gardening with Thongdam and Paphanh. Bob Lee has rototilled their plot.''
''Thanks to Bill Nichols, the Sithavadys have not had to spend much for
groceries. He has kept them supplied with fish he has caught at Post Pond.''
''Almost every morning, Paphanh and the children are down at the pond.
Phonprapha and Sinprasath are taking swimming lessons and Khanthana is swinging
and building sand castles with the other toddlers.''

If the refugees felt cut off from their own culture, they did not speak of it.
They accepted the advice and direction of their sponsors, who tried to teach
them Occidental philosophy, a New England Occidental philosophy.

''I told them you have to have a sweet dream, as we say in Thai, and if your
sweet dream is money, you have to work for it,'' says Srimalai Nichols, a
36-year-old native of Thailand who came to Lyme in 1969 when she married her
husband, Bill Nichols. The two met in Thailand while Bill was in the Army.
Srimalai was familiar with the language of the Lao, so when the Sithavadys first
arrived, she agreed to act as their interpreter. In the last year, she has
become much more - a friend and mistress of cultural re-education. She preaches
a Yankee doctrine of frugality, common sense and self-reliance, characteristics
highly valued in Lyme.

''They said they had a friend who was a refugee and was given money by the
Government,'' Srimalai continued. ''Their friend didn't have to get a job for
two years. Old people gave them a car. I told them their friend was spoiled. I
told them about welfare. I don't like welfare. I say to them that refugees who
eat on welfare are not good people. They don't change. They don't learn very
much.''

One of her first lessons to Thongdam was in economics: ''He came to my house and
he was smoking. As soon as he got out of the car, he lit up a cigarette. I
thought to myself, why is he smoking when he can't support his family on the
money he earns? I told him to quit.'' Thongdam, a quiet but proud man who says
little even to Srimalai, obeyed.

After that, Srimalai moved on to more personal matters. Once the family was
settled and working, Maura High decided to bring up the subject of birth
control: ''We knew it was a delicate subject, both personally and in terms of
its broader social implications. But we thought that, because of their financial
condition, it might be best if they didn't have more children. We wanted them to
make the decision.'' Srimalai, called in to help with the problem, advocated a
vasectomy. She pointed out that her husband had chosen the procedure, that it
was safe and economical. But Thongdam balked. ''He was worried that the
operation was going to affect his mind,'' said Srimalai. ''He told me he thought
it would make him crazy. I said, 'Is Bill crazy? Don't worry about that. Go
ahead and have it.' ''

Thongdam did, and the operation was a success.  It is late afternoon and the
giant, four-color press at the Dartmouth Printing Company in Hanover is roaring
through its second run of the day. Four men, all wearing industrial noise
mufflers, attend the machine. Thongdam is standing at the mouth of the press,
taking piles of articles as they come off the line and stacking them on a dolly
by his side. He is working full time now, 40 hours a week plus overtime, at
$3.85 an hour. His stacking job is one step up from the janitor's, and his
supervisor, Doug Mattison, thinks he would be better off pushing a broom.

''At least that way,'' says Mattison, ''he'd have to talk to people. The
language is a problem. He's a good, hard, willing worker but, to learn the next
job up the line, he needs to know more English. Right now, we just can't explain
it to him. The way it is, he'll stand there all night and never say three words,
and even if he did, what with the noise of the presses, no one would hear him.''

The language is always the problem. Maura High tutors Thongdam two times a week,
but progress has been slow. He is by nature a man who keeps to himself and thus
has little opportunity to practice what he has learned.

He got his job in September through Mike Smith, the company's president and
Lyme's town auditor. ''When the Vietnam War was over, the aftermath left me with
a guilty, moral feeling that many people had,'' said Smith. ''I made contact
with Thongdam and had him go through the interviewing process. But he really
didn't compete on the open market for the job because, emotionally, I was
leaning toward him. Ordinarily, with his language problem, he wouldn't have
gotten it.''

Few people in town were aware of Smith's generosity, but everyone knew that
Thongdam had got a good job with a respected company - a good job, said some,
that rightfully belonged to an American. For the most part, the discontent was
not racial. Rather, the family became the focus of a more general feeling that
refugees nationwide were putting extra weight on an already overburdened
economy.

''It's nothing against the family themselves,'' said Wayne Pike, a descendant of
one of Lyme's first families and a local building contractor. ''I heard they
were decent folks and hard workers. But we've got high enough unemployment in
this country. For every refugee you bring in, it takes a job away from a
legalized citizen. What gets me is that these are hard times for everyone, and a
lot of our paycheck goes for paying for the Cubans, Mexicans or anyone else they
bring into this country.''

The committee could do nothing to defuse the discontent about the national
economy, but it could point out a few facts about local unemployment. Fred
Pearce, a jewelry designer and craftsman in Lyme who is teaching Paphanh his
trade, said, ''No one was beating down our door to take her job. And besides,
there are certain people in town I wouldn't hire. Come hunting season or fishing
time, they're up and take off. They work if they feel like it and if not, they
won't.''

The Sithavadays, of course, did not divide the town against itself. They simply
brought to the surface its split personality. Says Syd Lea, ''You'll find a lot
of Yankee bullheadedness and professional xenophobia here, but there's also a
lot of courage, decency and integrity in this town.'' Thongdam has been able to
buy himself a car - not a very glamorous one, but it runs and he is able to
drive to work, to the stores, the schools, the doctor and the dentist. I bet Bob
Lee and Jerry Wheeler who owned the garage next door to the Sithavadys never
imagined the kind of discussions they've had with Thongdam about antifreeze and
snow tires.  - The Lyme Church News, December 1980.  The car was a 1971 Plymouth
compact. It cost $50 and looked it.  Maura High spent hours with Thongdam trying
to unravel the mysteries of the New Hampshire driving manual, and Colin High
took Thongdam on the road, a mission that called for unusual valor. ''I guess in
Laos they're rather casual about stop signs and changing lanes,'' said Colin.
''Thongdam brought some of that casualness with him. We had some exciting
moments.''

No one, however, was able to explain successfully to Thongdam the difference
between a learner's permit, the holder of which is required to have a licensed
driver with him, and a full-fledged license. One day, learner's permit in hand,
Thongdam decided to go for a drive on his own - an illegal drive on his own. Bob
Lee, in the garage next door, spotted him and rushed for the telephone to call
Maura. When Thongdam returned, Maura was waiting -angry, frustrated and almost
out of control.

''I went up to him and banged him on the head. I blew my top. I said, 'Thongdam!
Thongdam, why do you do this? People will think you're stupid.' I was afraid he
was going to get arrested. Later, I calmed down. I think he felt dumb having to
be chided by a woman.  After that, driving became a matter of pride to him. When
he finally got his license, his morale shot up. He went right over to the
driving examiner, shook his hand and bowed.''

Despite the new mobility, the Sithavadays have kept mostly to themselves. During
the fall, Paphanh's older brother and his family, who had also escaped to a
refugee camp, resettled in White River Junction, Vt., 15 miles from Lyme, so the
family spends many weekends with them. But in town, the only people they see
regularly are their sponsors, tutors and one or two committee members who have
become friends. ''We like to be with people,'' Paphanh said, ''but we're afraid
they might not like us to be around. We don't want to bother them.'' It is a
Saturday night dinner party and the guests in Carola Lea's apartment are
greedily attacking an Indochinese feast of meat, fish and vegetable dishes. The
meal has been prepared by Paphanh and Srimalai, who gracefully accept the
compliments of all assembled.  After the last shrimp and morsel of beef
disappear, Carola joins Paphanh in the kitchen to clean up the dishes. In the
past few months, they have become close friends and housemates.

Last fall, Carola's marriage ran into trouble and she and Syd separated. She
moved out of their house and into the apartment below the Sithavadays'. Her
marital problems deeply troubled Paphanh. When Carola was out, Paphanh would
slip into her apartment and give the place a thorough cleaning. ''Paphanh
suffered for a long time,'' said Maura High. ''She told me she thought the
reason Carola and Syd split up was because Carola was spending so much time with
them.'' The Leas' separation had nothing to do with the refugees, but Paphanh in
her own way, perhaps in the Buddhist way, was as concerned with the welfare of
her sponsors as they were with hers.

With dinner gone and dessert almost finished, the guests move to the living room
couch. As the conversation turns to zoning laws and bass fishing, Thongdam sits
silently, staring out past the room and people to some more private place.

''We knew living in this land was going to be hard,'' he has said.  ''But people
have helped us, have taught us. We think about leaving, about moving, but we
feel we belong to this town. If we ever have money, we want to build a house
here.''

Though they welcome such talk, the family's sponsors would settle for a much
more modest goal. Says Maura High, ''We just want to prove to the town and to
the church that we did the right thing by bringing the family here.''

In the February 1981 issue of The Lyme Church News appears this note: ''March 1
will mark the first anniversary of the Sithavadays' arrival in Lyme ... the
refugee fund of $4,000 has dwindled but it has done its job; the Sithavadays are
managing on their own with the funds supplying only an occasional item. Thank
you all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of the Sithavady family

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New Jersey Guide;
GOING TO THE DICKENS?

BYLINE: By Martha G.Wilson

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 28, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


It was 30 years ago that Emlyn Williams, the eminent 75-year-old Welsh actor,
playwright and author, first offered a one-man show based on the life of Charles
Dickens. Since then, he has taken it all over the world.

On March 13, ''Emlyn Williams as Charles Dickens'' will be presented at
Montclair State College. The show, basically a series of readings, was performed
in New York in January; at the time, it was described as an evening ''of
particular interest to anyone with a fondness for Dickens, but also for those
who may be skeptical about the ability of a single actor to hold and to
captivate an audience.''

The performance is the second in a series of one-man shows at Montclair that
began last fall with Vincent Price portraying Oscar Wilde in ''Diversions and
Delights.'' The third and last show will be ''Thurber II'' with William Windom
on April 22.

Like Mr. Williams, Mr. Windom has had a long acquaintance with his character. He
has been something of a Thurber expert since 1969, when he starred in ''My World
and Welcome to It,'' a TV series based loosely on Mr. Thurber's life.

The performances are presented in Montclair State's Memorial Auditorium, and
curtain time is 8 P.M. Tickets cost $6 ($4 for students and the elderly). The
school is at Normal Avenue and Valley Road in Upper Montclair. Reservations:
(201) 893-5112.

UKIYO-E PRINTS ON VIEW

One of the major influences on such 19th-century Western artists as Degas,
Gauguin and Whistler and the Impressionists were the decorative Japanese
woodblock prints called Ukiyo-e.

In a graphic, decorative art created for the masses, Ukiyo-e masters used bold
lines, beautiful patterns, unusual design and exotic perspectives to show the
pleasures of the moment. One of the best-known works of the type is ''The Great
Wave'' by Hokusai.

Through March 15, an exhibition of Ukiyo-e prints will be on view at the Morris
Museum of Arts and Sciences, Normandy Heights Road and Columbia Road,
Morristown.

Through April 5, the museum will have a companion exhibition of items from its
Oriental collection. Included are an embroidered Japanese kimono, an inlaid
19th-century Chinese screen and Chinese bowls, some 1,000 years old and some
from the 19th century.

Museum hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Monday through Saturday, and 2 to 5 P.M. on
Sundays. Admission is free. Information: (201) 538-0454.

ON STAGE, EVERYONE

Just a few weeks ago, the search ended for five special works by New Jersey
playwrights. And now the plays, which are related to contemporary issues of
public importance, will be read, and panel discussions will be held, in a series
of evenings called ''Dialogues at the George Street Playhouse.'' (The playhouse
is in New Brunswick.)

The first program, ''The Ethnic Experience in America,'' will be held March 9 at
8 P.M. The new play to be read is ''Somalia Rose,'' a poetic work about a young
black woman by Sydne Mahone of New Brunswick and Janiera Warren of Newark.

The panelists will be Imamu Amiri Baraka, the playwright and political activist;
Dr. Jewel Plummer Cobb, dean of Douglass College; Grizel Ubarry, executive
director of Aspira Inc. and chairman of the Association of Hispanics in Higher
Education of New Jersey, and C. Roy Epps, president and executive director of
the Urban League of Greater New Brunswick.

''Dialogues'' is sponsored by the playhouse and the New Jersey Committee for the
Humanities. Other evenings will be on the Vietnam War (March 30), feminism
(April 6), the modern American family (April 13) and the artist in America (May
4).

The playhouse is at 414 George Street. Tickets are free and can be reserved by
calling (201) 246-7717 Tuesday through Sunday from noon to 8 P.M.

EASING THE TAX BITE

The timing is perfect. While huge numbers of people are wrestling with their
income-tax returns, a two-hour seminar is being offered that may help to ease
the bite in coming years.

The seminar, ''Tax Sheltered Annuities,'' will cover how to defer the payment of
some Federal income taxes until retirement, when the tax rate is usually lower.
Other aspects will include tax-deferred annuity programs for employees of
tax-exempt organizations, I.R.A.  accounts and Keough plans for the
self-employed.

The date is March 11, the place is Midland Park High School at 250 Prospect
Street, the hours are 7 to 9 P.M. and the fee, which may or not be deductible,
is $5. The seminar is offered by the Midland Park/Waldwick Continuing Education
Program. Information: (201) 444-2030.

HOW SWEET IT IS

Interested in learning how to make maple syrup? Today, and again next Saturday
and Sunday at 2 P.M., you can learn how to tap your sugar maples, boil down the
sap and enjoy the best possible product.

The free demonstrations will be held at the Morris County Park Commission
Center, 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham.  And even if you don't have any sugar
maples, you can watch the process and taste the delicious results. Information:
(201) 635-6629. Martha G. Wilson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IT'S TIME TO ACT ON FIRE SAFETY...

BYLINE: By HARRY R. CARTER; Harry R. Carter is coordinator of the fire-science
program at Ocean County College in Toms River and president of the New Jersey
Society of Fire Service Instructors.

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 30,; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


ONCE again, fire has devastated a structure that met the code requirements,
leaving a trail of death and suffering in its wake. How many more people have to
die before the value of automatic sprinklers is recognized?

I am afraid that it will take a catastrophe that snuffs out the lives of a
public figure and his family. This will probably be the case, for, if action is
not taken in the next several weeks to remedy this classic case of negligence,
the impetus again will have been lost and more people will have died.

Each time a fire takes a large number of lives, a fresh cry arises from the
public and its elected officials, as though such a thing had never happened
before. The politicians swear solemn oaths to avenge the dead and reach new
heights of fire safety. Each tragedy is treated as though fire was just
invented.

Let us gain an insight into this by taking a look at some of the historic
junctures in fire protection.  It took the Chicago Fire - the one attributed to
Mrs. O'Leary's cow - to cause public officials to take a close look at the need
for building codes and fire-safe construction. In 1911, immigrant girls working
in the crowded Triangle Shirtwaist sweatshop in New York City died because the
exits were locked. It took that tragedy to change conditions that were horrible
and painfully obvious.

The latter part of 1942 brought the deaths of 492 people in the fiery depths of
the Coconut Grove, a nightclub in Boston.  Fireresistive decorations existed at
that time, but were not used, and regulations limiting occupancy were in effect.

Why did death have to act once again as the stimulus for progress?  The same sad
commentary can be made time and again. For example, 1946 was a bad year for
hotels; in 1959, 95 children died in a school fire. Don't even mention 1980.

In light of recent events, one glaring fact stands out: Stupidity, greed and
special interests have a greater sway in our society than a sincere respect for
human life.

While serving in Vietnam, I remember thinking how nice it was to come from a
country that placed great value on the life on an individual. I now wonder
whether my beliefs were falsely held. How can the money saved by not installing
a sprinkler be weighed against a human life?

Sprinklers were first used in New England mills in the late 1870's. They have
performed a yeoman service over the years, compiling a long-term failure rate of
less than four in every 100 operations.

Insurance companies have long shown their favor for the devices by allowing a
healthy reduction in premiums for their installation. Why must innocent people
continue to be sacrificed to the penurious malevolence of noncaring politicians
and interest groups?

The time for action is now.  In many cases, an aroused populace has played a
major role in helping to expedite the approval of regulations requiring smoke
detectors in a wide range of occupancies. Let us now press on to the goal of
demanding sprinklers in those structures that cry out for them: nursing homes,
hospitals, high-rise buildings and any others with the potential for fire death.
(The California Legislature has even mandated residential sprinklers for certain
classes of new construction.)

Let us go beyond what I found in a nursing home one evening when I paused to
take note of the posted instructions for use in the event of fire. On the wall
was a large, hand-lettered sign that said:

''In the event of fire, go to your room and wait for the firemen to rescue
you.'' How in God's name can that be justified in a facility housing more than
100 elderly women, a building without sprinklers and having bars on the
street-level windows? What good are modern devices if they are not used?

The key is retroactivity.  We must hound our elected officials to enact
legislation mandating not only the installation of sprinkers in new
construction, but also requiring the retro-fitting of existing structures. That
is the real issue: retroactivity.

Let us scream bloody murder, because that is what now occurs as a result of the
absence of automatic sprinklers. If an owner says that the existing code was
met, then let the code be changed for the better - before I or my family perish
in someone else's fire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. RETURNS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS WHO ARE FLEEING SALVADOR WAR

BYLINE: By JOHN M. CREWDSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2237 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 1


Refugees from the fighting in El Salvador are streaming into the United States
in ever-greater numbers, in many cases having sold all they own to finance the
difficult, expensive and illegal journey from their Central American homeland.
But they are being sent home again nearly as fast as they are captured, to what
many of them fear may be mistreatment or death.

Lawyers working in behalf of the Salvadorans say that, in an effort to keep them
from clogging the overloaded immigration system, the Immigration and
Naturalization Service sometimes does not tell the refugees that they have the
right to have a deportation hearing or to seek political asylum, or it
intimidates them into forgoing these procedures.

One Mexican immigration official in Tijuana said last month that some of the
Salvadorans apprehended in this country had simply been sent back across the
border by American officers.

Response of Immigration Service

A spokesman for the United States immigration service, Verne Jervis, said that
this practice would be illegal but denied that it was going on. Mr. Jervis said
that while there ''might be some violations'' by local offices of the service,
he was unaware of widespread trampling on the Salvadorans' rights.

In the fiscal year that ended in September, 11,792 Salvadorans were apprehended
by the immigration service, up from 7,890 four years before. Border Patrol
Agents estimate that for every illegal alien they catch, from two to five others
manage to evade detection, which would place the number of new arrivals at
25,000 to 60,000 a year.

The Salvadorans are only one small group among the uncounted people entering the
United States illegally south of the border. But they are the only ones for whom
church groups and others are seeking a temporary haven in this country. Unlike
the hundreds of thousands of Mexicans who commute here each year to work, the
Salvadorans are driven not by poverty but by war, and for them the prospect of
returning home holds far more anguish.

In January, alarmed by an unconfirmed report that some refugees sent home in
December had been murdered by right-wing ''death squads'' shortly after they
arrived in San Salvador on Christmas morning, 42 Salvadorans at the immigration
service's detention facility in El Centro, Calif., 150 miles southeast of here,
released a statement saying they had begun a hunger strike to underline their
appeal for asylum from ''the political situation which presently exists'' in El
Salvador.

The report of the Christmas murders, which has gained currency among Salvadoran
exiles in this country, remains unconfirmed. But many of those knowledgable
about conditions in El Salvador say there is little doubt that some number of
those sent home by the immigration service have been killed, as victims of
random violence if not as specific targets of the left or right.

''It just stands to reason,'' said Millard Arnold, who was deputy assistant
Secretary of State for human rights in the Carter Administration. ''The odds are
some of them are going to be killed.''

Prof. Blase Bonpane, a sociologist and Latin American expert at California State
University here, went further. ''There is no doubt in my mind that somewhere
between 5 and 10 percent of those who are returned are executed, because the
Government had something on them, a member of a union or something,'' he said.

Some of the refugees, among them teachers and trade unionists, say their names
have appeared on what purport to be ''death lists'' circulated by various
right-wing ''terror squads.'' But United States immigration officials say most
of those they apprehend seem to be associated with no political faction.
''They've seen the fighting,'' said one, ''but they're generally uninvolved in
it. They're just frightened.''

Whatever their reasons for leaving, the identities of those who are caught once
they arrive here are made known to the Salvadoran Government. Before they can be
''repatriated,'' at a cost to the Federal Government of about $300 apiece,
officials of the immigration service said, the refugees are interviewed by the
Salvadoran Consul General in Los Angeles to confirm their nationality. When they
arrive home, according to Professor Bonpane, they are interviewed again and
asked ''to give some kind of explanation'' for having left the country. He said
he had seen films of such interviews, adding that ''the level of abuse is
frightening.''

A spokesman for the United States Embassy in San Salvador said that he had heard
many reports of mistreatment or killing of Salvadorans returned from the United
States, but that he had no evidence that any of the reports were true. But Mr.
Arnold said the State Department had repeatedly asked the embassy whether it
could confirm or disprove the reports and was told, ''No one really knows, the
situation is so chaotic.''

Reports of People Missing or Dead

Among the Salvadorans in this country, it seems, almost everyone knows, or has
heard of, someone who has been sent back and is now missing or dead. Mario
Vasquez, a Los Angeles lawyer representing a 27-year-old Salvadoran mechanic who
has been awaiting deportation at El Centro for 13 months, said his client had
received a letter from his mother reporting that two friends sent back to El
Salvador a few weeks earlier had been killed.

Such reports are spread mainly through the mail and by word of mouth, but there
are also occasional telephone calls from home. It was such a call to a refugee
at El Centro, from someone who had been detained there whom he knew only as
''Carlos,'' that provided the Salvadorans with their first account of the
rumored Christmas massacre.

The rumor swept through the camp and was passed on to a reporter for El Diario,
the Spanish-language newspaper in New York City, which published a brief account
Jan. 4. It was later picked up by other Spanish-language newspapers, but none of
the published reports have contained any confirmation.

Documents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service made available to The
New York Times showed that a group of 25 Salvadorans left here Dec. 24 aboard
Western Airlines Flight 746, spent the night at the Mexico City airport and
arrived in San Salvador on Christmas morning aboard a Costa Rican airliner.
Twelve of the Salvadorans were returning under orders of deportation and the
rest as ''voluntary returnees.''

Bodies Along the Road

''Carlos,'' the man who telephoned El Centro with news of the incident, was said
to have been among those aboard the plane who somehow escaped death, and the
list of passengers includes three persons with that first name. The man
reportedly said he had returned to the airport the morning after his arrival and
had recognized the bodies of some of his fellow passengers lying along the road.

The immigration service rejected a request by The New York Times, made under the
Freedom of Information Act, for the home addresses of those who returned on
Christmas Day, saying it was concerned that any inquiries in El Salvador about
their well-being might jeopardize their lives.

As is true of all illegal aliens, no one knows how many Salvadorans are living
in the United States. Community services officials here estimate that there are
100,000 to 300,000 in the Los Angeles area alone, and there are also sizable
Salvadoran communities in San Francisco and the District of Columbia.

Deaths of 13 in Arizona Desert

The flow of refugees abated somewhat last summer, after the deaths from
dehydration of 13 Salvadorans who had crossed the border into Arizona without
sufficient water, a case that was widely reported in El Salvador. But
immigration officials say the refugees are once again arriving at a rapid pace.

The route they follow leads through Guatemala and Mexico, which as a result are
now confronted with illegal immigration problems of their own, and the journey
is an expensive one. Rings that specialize in smuggling Salvadorans charge from
$1,000 to $1,700 for passage to Los Angeles and $500 more for a trip to the East
Coast. Because they come with the intention of remaining here until the
Salvadoran conflict is resolved, many of the refugees sell their houses and
personal possessions to pay their way. If they are captured and returned home,
there is often nowhere for them to go.

Not many of the refugees appear to be applying for political asylum, which
requires a showing that the applicant has a specific reason to fear that he will
be harmed upon returning home, for example because of membership in a particular
political group. The immigration service has no reliable figures, but some
estimates place the total number of applicants as low as 400.

Even though there may be more who could meet the criteria for asylum, the great
majority of the refugees are probably not qualified under a strict
interpretation of the rules requiring a threat of political persecution. ''They
say they left because they don't want to take sides,'' said John Weis, an El
Centro lawyer who has many refugees among his clients. ''But they're caught in
the middle, and they feel that they're in real danger.''

Status of Temporary Refuge

United States law also provides, however, for giving temporary refuge to aliens
unable to return home because of ''civil war or catastrophic circumstances.''
Such status has been conferred at different times on citizens of Vietnam, Laos,
Uganda and, most recently, on Nicaraguans after the fall of the Government of
President Anastasio Somoza Debayle. Last fall, President Carter ordered the
admission of more than 150,000 Cubans and Haitians who had landed in Florida in
boats.

A coalition of Congressmen, religious organizations and other groups, among them
the National Council of Churches, the United States Catholic Conference and the
American Civil Liberties Union, has been urging the State Department to follow
the same policy in admitting the Salvadoran refugees. In a letter to Secretary
of State Edmund S. Muskie in January, the coalition quoted Phillip Sargisson,
the Central American representative of the United Nations High Commission on
Refugees, as having declared that ''anyone who comes out of El Salvador today
deserves refugee status.''

When the Carter Administration left office, according to Millard Arnold, the
former State Department official, it was ''very, very close to working out a
compromise'' that would have allowed the Salvadorans to remain here temporarily,
not through any official action but simply by not sending them home.

The plan was endorsed, he said, by the department's human rights bureau, after
reports that more than 10,000 people of El Salvador's 4.5 million people had
been killed there last year, a figure Mr.  Arnold termed ''an enormous number of
deaths in a country that size.'' But he said that it was rejected by other State
Department officials concerned that it might suggest that the United States,
which had been pushing for a political settlement of the Salvadoran conflict,
''did not have faith in the ability of the Salvadorans to resolve their own
problems.''

Concern of Drawing More Refugees

There were also concerns, he said, that such a policy might lead to a still
greater influx of refugees, and that the arrangement would be ''difficult to
police'' since it might be impossible to distinguish Salvadoran citizens from
other Central and South Americans.

Of the nearly 12,000 Salvadorans arrested last year, only 2,378 were formally
deported, suggesting that a large number were returned through what the
immigration service calls ''voluntary departure,'' an agreement by an illegal
alien to return home without demanding the deportation hearing, with its
expensive and time-consuming appeals process, to which he is entitled. Without a
large number of voluntary returns, immigration experts agree, the overloaded
adjudication system would quickly collapse.

The immigration service is required to provide all those it arrests with a
written notice of rights, including the right to free legal counsel. But lawyers
working with the Salvadorans say they are convinced that the options are not
being fully explained by immigration officials.

Reasons for Returning Questioned

''I.N.S. would like people to return voluntarily without going through the
system,'' said Mr. Weis, the El Centro lawyer. Another lawyer, William H.
Steiner of Los Angeles, questioned why so many Salvadorans were agreeing to
return home voluntarily ''when they've risked their lives and spent their life
savings to go 2,500 miles to get here.''

''It's a safe assumption,'' he said, ''that they were forced back.'' Mr. Steiner
said he had seen some voluntary departure agreements signed with an ''X'' by
Salvadorans who could neither write nor read what they were signing. In
''practically every case,'' Mr. Weis said, his clients withdrew their agreements
to return home after being told of the available alternatives.

There are also accounts of instances in which the advice of rights has been
followed by what what Mr. Steiner termed ''mental coercion.'' ''They're told if
they want a hearing or asylum they'll have to stay in jail, or that their
relatives will be arrested,'' he said.

''You'll get an overzealous border guard who says, 'You either go back or we'll
lock you away for the rest of your life,' '' Mr. Arnold said. ''So the poor
fellow elects to go back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of refugees (Page A14)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


There was a rainbow here last week. It arced stunningly over the city at the
close of an afternoon storm, bringing legions of workers to stare at the sky
from office windows all over the capital.

From downtown, the rainbow seemed to terminate or originate at the White House,
as does everything else here. Members of the citywide audience quickly seized
the metaphor, fashioning jokes that above them stretched ''the Reagan
econometric model,'' complete with the fabled pot of gold to balance the Federal
budget.

The beauty of the event seemed rooted in the fact that this was a purely natural
phenomenon brilliantly displayed in a city where events are variously planned,
announced, studied, ''leaked,'' advanced, contrived, compromised and even
''prioritized.'' The rainbow seemed like a pastoral event bringing relief to a
highly macadamized place.

Badges of Government Service

People here appear to be toughened by the bureaucratic Skinner box they are in,
with some of them not bothering to put away their laminated necklace credentials
when they go out on the street. They wear these Government badges like scapular
medals brandished beyond the monastery wall of office routine.

One recent day, members of the Hare Krishna sect suddenly appeared, dancing and
chanting by a downtown subway entrance. They popped about gently like saffron
harbingers of spring, but pedestrians ignored the dance as so much urban
humdrum. One White House worker, loose for an ho1ur on the streets, looked at
them and said to a companion, ''You remember liberals, don't you?''

A better mark of the season's turning was fully evident a few days ago,
manifested in the further ruinous drenching of the Union Station. What was once
the bustling showplace of national locomotion now stands as a monumental symbol
of Governmental self-defeat - a national landmark that absorbs floods of Federal
repair money far more smoothly than it sheds the simple rain that brought the
rainbow.

Ceiling Plaster to Congress

The station roof leaked so badly in a storm last week that great chunks of
ceiling plaster fell and were carried fresh to Congress which, in the last
decade, has made a now embarrassing habit of studying and financing various
''solutions'' to the Union Station problem.

A full report on ''the state of the roof'' was demanded by one Congressman, who
noted that only a few years ago Congress spent millions on restoring the idle
station and turning it into the National Visitors Center. Only $69,000 was used
then for repairs of the leaky roof, a temporary measure while the roof was
studied further. However, procrastination proved no match for the rains, and the
water has flooded down inside the 74-year-old stone building, eroding much of
the millions of dollars spent on internal refurbishing, and leaving a leaky roof
problem that alone would cost an estimated $10 million to repair.

With such vivid examples of the cyclical menace of Washington as Union Station
standing there, leaking endlessly like an informed source, it is understandable
that a rainbow might be welcomed here as no small wonder.

This ''wet season'' was noted in a far more sobering context by Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. in an appearance last Friday to play his part as
Cabinet proselyter to the city and the nation for President Reagan's budget
reductions.

He was to answer reporters' questions at the old Executive Office Building,
which stands like a tight-roofed Union Station next to the White House. But the
budget topic gave way at once to questions about El Salvador and the
Administration's concern over the leftist rebels fighting the Government there.

Mr. Haig was ready and he talked of ''conflicting evidence'' of arms shipments
to the rebels, allegedly at Cuba's behest, adding that there were reports of
''vast amounts'' of additional arms being readied, provided the ''wet season''
did not interfere.

Term Has a Familiar Ring

''I guess we've heard that term before,'' he said, smiling lightly in what
seemed an allusion to the monsoons of the Vietnam War. In a similar echo of the
past, Mr. Haig was asked whether the sending of additional American military
advisers to El Salvador was under study. Absolutely not, he replied. But he
added that Washington was considering sending more ''military training teams''
there. He said that there was quite a distinction between advisers, who go out
on the battlefields, and training teams, which do not.

The terminology of the past was creeping back into the questions and answers in
Washington. But the Secretary emphasized that, whatever the decision about El
Salvador, there would be no repetition of Vietnam. In Washington and beyond, Mr.
Haig said, all ramifications of the problem were still under study - the wet
season included.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW TEAM AT U.N.: COMMON ROOTS AND PHILOSOPHIES

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., March 2


The new team running the American mission here resembles an extended family
whose lineage extends from Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief delegate.

There is Carl Gershman, a counselor who sits in the office directly across from
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Like her, he made his mark urging a stern, anti-Communist
stance in Commentary magazine, the neoconservative bible. They first met at a
gathering of the Coalition for a Democratic Majority, a group aimed at rescuing
the Democratic Party from the George McGovern liberals.

Another key appointee is an old family friend, Charles M.  Lichenstein. He fills
one of the five posts that have ambassadorial rank and will deal mostly with
press affairs and with the security and other problems of the 153 foreign
missions here. Like Mr.  Gershman, Mr. Lichenstein is a Phi Beta Kappa from
Yale. A onetime officer in the Central Intelligence Agency and a ghost writer
for Richard M. Nixon, Mr. Lichenstein regularly vacations with Mrs.  Kirkpatrick
and her husband in Europe.

Jose S. Sorzano, 40 years old, presently ranked as a counselor, is a protege of
the new mission chief. He studied political science under her at Georgetown
University and she was one of three professors who read his doctoral thesis. Mr.
Sorzano was a research assistant in the preparation of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's book
on Argentina under Juan D. Peron, and, most recently, a colleague on the
Georgetown faculty.

Career Diplomat in No. 2 Post

The Commentary-Georgetown-friendship network does not embrace Marshall Brement,
the second-ranking member of the delegation and a career Foreign Service
officer. But in a mission whose directors often echo each other, he said, ''I am
compatible.'' The 39-year-old Mr. Brement is fluent in seven languages,
including Russian and two Chinese dialects, and comes here from a post in the
National Security Council.

The sense of common purpose binding her group is Mrs. Kirkpatrick's design. She
has the tidy mind of a professor whose lectures are easy to outline.

''The President has said he wants to staff the Government with those who share
his philosophy,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick said. ''What I've tried to do is add on
people who share the orientation of this Administration.''

She and her aides stress what Mrs. Kirkpatrick calls their intention ''to speak
here with greater clarity.'' But precisely what they will be clear about is
still obscure. At her first news conference, held last week, Mrs. Kirkpatrick
said that the Administration was still reviewing every foreign policy question,
from the global economic bargain that poorer countries are seeking to a Western
plan for independence of South-West Africa, also known as Namibia.

No 'Communications Gap' Seen

Even so, the new mission cannot imagine falling into the sort of pit dug for
Donald F. McHenry, Mrs. Kirkpatrick's predecessor, who voted in the Security
Council against expanding Israeli settlements last March and was promptly
disavowed by President Carter. A ''communications gap'' was blamed.

Mr. Lichenstein, a 54-year-old specialist in communications, said, ''When in
doubt, we'll be on the secure telephone and telex requesting guidance.'' The
guidance, he and the rest of the team make clear, will come from Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr.

Mr. Lichenstein ran his own consulting firm on policy analysis and mass
communications in Washington. He wrote the first drafts for four of the ''Six
Crises'' of Mr. Nixon's book. He also served as a special assistant in the Nixon
White House, taught political science briefly at Notre Dame University and was a
vice president for public relations for the Public Broadcasting Service.

''This will be an effective team, more so than in the past,'' said Mr. Brement,
the deputy. It will be marked, he said, by ''consistency'' and ''reliability.''

Mr. Gershman, who is 37, has a master's degree in education from Harvard to go
with his Yale diploma. Last year he was a resident scholar at Freedom House, a
private organization in New York, writing on totalitarian threats to American
democracy. For six years, he ran Social Democrats, USA, a political action group
supporting liberals concerned with Soviet power.

'Conceptual Clarity' Sought

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who is 54, is particularly uncomfortable with common United
Nations terms like ''the third world,'' ''North-South'' and ''nonaligned.''
These terms, she said, cover groups of nations ''that are not a monolithic,
integrated whole'' but ''disparate nations with disparate interests.'' What she
seeks, she said, is ''conceptual clarity.''

What will she do with the six Security Council members from Latin America, Asia
and Africa who typically work out common positions as members of the third
world?

''We bargain with them,'' she replied briskly. But this will not stop her from
seeking to deal with the six separately, through the United States embassies in
their capitals. ''I will use all the legal, morally acceptable tools at hand,''
she said. ''The notion that I will be less concerned with the so-called third
world than my predecessors is absurd.''

''Speaking is action,'' Mr. Brement said. ''Words matter. This team is united in
feeling that.'' The mission, he said, resists the notion ''that it doesn't
matter what you say here.'' It will not accept unwanted phrases in resolutions
simply to accommodate others, ''cynically going along to influence people,'' he
declared.

Veto to Be Used 'If Needed'

Mr. Brement, who graduated from Brooklyn College and has a master's degree from
Maryland, has served in Spain, South Vietnam, Indonesia, Singapore and twice in
the Soviet Union. His other languages are Indonesian, French, Spanish and
Hebrew.

To avoid appearing obdurate, the five permanent members of the Security Council
usually hesitate to invoke their power of veto. But Mr. Brement suggested that
''there will be a willingness'' to use the veto ''if it is needed.''

''The practice will be to represent U.S. interests,'' he said.  ''If it leads to
confrontation or vetoes, there will be confrontation or vetoes - although that
is not our intention.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick and her aides slip easily into the patriotic language of an
earlier era. The new chief delegate deliberately made her first speech in her
new post before the American Legion and spoke of ''a new determination to
restore United States strength and influence in the world, a determination to
regain self-respect and the respect of others.''

Mr. Gershman said that for 10 years he had quarreled with those on the
Democratic left who believe that ''anti-Communism is conservative or
reactionary, which presumes that Communism is progressive.''

''I fell on the side I considered pro-American,'' he said. ''I recognized the
nature of totalitarianism.'' Even a professional like Mr. Brement talks in a
similar fashion.  The new team, he said, shares ''a basic feeling that the
United States is the best hope of the world, and what we do in the U.N.  should
reflect our vision of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 5 Photos of U.N. leaders

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ONE PROJECTED SACRIFICE TO REAGAN ECONOMICS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 190 words


To the Editor:

My husband was a captain, an Air Force pilot. He died in Pleiku, Vietnam, on May
24, 1966. His plane was shot down, and within an hour he was killed by North
Vietnamese regulars.

Our son was then 2 years old. He is now 17, and he is to start college in the
fall. President Reagan proposes that there be no new recipients of student
Social Security payments.

Are we lacking information? Was there something more we were to have done as a
family? Something more my husband was to have done as an individual? A more
subtle sacrifice we've overlooked?

How peculiar that the Government would now plan to build up our nation's defense
while simultaneously discarding past military devotion. How ironic that on the
same day the President proposes such action Mrs. Reagan chooses to sponsor the
new Vietnam War Memorial at Arlington.

My son grows up without his father. The truth lies not in the abstractions of
government; it lies here, day to day, as in countless other homes in which a
kind of sadness has entered to stay. Nothing can change this, now. Being
remembered helps.
LINDA MALONEY, Amherst, Mass., Feb. 24, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TOP WINNER IN WESTINGHOUSE SCIENCE SEARCH IS HUNTER HIGH PIANIST

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY M. PHELPS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


A 17-year-old senior at Hunter College High School in Manhattan, who worked for
five months on experiments in genetic engineering that helped explain resistence
to disease, won the top prize today in the annual Westinghouse Science Search.

The winner, Amy Sue Reichel, who conducted her experiments at the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, will receive a $12,000 scholarship.

Second place and a $10,000 scholarship went to Douglas A. Simons, 18, of Vero
Beach, Fla., who designed and built his own optical instruments for his study of
the moon's surface. Michael M. Dowling, 18, of Newington, Conn., won third prize
and a $10,000 scholarship with a clinical biochemical research project.

Miss Reichel said in an interview that she first had learned of her talent in
science in the sixth grade when she was able to figure out a gear ratio that
none of her classmates had understood.

Hunter College High School, on Park Avenue between 94th and 95th Streets, is
part of the City University of New York. No tuition is charged at the school,
which is attended by 1,200 intellectually gifted children selected through
competitive examinations.

Miss Reichel is an accomplished pianist - Bach, Beethoven, Chopin and Debussy
are her favorites - and she also likes to paint.  ''A lot of people think that
if you're interested in science, you can't be interested in the arts at the same
time,'' she said.  ''That's always bothered me. I like to do a lot of different
things.''

The annual contest is conducted by a nonprofit organization, Science Service,
for Westinghouse Electric, the sponsor.  Of the top 10 winners among the 40
finalists who assembled here for the last five days, seven were from New New
York state. This reflected a trend that has always been a topic of conversation
at the annual judging.

One Westinghouse official said that ''New Yorkers have no inhibitions,'' whereas
''you might be more inhibited if you came from Oklahoma.'' Others cited New
York's science-oriented high schools and multitude of research facilities.

''It's really hard to do research, you know,'' said Michael R.  Candan, a
17-year-old senior at Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Queens, who studied the
use of an extract from fern leaves as a repellent to flour beetles. ''You have
to have equipment. Usually you have to go to a university, which is found only
in the major cities, and sort of beg for help.''

Joel M. Wein, a 17-year-old Manhattan resident who goes to Stuyvesant High
School in Manhattan, said of his friends on the school's mathematics team: ''My
friends are some of the most brilliant mathematicians in the country. You can't
help but get excited when you are running around with people like that.''

Mr. Wein, who did his project in numbers theory (''An Examination and
Generalization of the Syracuse Algorithm''), came in fifth and got a $7,500
scholarship.

Both the students and the judges of the competition say that teachers in New
York set their sights early on the Westinghouse competition and begin
encouraging their best students years in advance to start working on projects.

The Bronx High School of Science, according to some of the finalists, has a
special research course aimed at the Westinghouse program. As a result, the main
hall of the school displays 50 feet of plaques from the competition, according
to E. G. Sherburne Jr., director of Science Service. The school will add three
more plaques this year from among the top 10 finalists.

The 40 finalists exhibited their projects to the public at the National Academy
of Science over the weekend.

The other official winners were: Song Pan, 17, of Miami, fourth, a $7,500
scholarship; Terrence D. Sanger, 17, of Manhattan, Dalton School, sixth, $7,500;
Lori E. Kaplowitz, 17, of Woodmere, L.I., George W. Hewlett High School,
seventh, $5,000; Seth Finkelstein, 16, of the Bronx, Bronx High School of
Science, eighth, $5,000; Mark L.  Movsesian, 17, of Forest Hills, Queens, Forest
Hills High School, ninth, $5,000; and William Chang, 17, of Fresh Meadows,
Queens, Bronx High School of Science, 10th, $5,000.

Tan Dinh Ngo was one finalist who did not win one of the top 10 prizes, but he
was a winner in the eyes of many at the competition. A 16-year-old refugee from
Vietnam, he settled in the Bronx a year and a half ago, speaking no English.
Yet he was able to complete a complicated analysis of a problem in numbers
theory that earned him a place as a finalist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Hunter student (Page A1)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Vietnam War Stone Vanishes in Buffalo

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 150 words


BUFFALO (AP) - A piece of granite that a group of Vietnam veterans intended to
use as a pedestal for a war memorial disappeared from the lawn of the Federal
Building here over the weekend.

The rock is the subject of a dispute between the veterans and the Federal
Government, which required the group to take out a $500,000 liability insurance
policy on it. The group - the Vietnam Era Veterans Association - installed the
pedestal in the lawn nearly two years ago but missed payments on the insurance
policy, allowing it to lapse.

Mark J. O'Connor, lawyer for the association, said security personnel at the
Federal Building had told him that the 2-by-3-foot, 400-pound granite marker was
not removed by Government workers. He said it apparently had been dug up by
vandals late Saturday or Sunday and dragged along some streets to a vehicle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT DOUBTFUL ON U.S. INTERVENTION

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1402 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


President Reagan said today that he saw no likelihood that the United States
would send fighting forces to El Salvador in an effort to help the Government
there defeat leftist insurgents.

Mr. Reagan denied that there was any parallel between the increase in American
military advisory aid and the beginnings of United States involvement in the
Vietnam War.

''I certainly don't see any likelihood of us going in with fighting forces,''
the President declared in an interview at the

Excerpts from interview, page A18.
White House with Walter Cronkite, the veteran correspondent who is retiring as
the CBS Evening News anchorman this Friday. ''I do see our continued work in the
field of diplomacy with neighboring countries that are interested in Central
America, South America to bring this violence to a halt and to make sure that we
do not just sit passively by and and let this hemisphere be invaded by outside
forces.''

Commenting on the Government's decision to send 20 additional military advisers
and $25 million in additional military equipment to El Salvador, the President
said the difference between the historical lesson of Vietnam and the incremental
involvement in El Salvador was ''profound.''

''What we are actually doing,'' he said, ''is at the request of a Government in
one of our neighboring countries, helping, offering some help against the import
or the export into the Western Hemisphere of terrorism, of disruption. And it
isn't just El Salvador. That happens to be the target at the moment.''

''Our problem is this whole hemisphere,'' the President continued, ''and keeping
this sort of thing out.'' Mr. Reagan emphasized what he termed a ''sort of
technicality here,'' the difference between military ''advisers'' who got out on
the battlefield and military training ''teams'' who do not. He stressed that no
American advisers were being sent to El Salvador, only training teams similar to
ones the United States has in 30 countries.

The President refused to say whether or how he might compromise in trying to get
Congressional approval of his economic recovery plan of budget and tax cuts,
asserting, as an old college football lineman, ''That would be giving the play
away.''

Asked what incentives exist for the tax cuts to be translated into savings
rather than more consumer inflation, the President said that ''polls'' had
indicated this would be the effect.

On the subject of the suggestion by the Soviet leader, Leonid I.  Brezhnev, for
a summit meeting with the United States and renewed arms talks, Mr. Reagan
reacted cautiously.

''I can't really say a specific answer to any of these things unless and until I
have met with and discussed this whole problem with allies who, you know, are
only a bus ride from Russia,'' the President declared.

''We could talk a lot better,'' he said of the Russians at another point, ''if
there was some indication that they truly wanted to be a member of the
peace-loving nations of the world, the free world.''

Points to Afghanistan

The Afghanistan situation would be a good place for the Russians to demonstrate
a change in attitude, Mr. Reagan said.  ''I think it would help bring about such
a meeting if the Soviet Union revealed that it is willing to moderate its
imperialism, its aggression,'' he said.

But Mr. Reagan questioned whether withdrawal of Russian troops from Afghanistan
would be ''subject to negotiation.'' If they say no, he continued, ''What do you
do?''

When asked whether he was, in effect, ruling out the summit invitation, the
President replied that he was not being ''hard and fast'' at this time, but only
saying that in discussing the matter with allies ''it would make it a lot
easier'' to point to signs of improvement by the Russians and ''their
surrogates.'' The latter he described as ''Qaddafi in Chad, Cuba in Angola, Cuba
and East Germans in Ethiopia in South Yemen, and, of course, now the attempt
here in our own Western Hemisphere.''

Clarification on Cuba

Mr. Reagan said that, in discussing Cuba's alleged role in the trouble in El
Salvador, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was in no way suggesting ''an
assault on Cuba'' in his recent remarks about dealing with alleged Cuban arms
aid, ''at the source.''

''There are a lot of things open: diplomacy, trade, a number of things,'' the
President declared. ''And Secretary Haig has explained the use of the term, the
source, with regard to Cuba means the intercepting and stopping of the supplies
coming into these countries, the export from Cuba of those arms, the training of
the guerrillas as they've done there.''

In response to a further question on Cuba, Mr. Reagan declined to talk in terms
of a ''blockade'' but spoke rather of intercepting arms either when they are
landed or when they are found being channeled through Nicaragua, and then of
''using diplomacy to see that a country decides they're not going to allow
themselves to be used anymore.'' The Reagan Administration has accused Nicaragua
of being a conduit for arms shipments, although Mr. Reagan said today that
''there's been a great slowdown.''

The United States is wary of playing the role of ''the great colossus of the
North,'' the President said in explaining the stepped-up role in El Salvador.
The new help, he said, is limited to training and equipment to help the local
government ''to try to interdict the supply by water of weapons and
ammunition.''

Asked whether the Administration would extricate itself without ''loss of face''
should the situation worsen, the President replied that the people there support
the current Government, but that if, hypothetically, the insurgents succeeded
and the Government was overthrown, then ''we're not going there without an
invitation.''

''We're not forcing ourselves on them,'' he said, ''You'd simply leave and there
aren't that many people to be extricated.''

Comment on Soviet Leaders

In discussing his earlier remarks about the Soviet leaders being willing to
''resort to lying and cheating'' as part of Marxist ideology, Mr. Reagan
stressed that he did not volunteer the comments and was only replying to a
question.

''They have never denied the truth of what I said,'' Mr. Reagan added.  He was
asked whether there was ''macho'' premeditation and a ''childish'' touch in the
sudden denial of special parking privileges to the Soviet Ambassador here.

''I don't know,'' Mr. Reagan replied. ''Maybe they got the message.'' On other
international matters, the President said he was ''very intrigued'' with recent
proposals that illegal aliens from Mexico be granted a new type of labor visa to
help promote ''stablity south of the border'' and to see that taxes are
collected in this country. He said that he intends to discuss it in talks next
month with Mexican officials.

On the subject of human rights, the President contended the United States had
been too ''selective'' in the past, criticizing some authoritarian ''but not
totalitarian'' governments, while proclaiming detente with the Soviet Union,
''the greatest violator today of human rights.''

''I think we ought to be more sincere about our position on human rights,'' Mr.
Reagan declared.  Mr. Reagan said he ''would like to'' end the grain embargo
against the Soviet Union because of the hardship on American farmers, but added
that the situation in Afghanistan and Poland had made him ''think very hard''
about whether it could be done unilaterally without improvement from the
Russians.

On the subject of arms negotiation, Mr. Reagan asserted that ''it is rather
foolish to have unilaterally disarmed, you might say, as we did by letting our
defensives, our margin of safety deteriorate.'' He said he wanted to see some
evidence that the Russians were willing to discuss ''actual reductions'' in
strategic nuclear weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A SCALED-DOWN VERSION OF SECURITY ADVISER'S TASK

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1343 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


A reporter recently complained to a colleague that he had telephoned Richard V.
Allen, President Reagan's adviser on national security, and waited two days
before getting a reply from an aide who explained that Mr. Allen was too busy to
handle his call.

''You never had that problem under Brzezinski,'' the reporter said, referring to
the eagerness of Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security
adviser, to talk with reporters and project his views.

Quite deliberately, Mr. Allen, a sturdy, easygoing, 49-year-old former
researcher and business consultant, has remained unobtrusive, in keeping with
President Reagan's determination to make Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. his spokesman on foreign policy and to curb the feuding between the State
Department and White House that has plagued other administrations.

Mr. Allen, who was a very visible foreign-policy spokesman during the
Presidential campaign, says he is comfortable with a more anonymous role as a
coordinator and presenter of options to the President.

Anonymity Is an Ally

Selling policy is the State Department's job and the ''White House press
secretary's job, not mine,'' he said in an interview in his basement office at
the White House.

''The important thing to me is the shape of policy in two or three years,'' he
said. ''That's the ultimate test. And anonymity helps in getting the job done.''

His model, he said, is Gordon Gray, who managed the National Security Council
staff under President Eisenhower, rather than the more forceful and influential
security advisers who followed - McGeorge Bundy under President Kennedy, Walt W.
Rostow under President Johnson, Henry A. Kissinger under President Nixon, and
Mr.  Brzezinski.

Mr. Allen envisions the 62-member staff that he has largely assembled as more of
a long-term policy-planning unit than the kind of hard-driving operational team
that Mr. Brzezinski, Mr. Kissinger and others have run.

He explained: ''I've told my colleagues, 'If you're looking for action in terms
of day-to-day operations, sending out cables and circulating memos, this is not
the place for you - you should be out in the operating agencies. But if you are
interested in seeing the policy-making machinery mesh in a coherent and
intelligent fashion and you want to be at the crossroads of policy making and
you're interested in longer-term policy initiatives, then this is the place for
you.' ''

A Different Approach to the Job

Mr. Brzezinski used his chairmanship of the interagency special coordination
committee and Mr. Kissinger used groups like the verification panel to wield
influence with the bureaucracy and to drive the policy-making apparatus. They
felt that such a role was vital to their jobs of coordinating the formulation of
policy.

But Mr. Allen is content with the foreign-policy structure worked out by the
Reagan Administration that puts the State and Defense Departments or the Central
Intelligence Agency at the head of such groups. He does have some authority to
steer issues toward one or another of these interdepartmental groups, but he
says he does not intend to serve as chairman of an interdepartmental committee.

''Not if I can avoid it,'' he said. ''The best system is to have those
committees chaired from outside. If there is any issue that is so overarching
that all departments have equal interest, then it's conceivable I could chair
it, but that is not integral to coordinating policy. Our job is to make sure all
the bases are covered, that all reasonable options are in the product that comes
our way for the President.''

Like other security advisers, Mr. Allen meets daily with the President to
provide a daily briefing on the world situation. Often, Vice President Bush and
James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, sit in on the briefing.

He Goes Over President's Speeches

Mr. Allen is often at the President's side with a memorandum of ''talking
points'' for a telephone call with President Valery Giscard d'Estaing of France
or some other foreign leader. He maintains liaison with embassies and certain
members of Congress. For foreign visits, he goes over proposed speeches, toasts
and welcoming remarks prepared for the President by the State Department.

But because of the prominence of Edwin Meese 3d as the senior Cabinet-level
policy adviser to President Reagan, Mr. Allen has been cast politically at the
level of deputy secretary rather than at full Cabinet rank as were his
predecessors. Although he sends material directly to the President, some goes
through Mr. Meese.

Mr. Allen has also moved to rid the National Security Council staff of functions
that he considers inappropriate, such as receiving regular reports from the
American mission supervising the Egyptian-Israeli disengagement in the Sinai
Peninsula; the sign-off authority on all international civil air routes
affecting American aircraft, and planning for international economic summit
meetings among the Western allies.

''The day-to-day stuff really ought to be gotten out of here,'' he said. ''We
don't need to be in the business of clearing cables every 10 minutes. That's the
State Department's job.''

Some Say He Has Gone Too Far

Some former National Security Council staff members say Mr. Allen has gone too
far in relinquishing power. ''To put it bluntly,'' one said, ''the system's been
emasculated. Allen isn't going to be able to coordinate policy. He's too busy
getting out of everyone's way.''

But Mr. Allen, who once served as a deputy to Mr. Kissinger on the Nixon
National Security Council staff and later headed the staff for international
economic policy in the Nixon White House, denies that he has downgraded the
importance of the job.

''I disagree,'' he said. ''I believe that by restoring the N.S.C.  staff to the
role it should rightfully play, its importance is enhanced.''

Teamwork and harmony, Mr. Allen contended, will produce a coherent and
consistent foreign policy because the President's top advisers are so
like-minded in their views of the world.

No Worries About Rivalry

He feels comfortable, he emphasized, because a network of former academic and
political colleagues are now in key jobs. He discounted risks of rivalry, saying
that he had encouraged Mr. Reagan during the campaign to meet with Mr. Haig
before he was picked as Secretary of State.

Mr. Allen's own staff is a mixture of scholars and Government career officers
with Washington experience, like Rear Adm. James W.  Nance, retired, a former
commander of the carrier Forrestal, and Maj. Gen. Robert L. Schweitzer, a
Vietnam veteran, both of whom have worked for the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the
Pentagon.

From the academic world he has drawn Richard Pipes, a Russian historian from
Harvard; Geoffrey Kemp, a Middle East specialist from the Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy at Tufts University; Roger Fontaine, a Latin American specialist,
from the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies; Carnes Lord,
a former armscontrol official and strategist who has been on the faculty at the
University of Virginia, and Henry Nau, a specialist in international political
economics from George Washington University.

Although Mr. Allen's staff also continues to run the White House situation room
for President Reagan, there are indications that unlike his predecessors he will
not oversee crisis management but may go along with having that function pass to
the State and Defense Departments.

''We shouldn't be an impediment in the flow of strength and information from the
bureaucracies to the President,'' Mr. Allen said. ''It's our job to get the best
out of the bureaucracies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Richard V. Allen

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE LEADER PREDICTS BACKING FOR INCREASE IN MILITARY AID TO EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 599 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the majority leader, predicted today that Congress
would support increased American military aid to El Salvador despite what he
termed a ''high level of concern'' among many senators and protest from liberal
House and Senate Democrats.

''This is a reasonable and prudent step for the President to take under the
circumstances and I intend to give him my support,'' the Tennessee Republican,
who is also a senior member of the Foreign Relations Committee, told reporters
before today's Senate session.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. met this morning with the House
Democratic leaders and members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee to brief
them on the Administration's actions and to assuage concerns that they might
embroil the United States in a conflict like the Vietnam War.  Representative
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, said Mr. Haig made a ''lengthy
justification for the current policy'' and ''a fervent plea for Congressional
and Presidential harmony in foreign policy.''

Agreement on Economic Aid

Mr. Solarz said that most of the panel members supported increased economic
assistance but said there was no agreement on military aid.  Last night, 44
House members, led by Representative Richard L.  Ottinger, a Westchester
Democrat, protested the military aid in a telegram to President Reagan.

In the Senate, Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said today that
military aid would ''reduce the prospect for a peaceful resolution.''

Despite these protests, however, there did not appear to be sufficient
opposition in Congress to reverse the Administration's policy. The War Powers
Act of 1973 requires the President to consult with Congress ''in every possible
instance'' before American armed forces are introduced into ''imminent
involvements in hostilities.''

State Department officials, however, have contended that sending military
advisers to El Salvador does not fall under the act because they would not be
armed for combat and would remain on bases.  Representative Jonathan B. Bingham,
Democrat of the Bronx, who signed the Ottinger telegram and who helped draft the
War Powers legislation, said he did not believe the law would be invoked, but
Mr. Ottinger said he would introduce a resolution calling upon President Reagan
to consult with Congress under the act.

Mr. Bingham and others said it would be difficult for Congress to block the $25
million the Administration plans to spend for military equipment for El
Salvador. The Administration plans to ''reprogram'' $5 million from other
unspecified aid programs. House and Senate appropriations committees have 15
days to block the action but are unlikely to, Capitol Hill and State Department
analysts agreed. The rest of the military aid, $20 million, is to come from
emergency provisions of foreign aid legislation. Officials said this move could
be blocked only by extraordinary measures.

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee met yesterday in closed session with
senior State Department officials to discuss the increase in military aid.
Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina and chairman of the
subcommittee on Latin America, strongly endorsed the moves, but other
Republicans and Democrats gave only qualified endorsements.

Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, acknowledged that Democrats
probably lacked the votes to stop the aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM REAGAN INTERVIEW

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1700 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of the interview by Walter Cronkite of
CBS News with President Reagan last night, as recorded by The New York Times:

Q. Do you see any parallel in our commiting military advisers and military
assistance to El Salvador and the early stages of our involvement in Vietnam?

A. No, Walter, I don't. I know that parallel is being drawn by many people. But
the difference is so profound. What we are actually doing is at the request of a
Government, and one of our neighboring countries, helping - offering some help
against the import, or the export into the Western Hemisphere of terrorism, of
disruption, and it isn't just El Salvador - that happens to be the target at the
moment. Our problem is this whole hemisphere and keeping this sort of thing out.

We're sending, and have sent, teams down there to train. They do not accompany
them into combat. They train recruits in the garrison area and, as a matter of
fact, we have such training teams in more than 30 countries today. And we've
always done that, the officers of the military in friendly countries and in our
neighboring countries who've come to our service schools, West Point, Annapolis
and so forth.

So, I don't see any parallel at all. And I think it is significant that the
terrorists, the guerrilla activity in El Salvador is supposed to cause an
uprising. That the Government would fall because the people would join this
aggressive force and support them.

The people are totally against that and have not reacted in that way.

A Comparison With Afghanistan

Q. What, really, philosophically, is different from our going down to help a
democratic government sustain itself against guerrilla activity, promoted from
the outside - Soviet and Cuban aid, as we believe it to be, or as your
Administration says it is - and Afghanistan? El Salvador is in our sort of
geopolitical sphere of influence; Afghanistan, on the border of the Soviet
Union, is certainly in their geopolitical sphere of influence. They went in with
troops to support a Marxist government friendly to them. What - where - why
isn't that a parallel situation?

A. It was the Soviet Union that put their man as president of Afghanistan. And
then their man didn't work out to their satisfaction. So they came in and got
rid of him and brought another man that they'd been training in Moscow and put
him in as their president and then, with their armed forces, they are trying to
subdue the people of Afghanistan, who do not want this pro-Soviet government
that has been installed by an outside force.

The parallel would be that, without actually using Soviet troops, in effect the
Soviet are, you might say, trying to do the same thing in El Salvador that they
did in Afghanistan, but by using proxy troops through Cuba and guerrillas. And
they had hoped for, as I said, an uprising of the people that would then give
them some legitimacy in the government that would be installed, the Communist
government.

But the people didn't rise up. The people have evidenced their desire to have
the government they have and not be ruled by these guerrillas.

Q. Even if the Duarte forces began to lose whatever military materiel assistance
we given them, whatever training advisers we give them, are you pledging that we
will not go in with fighting forces?

A. I certainly don't see any likelihood of us going in with fighting forces. I
do see our continued work in the field of diplomacy with neighboring countries
that are interested in Central America and South America to bring this violence
to a halt. And to make sure that we do not just sit passively by and let this
hemisphere be invaded by outside forces.

Hard Line Toward Russia

Q. Your hard line toward the Soviet Union is in keeping with your campaign
statements, your promises. But there's some who, while applauding that stance,
feel that you might have overdone the rhetoric a little bit in laying into the
Soviet leadership as being liars and thieves, et cetera.

A. I was asked a question. And the question was: What did I think were Soviet
aims? Where did I think the Soviet Union was going? And I made it clear to them.
I said I don't have to offer my opinion. They have told us where they're going,
over and over again.

They have told us that their goal is the Marxian philosophy of world revolution
and the single one-world Communist state. And that they're dedicated to that.

And then I said, we're naive if we don't recognize in their performance of that
that they also have said that the only morality - remember their ideology is
without God, without our idea of, of morality in the religious sense -their
statement about morality is that nothing is immoral if it furthers their cause.
Which means they can resort to lying or stating - or stealing, or cheating or
even murder - if it furthers their cause, then that is not immoral.

Now, if we're going to deal with them, then we have to keep that in mind when we
deal with 'em. And I've noticed that with their own statements about me, and
their attacks on me since I answered that question that way - it was the only
statement I made -they have never denied the truth of what I said.

Q. You don't think that name-calling, if you could call it that, makes it more
difficult when you do, finally - whenever that is - sit down across the table
from Mr. Brezhnev and his cohorts?

A. No. I've been interested to see that he has suggested having a summit meeting
since I said that.  Q. They seem to be saying that they're saying they're
anxious for you to meet on arms control. They're terribly concerned about that.
They're fearful that you're not going to want to negotiate until such time as
you get your defense program and your economic program through Congress and feel
that you're negotiating from strength. And that they're fearful that that's
going to be some time, and too late.

A. Well, ''too late for what?'' is the question. I - No, I don't know, but I do
believe this: that is it rather foolish to have unilaterally disarmed, you might
say, as we did, by letting our defensive margin of safety deteriorate. And then
you sit with a fellow who's got all the arms. What do you have to negotiate
with?

You're asking him to come down to where you are, or you to build up to where he
is; but you don't have anything to trade. So maybe realistic negotiations could
take place when we can say, well all right, this thing that we're building we'll
stop, if you'll stop doing whatever it is you're really doing.

On the Economic Program

Q. Now that they face the stone-hard reality of it all, 150 liberal
organizations have gotten together to campaign against your budget cuts and
social welfare program. Middle Western and Eastern, Northeastern states are
concerned that the programs favor the Sun Belt. Some farm organizations are
concerned that the subsidies are being cut, of course, all across the board.
Now, these people who are beginning to see that they're going to get hurt a
little bit on these cuts. Are you still optimistic in the face of all this
opposition that it can be done?

A. Yes. I expected that opposition. And one of the reasons I'm optimistic is
because we received 100,000 letters and telegrams since I made the speech on the
18th. We so far have only been able to open and read and catalog about 5,339, I
think the figure is. And of that first 5,000-plus messages, 92 and a fraction
percent are totally in support of our program; of what we want to do.

We - I know that polls have been taken. And a national poll recently has shown
an even higher percentage of people in support of the program. I know from my
own experience in the few times that I get out of here and can meet the
citizenry, I find the same thing is true. You feel it, You sense it. You hear it
among the people out there.

Q. Your targeted ceiling on Federal spending is $695.5 billion with a $45
billion deficit. And how much higher than that, in that budget, can Congress go
without seriously endangering your program?

A. Well, I have to say that I believe our package has been so carefully worked
out that they endanger it if they start picking off any parts of it. Our program
is aimed, not only at reducing the budget, but with the tax feature of it, and
stimulating the economy, increasing productivity, which means more jobs for our
people and which will reduce inflation, and I believe in our program.

Yes, there'll be a $45 billion deficit. But just think what that means. That
means that that deficit would be double that without our program.

And this is why we're presenting it literally in a package. As a matter of fact,
Prime Minister Thatcher told me that she regretted that in her own attempts that
she has been unable to cut government spending as she knew she would have to to
cure their ills. And she said one of the reasons was that she tried piecemeal -
tried piece by piece to get this reduced, that reduced, and one by one they just
- they knocked it off, and turned it down.

Q. The whole core of the thing right now, of course, is getting that program
through. But realistically, are you going to be in the position, politically at
any rate, of saying all those thousands of people out there are for you to get
the cuts made but it they - if Congress cuts just one cent, or adds one cent to
it - that it's not your responsibility any longer, Congress has failed you and
failed the people?

A. Well, Walter, I virtually have to say that. Because if I said anything else -
I played in the line when I played football. It's like giving a play away and
indicating to your opponent where the play is going. No, I can't - I have to
stay with it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Reagan and Walter Cronkite

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROGRAMS FOR VETERANS WILL BE CUT IN BUDGET, PANEL IN HOUSE IS TOLD

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


President Reagan's budget-cutters want to lay off 20,000 medical personnel in
the Veterans Administration and scrap the readjustment counseling program for
Vietnam veterans, a Congressman reported today.

Representative Robert W. Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, said at a meeting of
the House Veterans Affairs Committee that someone in the Veterans Administration
had informed him of the proposal to eliminate the positions over five years and
cut off the counseling program at once.

The proposal would cut $800 million from the agency's budget.  Congressional
sources said there was no immediate breakdown on the 20,000 positions to be
abolished.  In 1980 the department had 170,000 employes, of which 8,000 were
physicians and dentists.

The statement brought angry objections from Democratic and Republican committee
members and representatives of the Veterans of Foreign Wars. Mr. Reagan said in
his message Feb. 18 that he would not cut veterans' benefits.

However, Representative Phil Gramm, Democrat of Texas, a member of the House
Budget Committee, said that the director of the Office of Management and Budget,
David A. Stockman, speaking of plans to build facilities for veterans, had told
him, ''At worst we are looking at a slowdown in our construction programs.''

''I don't believe the Administration is so obtuse, literally, as to come forward
with an overall cut in personnel of the magnitude of what we're talking about
here,'' Mr. Gramm said.

Edgar Lists Proposals

Mr. Edgar said that the proposals included these:

- Eliminating 1,100 positions from the administration's Department of Medicine
and Surgery this year and 20,000 by 1986, and 3,200 people from its Department
of Veterans Benefits by 1983.

- Halting construction projects in Camden, N.J., and Baltimore and deferring
others.

- Scrapping the readjustment counseling program and the $63 million education
program for Vietnam veterans.

- Witholding additional staffing for the vocational rehabilitation program,
which was made permanent last year.  Mr. Edgar said that the readjustment
counseling program had a budget of $9 million and served 50,000 veterans last
year in 91 storefront centers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LOOKING BACKWARD, AND FORWARD;
America, Again

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


Just last week the idea was expressed in gray, abstract words in the report of a
Federal commission on immigration: ''Historians, in their support of increased
immigration, have cautioned against overly restrictionist tendencies. They point
out that U.S. citizens have always been concerned about the arrival of
immigrants, but note that immigrants have always made contributions to U.S.
society.''

This week, the abstraction became flesh. One of the finalists in the annual
Westinghouse Science Search for outstanding student achievement was a
16-year-old Bronx boy who completed a complicated analysis of a problem in
numbers theory. Students from the Bronx, and from New York, always do well in
the competition. But this student is unusual. His name is Tan Dinh Ngo. He is a
refugee from Vietnam, and a year and a half ago he spoke no English.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


International
A negotiated peace in El Salvador will be sought this weekend in West Germany by
President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador, according to sources close to
him. West Germany's two major parties have been in close contact with both the
junta and the left-wing insurgents and have reportedly sounded out possibilities
for peace talks. (Page A1, Column 1.)
No likelihood of combat involvement in El Salvador by American forces is
foreseen by the Administration, President Reagan said. He denied that there was
any parallel between the planned increase in military advisory aid in the
conflict and the beginning of American involvement in Vietnam. (A1:2.)
Increased military aid to El Salvador will be supported by Congress, according
to Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader. He made the
prediction despite what he termed a ''high level of concern'' about the plan
among many Senators and opposition by liberal Democrats in both chambers.
(A4:5-6.)
Optimism for an Iraqi-Iranian truce was indicated by an Islamic commission. It
decided that its three-day visit to the countries this week was so promising
that it would return to Teheran today. The panel sent Yasir Arafat, chairman of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, to Teheran to make the arrangements.
(A3:5-6.)
No early accord on ocean resources is now in prospect. In a major decision, the
Reagan Administration said that it would not go along with previously
agreed-upon efforts to conclude a treaty this spring at the United Nations Law
of the Seas Conference to regulate the use of the oceans and their riches. State
Department officials said that a factor in the delay was pressure by private
mining interests.  (A1:5.)
The plot against Spain's Government began late last year after a group of senior
generals and colonels conferred in Madrid on their fears that the civilian
regime was leading the nation to disaster.  High military emissaries expressed
their concern to King Juan Carlos, who insisted he did not have the
constitutional power to remove Prime Minister Adolfo Suarez. In early January,
key officials said, Mr.  Suarez's military intelligence informed him of a
wide-ranging plot for a coup, and he decided to resign to forestall it.
(A6:1-6.)
National
An added $33.8 billion for the military will be asked of Congress today by the
Reagan Administration for the 1981 and 1982 fiscal years, according to defense
officials. They said that the request would include nearly $1 billion more for
the Rapid Deployment Force and for improving military facilities in the Indian
Ocean region.  (A1:6.)
Arms purchases on long-term orders will be proposed by the Reagan Administration
in an experiment that officials hope could save more than $1 billion a year by
1985, according to Administration officials. But the alternative to buying arms
on annual contracts is likely to stir controversy in Congress because the
long-term contracts would be difficult to alter. (A20:5-6.)
A revamping of cost-of-living policy under which automatic increases are granted
to Social Security recipients, Federal retirees and beneficiaries of such
programs as food stamps and child nutrition was recommended by the General
Accounting Office. The proposal was tentatively rejected by the Reagan
Administration as politically unfeasible. (A20:1-2.)
A ban on the use of talc on rice imported into Puerto Rico or processed or sold
there was imposed by the authorities. The use of talc, mixed with glucose and
applied to rice to make it shiny, has been challenged by a study suggesting that
the ingestion of talc might increase the risk of stomach cancer. (A12:4-6.)
Meharry Medical College is troubled by a deepening financial crisis.  The
institution, which was founded in Nashville in 1876, has trained nearly half the
black physicians and dentists in the country. Its problems have prompted a
change in leadership and a reassessment of its mission. (A12:1-3.)
A drive to unionize office workers was announced jointly by the 650,000-member
Service Employees International Union and the 10,000-member Working Women, a
national group of office employees.  They will seek to organize the nation's 20
million clerical workers, most of whom are women. (A12:1.)
Metropolitan
Possible trading-in of Federal funds earmarked for the Westway to help finance a
$5-billion, five-year improvement program for the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority system was suggested by the Democratic leaders of the Assembly and
Senate. Governor Carey has repeatedly said that such an arrangement would be
blocked in Congress and he has vowed that the controversial highway project in
Manhattan will be built. (A1:3.)
Soaring heating costs are a critical problem for hospitals. Twenty years ago, it
cost $100,000 a year to heat Hartford Hospital. Last year the cost was $1.7
million, and this year it will be even higher. Administrators estimate that on
the coldest days they are spending $10 a minute to keep the Hartford Hospital
complex warm. (A1:4-6.)
Cooperative apartment prices rose again in Manhattan last year despite high
mortgage interest rates, according to real-estate executives. One survey found
that the average sale price in December was nearly $61,000 a room and that
prices of apartments sold in 200 selected buildings in 1980 averaged nearly
$49,000 a room, about 40 percent higher than in 1979. (B1:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Jack Ogilvie Horton, 43, Ex-Aide in Interior Dept.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


Jack Ogilvie Horton, a former Assistant Secretary of the Interior, died Saturday
in Denver of leukemia. He was 43 years old and had been working as a consultant
in natural resources before he was taken ill.

Mr, Horton, a naturalist and outdoorsman, was born in Sheridan, Wyo., and grew
up on the family ranch in Saddlestring, where he was living.

An alumnus of Deerfield Academy, Mr. Horton was graduated from Princeton
University with a degree in geology in 1960. After studying at Oxford University
as a Rhodes Scholar in 1960-61 and 1965-66, he received a master's degree in
politics and economics. During the Vietnam War he was an officer in the Navy,
flying 175 missions over the South China Sea, for which he was decorated.

His career in civic service began with his appointment in 1967 as the executive
director of the Wyoming Republican Committee, which he left to join the Interior
Department. There he held various posts, until he left in 1972 to serve as a
co-chairman of the Joint Federal-State Land Planning Commission for Alaska. He
returned to the Interior Department in 1973 as an assistant secretary for land
and water under President Nixon and remained there until 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PRIORITIES: BASIC REVERSAL;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


The Reagan Administration's military budget, coming on the heels of the big
domestic budget cuts two weeks ago, signals a reversal of national priorities as
basic and significant as did the Great Society programs of President Johnson in
the mid-1960's.  If the Administration has its way, its new military program
will commit the nation to major long-term growth in Pentagon spending, just as
the Johnson Great Society initiatives committed the nation to a huge buildup in
domestic spending, long after Mr. Johnson had left the White House.

The Reagan military budget represents an expansion of the Carter
Administration's long-term effort to put the United States in a stronger
position to deal militarily, if it wants, with global instability in trouble
spots like the Persian Gulf, and it tacitly accepts that the threat of
conventional war is greater there than in Europe.

It goes beyond the Carter buildup of strategic forces with an expensive new
manned bomber and a surge of naval growth. And, by emphasizing the need for a
quick strategic spurt to match Soviet power, it contains the hint that the
Reagan Administration believes that, in Winston Churchill's famous phrase, it
must ''arm to parley'' with Moscow on arms control.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger disclosed no stunning new military
doctrine and unveiled no grand revision of national strategy in arguing for a
$33 billion jump in military appropriations over the Carter budgets for the
fiscal years 1981 and 1982.

Implicitly he accepted the premises of the Carter budget that the American
land-based deterrent was in jeopardy and that the greatest immediate threat of
conflict lay not in Europe but in the Persian Gulf, requiring improved naval
forces, more funds for rapid deployment, greater mobility for American forces.

The fault with the Carter military budget, Mr. Weinberger contended, was ''not
so much that it omitted critical programs entirely in order fully to fund
others, but rather that it failed to provide full funding for many programs it
conceded were necessary but felt unable to afford. The budget, in short,
temporized.''

The numbers he unveiled today for the fiscal years 1981 and 1982 only hint at
the magnitude of the effort the Reagan Administration has in mind. Pentagon
briefing papers showed increases in military spending authority not only of 12.4
percent in the fiscal year 1981 and 14.6 percent in the fiscal year 1982, but
also 7 percent a year through the mid-1980's, raising the military budget to
$367.5 billion in 1986, nearly $50 billion above the projected Carter figure for
that year.

Moreover, the new Administration plans to seek Congressional approval for
multiyear financing for arms, to help, in Mr.  Weinberger's phrase, ''rebuild
the industrial base'' of the nation's military-industrial complex. To recruit
and hold military personnel, he has recommended a total military pay rise of 17
percent for the fiscal year 1981 and stuck with an additional increase of 9.1
percent for next fall.

''This is not a one-year program for summer soldiers,'' Mr.  Weinberger said
with soft-spoken bluntness in a meeting with reporters this morning. ''This is a
very long-range kind of program.  When you neglect them a long time, as we have,
and then you have to move rapidly, you have all kinds of problems.''

It is the long-term trends that the Reagan Administration is bent on reversing,
one of them being what Mr. Weinberger called the ''investment gap'' between the
estimated levels of Soviet and American military spending and the steady decline
of the military share of the American Federal budget.

Over the last decade, he contended, Washington not only did not maintain ''a
competitive position'' with the Soviet Union but also was ''a bad example'' for
its allies.

''If we continue at anything like the levels of expenditure of the recent
past,'' the Defense Secretary argued, ''by the mid-1980's, we will clearly be
second in military power to the Soviet Union, with all of the consequences that
would entail for our own security, the cohesion of our alliances, and the
worldwide protection of our interests.''

What the Reagan circle sees is that during the Vietnam War military spending
reached a peak of 43.2 percent of the Federal budget in 1968 but declined to
22.9 percent in 1980, as the war wound down and as President Johnson's domestic
programs absorbed more funds.

With the Iranian crisis and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in late 1979,
military spending rose slightly, reaching nearly 24 percent this year. The
Reagan goal is to increase that share to 32 percent by 1984, primarily by
shrinking the growth of domestic programs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORAN GUERRILLAS DENY OBTAINING ARMS FROM COMMUNIST BLOC

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: SAN JUAN, P.R., March 4


The political commission representing El Salvador's guerrillas has denied
receiving arms from Vietnam, Ethiopia, Cuba, the Soviet Union or ''any other
government.''

In a statement issued here yesterday by Hugo Navarette, a commission member, the
group accused the United States of conjuring up the idea of Soviet expansionism
to justify its own military intervention in El Salvador.

''The Salvadoran people have taken more than 10 years to acquire and develop all
the resources that now permit them to carry out successfully their
political-military struggle against tyranny,'' the statement said.

Many weapons, the commission said, had been made by the guerrillas themselves.
Others, manufactured in the United States, had been seized in combat with the
Salvadoran military, it said, and still others had been bought in the
international marketplace.

The commission called ''entirely false'' the evidence the United States has
assembled to demonstrate that the Soviet Union, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cuba and
other Communist countries are sending arms to El Salvador.

''All governments and people,'' the commission said, ''know the methods that the
Central Intelligence Agency uses to fabricate these 'proofs.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REACHING FOR THE 'GOOD GUYS' IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial of Feb. 19 suggests that on some levels in this great country
there exists a clear understanding of the causes and possible solutions for the
chaos in which El Salvador is submerged.  If that is the case, maybe there is
time to initiate ''a genuine political approach to the democrats among the
insurgents.''

I wholly agree with you when you note that ''the junta has only contained, not
eliminated the insurgency,'' and the Pentagon knows perfectly well that it is
militarily impossible for the junta forces to terminate it.

As a businessman who briefly served as president of the Salvadoran Energy
Commission for the junta that resigned on Jan. 3, 1980, I wonder how long the
U.S. will permit itself to be manipulated by an ambitious military group
commanded by the Minister of Defense, Colonel Garcia (whom Napoleon Duarte has
failed to control).

It is well known that behind their ''anti-Communism'' hide the greatest
corruption that El Salvador has ever witnessed as well as primitive repressive
practices that have made thousands of Salvadorans, and some Americans, innocent
victims, thus minimizing whatever errors the extreme left has made. China,
Vietnam,

Iran and Nicaragua vividly testify to the long-range direction of those tactics.
Certainly, it is not good business to keep friendly thugs in power while
allowing democratic elements to become radicalized.

By now it has become crystal clear for many people why the entire cabinet and
the civilian members of the junta that replaced dictator Carlos Romero resigned
on Jan. 3, 1980. For us, it was no secret at that time that a close alliance had
been worked out between some high-level military commanders and the most
backward elements of the Salvadoran right.

That is why the assassinations of Monsignor Romero, Enrique Alvarez, and the
American nuns and land-reform advisers will never be solved by the present
junta; and that is why such honest and capable democrats as Guillermo Ungo and
many young army officers oppose the junta.

In view of East-West tensions, it is understandable that the new U.S.
Administration is sounding the alarm bell over El Salvador; but, as in the case
of Vietnam, it will be impossible for the U.S. to genuinely protect its own
interests by supporting a small group of military landlords and dishonest
politicians.
RODRIGO E. GUERRA, Santa Clara, Calif., Feb. 24, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

* To the Editor:$


SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


William Safire could set the world afire if he has his way. In his Feb. 26
column, he offers two reasons for U.S. intervention in El Salvador: (1) ''We
must break the Communist winning streak'' and (2) ''El Salvador is a place where
we can win.''

Are these valid reasons for supporting what Times correspondent Alan Riding
described as ''one of the more repressive regimes in Latin America'' (news
analysis Feb. 13)?

The brutalized little land of jungle, poverty, malnutrition and massive
unemployment has been ruled by a series of army officers without interruption
for 50 years. Land ownership is concentrated in few hands. The revolutionary
bloc has backed successive but wholly unsuccessful campaigns for higher wages,
lower rents and a redistribution of the large estates. In the bedraggled cities,
it has organized strikes for better working conditions in factories and for
improved drinking water in the quagmire of slums. The military regimes make sure
the distance between the impoverished masses and the small ruling class remains
vast.

Why can't the U.S. back the good guys for a change? If we did just that in El
Salvador, we would be defeating the Russians and their Cuban pawns at their own
game. If we are planning to make the tiny Central American country another
Vietnam or a Korea, it might behoove Mr. Safire to remember what history teaches
us: a small flame can ignite the world.
RALPH OBER, Brooklyn, Feb. 27, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LATINS' PRESSING QUESTIONS;
by Carlos Fuentes

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: HANOVER, N.H.


Throughout this hemisphere, these are the questions that we Latin Americans are
urgently asking ourselves: Is the Reagan Administration out to prove the
born-again machismo of the United States? But, then, why doesn't the United
States show its bravery in Kabul or Warsaw? Since it cannot take vengeance in
Iran, must it take it in El Salvador? Is it bravery or cowardice to bully and
slap around a pale, underfed 9-year-old child? Why are Gen. Alexander M. Haig
Jr.'s sabers rattling?

Is the Administration really winking at the Soviet Union? Is it actually saying:
''Look, I do whatever I like in my backyard; you go on and do whatever you like
in yours.'' Is the blood of the Polish workers to be shed on top of the blood of
the Salvadoran peasants?  Are we not witnessing a vast charade between the two
superpowers?

Do the United States and the Soviet Union really believe that the historic trend
toward a world of pluralistic powers can be halted? Do they ignore the fact that
Mexico and Poland, Hungary and Venezuela, China and Brazil are relentlessly
drifting further and further away from the dominating spheres of the Dulles and
Molotov eras? Or, do they know it only too well? Does Washington think El
Salvador can be the cheap ticket for a nostalgic restoration of the 1950's?

Does the State Department think that any Latin American will swallow the
gruyere-like white paper on Communist intervention in El Salvador? Does it think
that we ignore the fact that the opposition in El Salvador has plural links not
only with Moscow and Havana, but also with Bonn, Mexico City, Caracas, Paris,
and Stockholm, thus faithfully mirroring the varied sources of support a
democratic government in El Salvador could count on? Does General Haig think we
ignore the fact that in civil strife arms are readily available from all
quarters? That, furthermore, arms can be introduced with propaganda purposes, as
in Korea and Vietnam? That, after all, fourfifths of the arms used by the
Salvadoran rebels come from democratic, free-enterprise gun-runners in Florida,
Texas, and California? Why doesn't the United States Government crack down on
its own sources of contraband?

Who can hide the central fact that the problems of El Salvador cannot be the
invention of foreign forces since those problems are bred in the marrow of a
colonialism nearly 500 years old? That the army is the unlimited custodian of
colonialism in El Salvador and that it will use the arms it gets from the United
States to kill unlimitedly? Is this what Mrs. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick means by
''moderate repression?'' Can't she hear the thousands of innocent dead in El
Salvador answering her that they are not ''moderately dead?'' If Jimmy Carter's
human rights policy was selective, what about a Reagan antiterrorist policy that
condones terrorism in Guatemala, Chile, Argentina, and El Salvador - even when
the victims are United States citizens?

We ask ourselves: Will the somewhat ominous presence of Spanishspeaking United
States Army advisers who have been in El Salvador since the autumn of 1980 -
many of them of Mexican and Puerto Rican descent - swell in size into a United
States ground army in Central America? Does General Haig's reference to dealing
with problems ''at the source'' foreshadow blockades and invasions of countries
in the region? Do Senator Jesse Helms's fears of having to ''draw the line''
north of Mexico portend that Mexico might one day be the object of a
''protective'' United States intervention?

Is the Administration really aware that armed intervention, be it direct or
inspired by the United States, against any Latin-American nation of whatever
political stripe, will turn the whole Latin continent into a gigantic brush
fire? That we will resist United States intervention in Cuba or Chile, El
Salvador or Argentina, Nicaragua or Mexico?

Is Washington aware of the collision course with Mexico that it has charted
through its imprudent elevation of El Salvador to the realm of strategic
confrontation? Will Washington deny Mexico's legitimate interests in the region
- first of all the interest of true stability, the stability that can be
achieved only by the speedy dissolution of the ruinous colonial heritage of
Central America? It is to be hoped that when the new ambassador takes up his
post in Mexico City, he will forcefully inform the Reagan Administration of the
true thrust and range of Mexico's preoccupations.

Meanwhile, we ask ourselves if we are to hear in El Salvador nothing but an echo
of the corrupting United States intervention of 1954 in Guatemala, itself an
echo of interventions past in Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Haiti,
Cuba, and Panama? Is not this the other fundamental reason, along with
colonialism, of turmoil, instability, terrorism, hunger, and weakness in the
area: United States interventionism, always, only, United States
interventionism?  Is there no lesson to be learned here? Will this tragedy go on
forever, fatally, a poisoned curse on Latin America?

When we ask these questions we think that El Salvador is a test case. A test
case of misguided United States expansionism in Latin America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Carlos Fuentes, a novelist, is a Fellow at Dartmouth College. He was Mexico's
Ambassador to France from 1975 to 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERBICIDE CASE IN ARIZONA IS SETTLED

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 336 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, March 4


The Dow Chemical Company and the United States Forest Service have agreed to pay
an undisclosed sum to five families in Globe, Ariz., who said they suffered
permanent injuries 12 years ago when a defoliant was sprayed over their homes.

The amount of the settlement, reached Monday, was not disclosed.  One condition
imposed by Dow, the manufacturer of the defoliant, was that the amount be kept
secret. In addition, the company did not admit any liability in the settlement.

Federal District Judge John K. Regan of St. Louis oversaw the negotiations.  The
case, which was scheduled to go to trial Monday in Federal court here, involves
a herbicide called Kuron that is related to the herbicide Agent Orange, which
was used as a defoliant in the Vietnam War. Two chemicals in Agent Orange,
2,4,5-T and 2,4-D, are found in Kuron.

Lawsuit by Vietnam Veterans

Vietnam veterans who handled Agent Orange have filed a lawsuit contending that
the defoliant caused them to suffer from various ailments, including cancer.

Kuron, which was first manufactured in 1954, was sprayed by the United States
Forest Service to thin foliage and increase water runoff in the Pinal Mountains
of the Tonto National Forest near Globe in 1968 and 1969.

Twenty plaintiffs in the Globe case contended in the suit that they started to
have health problems almost immediately after the spraying.

One of the first plaintiffs, Billee Shoecraft, died in 1977 of cancer. Her
husband, Willard Shoecraft, who said she began suffering from cancer after a
helicopter sprayed her with the defoliant, is among the plaintiffs who settled.

Before her death, Mrs. Shoecraft wrote a book about her experience in which she
said that after she was sprayed her eyes were ''nearly swollen shut,'' her arms
and legs were swollen ''twice normal size'' and her hair was ''coming out in
patches.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAKING OF A WRITER: TELL A YARN OR NO DINNER

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


''When I was young, we lived in a large, large house in Ossining, and there was
a huge diningroom with a long table like you see in New Yorker cartoons. My
father had hired a chef from the Hotel Pierre and he used to make these
incredible dishes. I would come in at dinner time, and before I could sit down,
my father would ask, 'What did you do at school today?' and I would tell him.
'That's not enough,' he'd say. 'What did you do at school today?' Then I would
try making something up - still not good enough. Before I could eat, I had to
satisfy my father with a tale that would entertain him. Telling stories began as
sort of a food-gathering reflex.''

THUS did Mark Helprin, the author of ''Ellis Island'' - a new and highly
acclaimed collection of short stories, recently published by Delacorte Press -
explain his choice of vocation. There is to his account, as there is to all his
fiction, an air of the fabulous, a certain shapeliness of detail that blurs the
line between reality and fiction. Indeed, the story about his father and the
dinner table, he said in a later interview, was actually just that - a story.

''I do tend to exaggerate,'' says Mr. Helprin. ''The truth of it was that I was
speaking in a metaphor for my relation to my father.  He retired very early and
devoted all his energy towards me and sometimes it was too much. I had to figure
out how to slip out from under, and so I learned to dissemble and make up
stories. We did eat in that diningroom, and he did ask me about school, but
instead of saying don't go to the table, he would frighten the death out of me
at the table. I gave the courtroom truth a twist to make it a better story and
to protect him and to protect me a little. That's my profession - to change one
thing into another.''

Sprawling and picaresque, Mr. Helprin's first novel, ''Refiner's Fire,''
chronicled the extravagant adventures - adventures either remembered or
hallucinated - of one Marshall Pearl, a foundling who roams the world from the
Hudson Valley to the Rockies to the jungles of Jamaica and finally to his
homeland, Israel. Marshall fights with eagles, tries ''to catch impressive
diseases,'' discourses with madmen and finally learns what it means to be a
hero.

Visions of the Extreme

Many of the stories in ''Ellis Island'' are similarly concerned with conditions
of the extreme: in ''The Schreuderspitze,'' for instance, a man tries to climb a
mountain and has a vision of the summit as a place of pure light, free of all
ambiguities; and in ''Letters From the Samantha,'' a ship is held hostage by the
disturbing presence of a large ape that has been brought aboard during a summer
storm. In each case, these encounters with the absolute have a kind of purifying
effect.

Mr. Helprin's point of view, it seems, is an essentially religious one. He says
he is interested above all in ''devotional literature - any kind of literature
which is written in praise of the Supreme Being'' - and feels he has more in
common with a Hebrew writer like S.Y. Agnon than with contemporary Jewish
authors in America.

''If Bellow and Malamud are standing on the sun, then I'm at least on Pluto,''
he says. ''I'm not at all like them: I don't have that introspection. I have no
agony and no resentments. Boredom and alienation don't mean a thing to me. Given
the Holocaust, I don't see how anyone - at least any Jew - can be upset or
alienated by their life here, where they are free to live and work and raise
families.  My interpretation of what the Holocaust ordains is to appreciate what
we have.''

''I've written three Jewish books now,'' he goes on, ''but they've been more or
less ignored by the Jewish press - not one was reviewed in Commentary, for
instance - and that hurts me. I think it's because I'm not alienated from the
core of Judaism, whereas a lot of current Jewish writers are and Jews like to
worry. I don't think they're interested in someone with an unfettered relation
to his faith. It's partly a survival thing: if you come from a background where
your grandparents were made into soap, you tend to keep your eye on the
negative. Someone who doesn't agonize isn't worth paying attention to because
he's basically healthy.''

Language Is Classical

If Mr. Helprin's work is curiously lacking in the modernist sentiments of
alienation and ennui, it is old-fashioned in other respects as well. The
language employed in his books is more classical than conversational, and its
end, says the author, is ''less to show my place in the world than to praise the
beauty of the world around me.'' What's more, he holds the now somewhat
unpopular opinion that writers, even successful writers, should maintain another
profession: his ambition is to someday work for the government, much the way
Dante, John Donne and Washington Irving once served theirs. Toward that end, he
has studied at Harvard's Center for Middle Eastern Studies and spends several
hours a day reading up on foreign affairs.

''Diplomacy seems a profession suited to a writer,'' he says.  ''When you're
trying to judge people's actions in making policy, you have to have
translational abilities - I think there's a special link of language between
writing and statemanship. The sense has developed - especially since Vietnam -
that writers are oppositional, but in history, they've often served their king.
At this moment I would love to serve my country - I don't feel oppositional at
all.  But I guess I've always been sort of a living anachronism.''

In fact, as far as Mr. Helprin is concerned, he is a thoroughgoing outsider -
not just an exile from this century, but a kind of spiritual orphan as well. He
was sickly as a child, he says, and that experience left him more at home in the
private landscape of his dreams than the world of his peers. Although a sense of
obligation to his religion led him to emigrate to Israel after his years at
Harvard, he stayed little more than a year. He was ''miserable'' in the Israeli
infantry - he says he spent most of the time peeling hardboiled eggs in the army
kitchen - and so returned to America.

Orderly Life in Brooklyn

Today Mr. Helprin and his wife Lisa, a lawyer, maintain a quiet, orderly life in
Brooklyn. ''Psychopathically neat'' by his own description, Mr. Helprin spends
his days writing at a large, empty desk in his sparely furnished living room.
First drafts of his books consist of black loose-leaf binders filled with lined
white paper, meticulously covered with peacock-blue script - no blots, no
scratchings-out. He abjures drinking and smoking, avoids parties and rarely
entertains visitors. ''To me, it's a big deal when the mail comes,'' he says.
''Sometimes I even find that upsetting.''

Clearly it is a hermetic life, but it is a life apparently conducive to Mr.
Helprin's art. ''There's something you get from being an outsider,'' he says,
''and in my case it's as much selfwilled as not. Maybe that's even true of Jews
as a group. If you are outside, you have a different perspective - you spend
more time observing things, which is the basis for all writing. It's the
difference between a king and a painter of the court. You don't have power, so
you create it through understanding.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mark Helprin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Swedes Protest Over Salvador

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, March 5


More than 1,000 demonstrators gathered in a snowstorm in Stockholm's main square
tonight to protest American involvement in El Salvador. Pictures of victims of
the fighting in El Salvador were projected on a huge screen in scenes
reminiscent of protests here against United States policies in Vietnam a decade
ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRAT GIRDS FOR BUDGET FIGHT WITYH EYE ON DATA, EAR ON TULSA

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 5


When Representative James R. Jones describes his task as the House Budget
Committee chairman, who must help marshal the Democrats' case for or against the
Reagan economic program, he talks of Vietnam and his learning days on the staff
of President Johnson.

Information, a never-ending flood of official information, is the easy,
mesmerizing part of the capital routine, he says, but the crucial thing is to
reach out for variety and divergence.

''L.B.J. was the master at soaking up information,'' said the Oklahoma Democrat,
who, as Lyndon Baines Johnson's chief of staff, was one of the governors of the
information flow. ''But one of the problems, I think, is that he was unable to
get a wide enough divergence of opinion on the war. He was unable to feel and
touch the problem as much as he needed for his good instinctive judgment to
work.''

Mr. Jones says he fears forgetting that lesson, and so, as he hurries to prepare
to stand up to the enormous informational strength built into the President's
role as chief budgetmaker, he makes sure that after the visits north to Wall
Street and overseas to Downing Street, after the staff absorption of the Wharton
School's latest economic predictions and the latest theorizing on block-grant
financing, he takes the extra trouble to read his constituents' mail and to call
up people in places like Tulsa.

Duration of Problem Cited

From Tulsa he hears: ''So far there's been lots of platitudes, but no great
detail on the Reagan program.'' This is the view of John Bumgarner, senior vice
president of the Williams Companies in Tulsa, a Jim Jones intimate in the oil
and coal business who talks a few times a week with his friend. He maintains
that the ''numbers part'' of the budget issue is ''the easy part,'' and lately
the two of them have been discussing the psychology of inflation. ''I like the
Reagan direction, but I wish he'd give the same emphasis to the duration of the
problem,'' Mr. Bumgarner said. ''I don't think the solution can happen quickly
and the public should be cautioned.''

From such chats and from gleaning new ideas from his mail and pursuing them, the
Congressman said he felt more assured about his job. He receives 1,100 letters a
week, and from this gets about one such idea each week, he said. He attends to
the committee's long hearing process not so much in search of pure information,
he said, as to record the thick, strong consensus that legislation will need at
the grass-roots level when the distasteful budget-cutting votes come up this
summer. Sometimes the buzz and drone of the hearings can invite serendipity, he
said.

''I don't know why, but I remember the shape of the '78 tax compromise started
to click in my mind during a certain hearing that featured four economists, two
conservatives, two liberals,'' he said. ''Don't ask how or why.''

The Budget Committee has a staff of 70 assistants, including a score of fiscal
analysts. Each of the 18 Democrats and 12 Republicans on the committee is
entitled to a budget associate. These associates are typically older, more
schooled specialists who are troubleshooters on economic questions for their
legislators. Beyond that, there are the analytical resources of the General
Accounting Office and of the Congressional Budget Office, the bipartisan agency
established in the budget fights of the Nixon Administration, when Congress
decided that it needed its cadre of analysts to face the Presidential armies at
Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget.

Common Sense Is 'Potent Weapon'

''Certainly the President and the Administration can have most of the cards on
something like this,'' Mr. Jones said. ''But it's been my experience that if you
talk to enough people and read enough divergent information, common sense can be
an extremely potent weapon.''

John Dill, Representative Jones's counsel and the Budget Committee's deputy
executive director, said he felt that there could be advantages to the smaller,
tighter size of Congress's budget apparatus.

''I'm sure the Reagan Administration is like all the others,'' Mr.  Dill said.
''It must travel the path of multiple layers in the decision process. We are
able to react quicker than the executive branch, and that is a strength.''

The committee staff includes Bruce M. Meredith, the chief budget analyst now
looking into the Reagan cuts, Allen C. Grommet, chief of the economics section
studying longer-range questions, and M.  Wendell Belew Jr., the committee
counsel whose speciality includes the procedural strategy involved in arranging
and moving a compromise in Congress.

So far in the process, Mr. Jones said, he senses ''some wiggle room'' from
private talks lately with business leaders, governors and mayors. ''Most realize
the full size of the Reagan program might not be needed for full success,'' he
contended. ''Cuts in the area of, say, $25 billion to $35 billion would do in
establishing a credible program of cuts.'' The size of the cuts, as originally
put forward, was $41.4 billion.

While his committee staff awaited details on the first round of Reagan budget
cuts and the outline of the second round, the chairman said he foresaw a final
compromise in which any differences with the President over economic facts and
data interpretation would likely be settled, except, he said, for one rather
large possibility. ''That is the question of whether a 30 percent tax cut will
prove a stimulus to consumtion rather than the stimulus to savings and
investment the President predicts,'' the Congressman said. ''That probably will
only be resolved on the House floor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Representative James R. Jones

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


The Importance of Being Walter A blizzard of bouquets already threatens to
smother Walter Cronkite, but there is one more point worth exploring. Tonight's
final ''That's the way it is'' on the CBS Evening News is a Media Event. Still,
his talents as a broadcaster, as he'd be first to concede, are hardly unique;
others are as proficient at the microphone and as seasoned in judgment. Yet
viewers have not elected them ritual chief of television news. Why? We venture a
theory of contraries.

Viewers want their electronic chief to offset the mood promoted by the real-life
one in the White House. Consider: during the placid years of the Eisenhower
Presidency, the most-admired network journalist was Edward R. Murrow, the
captain of the CBS News team until he resigned in 1961 to head information
services in the Kennedy Administration. Mr. Murrow was a tense chain-smoker, a
committed disturber of the peace - nearly everything, in short, that Ike was
not.

When Mr. Cronkite began his run as anchorman in 1962, it chanced that his
reassuring voice and manner perfectly suited a time of heat. Viewers were hungry
for calm and continuity, and remained so during the years of the Cuban missile
crisis, the civil rights upheaval, assassinations, Vietnam, Watergate. Mr.
Cronkite delivered, superbly. He helped America mourn its slain leaders and
cheer successful space shots; he was there during the 1968 riots in Chicago and
the return of the hostages from Teheran.

With Mr. Cronkite gone from his regular slot, there will be earnest debates
within the television industry about how best to catch, and hold, a mass
audience. The answer, if the anchor theory has weight, will depend on the temper
of the White House and the temperature of the times.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Afghan and Cambodia Issues Cited by U.N. Rights Unit

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 6


The United Nations Human Rights Commission accused Vietnam today of occupying
Cambodia and criticized the Soviet Union for its intervention in Afghanistan.
Neither country was mentioned by name.

The resolution on Afghanistan said the commission was ''gravely concerned at the
continued foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan.'' The resolution was
sponsored by Islamic and other third-world nations.

The Western-backed resolution on Cambodia, which is called Kampuchea by the
Cambodians, said that ''gross and flagrant violations of human rights'' had
continued to occur there and added that ''the primary violation of human rights
in Kampuchea at present is the persistence of foreign occupation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4951 words


MATTERS

Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference in Washington
yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times.

OPENING STATEMENT

President Reagan. How do you do, I have a brief opening statement before turning
to your questions.  Today, I'm instructing the Office of Management and Budget
to include in the budget package that we will send to Congress next Tuesday a
plan for the reduction of nondefense personnel in the Federal Government.

Under this plan we will replace the temporary hiring freeze with new permanent
ceilings that will reduce Federal employment by nearly 33,000 this fiscal year,
and another 63,100 in 1982, compared to the personnel projections of the last
Administration.

In just two years, these reductions will save the taxpayers $1.3 billion.
Millions of Americans today have had to tighten their belts because of the
economic conditions and it's time to put Washington on a diet too.

Gaining control of the size of Government, getting our economy back on track,
will not wait. We'll have to act now and we'll continue to search for ways to
cut the size of Government and reduce the amount of Federal spending, and to
achieve a trimmer, more efficient, more responsive Government for all the
people.

And now we shall get on with our first attempt at 'Reagan Roulette.'

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Coup in El Salvador

Q. Mr. President, your Secretary of State has said that you would strongly
oppose a right-wing takeover of the Government in El Salvador, while your own
White House spokesman has been less definite. Just how strongly would you oppose
such a coup? And would it result in a complete cutoff of American aid, both
economic and military?

A. Well, I think what we're all intending to say is that we would have to view
very seriously such an attempt and such a coup. We're there at the request of
the Government; we're supporting a Government which we believe has an intention
of improving the society there, for the benefit of the people, and we're opposed
to terrorism of the right or left.

And so we would have to view very seriously - I can't answer the last part of
your question as to exactly what we would do. But it would be of the gravest
concern to us if there were such a thing.  Helen.

Veto of Tax Bill

Q. Mr. President, we know you don't like to tip your hand on legislation before
the documents on your desk are dead, but Mr.  Stockman, who speaks with great
authority for the this Administration, and others who talked to you recently,
say that you are considering a veto of the tax bill if it is changed
substantially. Do they know whereof they speak?

A. Well, the veto is a tool of Government that belongs to the President and I've
never been reluctant to use it, but you were right in your first statement: I
never talk about in advance whether I will or will not veto.

First of all, I think I should say that I am reasonably optimistic. I'm not
looking for a confrontation with the Congress and I have, I think, sufficient
reason to believe that there is great bipartisan support for our program in the
Congress. And I'm going to try to keep trying to work with them so that we won't
face that particular problem.

Precautions in El Salvador

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to ask you a two-part question on El Salvador: First,
is a naval blockade an option you are considering?  And second, isn't it a fact
that several Americans have been murdered in El Salvador in the last several
weeks and the advisers you're sending there could well be a special target for
terrorists? How do you intend to provide for the personal safety of those
advisers? And do you envisage the need for American troops as any sort of a
security force for those advisers?

A. Well, it almost was three parts to your question so let me say the first part
is I won't comment on anything we might be considering in the line of an action.

With regard to the safety of our personnel, we're taking every precaution we
can. We realize that there is a risk and a danger. None of them will be going
into combat; none of them will be accompanying El Salvadorian troops in missions
of that kind. They will be in what has to be considered as reasonably safe a
place as there can be in that country, in garrison. They are there for training
of the El Salvador personnel.

We can't, I'm sorry to say, make it risk free but we shall do our utmost to
provide for their safety.  Q. Just a follow-up: Do you - do you not see the need
for American troops as security forces, in other words?  A. No, we - that is not
in our reckoning at all. We think we're abiding by what it - nor has it been
requested. We've had requested the people that we have sent there already and we
don't foresee the need of any American troops.

Inflation and Jobless

Q. Mr. President, several of your advisers say that you're going to be in deep
political hot water if the public doesn't get conclusive evidence, at least by
the end of the year, that your economic program is leading to a slowdown in
inflation and in reducing unemployment. How long do you think Americans should
wait before making a judgment on your program? And to win a good mark from the
public, in your mind what specific progress must be made on the economic front?

A. I think that one of the - and I hope that the public would understand this
-that one of the things that must be realized is we're not promising any instant
cure. We don't believe that in the matter of several months, or probably even in
the first year, we're going to see more than beginning signs of recovery.
Because, remember, we have inherited one budget that still has never been passed
- the Government is operating without a passed budget - but in a year that is
pretty well gone. So our first savings in this year are going to be reduced by
that fact.

Oct. 1 the '82 fiscal year begins. I think it would be premature and I think no
one should indicate that we're promising an instant cure of these problems.
These problems have built up over several decades and they're not going to go
away overnight. But we do believe that as the - if the economies are passed
which - and they should be - and the tax program, we should begin to see some
effects, I would think, by the end of the '82 year.

First of all, we would see a drastic reduction in the deficit that will take
place in the fiscal year '82. But those things, as they take place, it takes
some time before the effect of those is then felt out in the economy.

El Salvador and Vietnam

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to get back to El Salvador for a second: The United
States' role there is being compared with its role in Vietnam 15 to 20 years
ago. Do you think that's a valid comparison?  And also, how do you intend to
avoid having El Salvador turn into a Vietnam?

A. I don't believe it is a valid parallel. I know that many people have been
suggesting that. The situation here is, you might say, our front yard. What
we're - it isn't just El Salvador.

What we're doing in going to the aid of a government that asked that aid of a
neighboring country - and a friendly country in our hemisphere - is try to halt
the infiltration into the Americas, by terrorists and by outside interference,
and those who aren't just aiming at El Salvador but, I think, are aiming at the
whole of Central and possibly later South America and, I'm sure, eventually
North America. But this is what we're doing: is trying to stop this
destabilizing force of terrorism and guerrilla warfare and revolution from being
exported in here, backed by the Soviet Union and Cuba and those others that
we've named. And we have taken that evidence to some of our allies.

So I think the situation is entirely different. We do not foresee the need of
American troops, as I said earlier, in this. And we're sending what some 50-odd
personnel for training. Well, we have such training squads in more than 30
countries today. So this isn't an unusual thing that we're doing.

Prospects for the Poor

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Despite what Budget Director Stockman says about
sharing the burden of the proposed budget cuts, I don't understand how the
nation's poor are going to survive this almost across-the-board cut in social
programs. Can you explain this, since your proposed economic plan is not an
immediate quick stitch?

A. Yes, I think I can. We're not cutting into the muscle of a program where it
is going to require taking aid away from those people that must have it. First
of all, by putting many of the programs that are now categorical grants into
block grants, we're getting rid of a rather expensive administrative overhead,
which will account for part of the savings.

Part of the savings, also, is going to be the manner in which these programs
tend to expand. And then government loosens the regulations a little bit and
says, ''Well, we ought to include these people over here or these people over
here,'' and we find that we are giving the benefits of the program to people who
do not have real need, and for which the program was not originally intended.

I speak with some confidence of this because this is very much what we did in
California with our welfare reforms. We never had a single case turn up after
our welfare reforms, and some 350,000 people in that one state disappeared from
the welfare rolls. We never had a single case of anyone suddenly appearing and
saying: ''I am destitute. I've been cut off welfare.'' As a matter of fact, most
of those people disappeared of their own free will, which led us to believe,
under the regulations which bound us in our administrative ability, we were
unable to really pin down how many people might be getting more than one welfare
check. And they just disappeared as the spotlight began to be turned on -
possibly out of recognition that they were now going to be caught - the rolls
just shrank.

And it's this theory that is behind what we're doing. Our safety net of programs
- the seven programs we spoke of - is intact. And I'm quite sure there will be
attempts by those in the bureacracy who are involved in some of these programs
to suggest that there is great distress being caused by them. And we had the
experience in California of seeing them actually attempt to penalize some of the
truly needy until we could intervene, simply to create cases of that kind. And
we'll be on guard for that.

Private Aid to Reagans

Q. The White House has taken the somewhat unusual step of asking private groups
to raise money to promote your economic program and to refurbish the White
House. Could you tell us why the names of contributors to these programs are not
being disclosed? Wouldn't disclosure of the names be a way of assuring the
public that there is no conflict of interest?

A. Well, there can't be any conflict of interest because we didn't have anything
to do with it. We know that such a program is going forward and we have no
contact with it at all. But these are people that were so enthused after the
presentation was made of the program that apparently they are enlisting support,
just as those who are opposed to it are massing their forces together to oppose
the program.

Curb on Japanese Autos

Q. Mr. President, there appears to be a debate within your Administration over
whether to have mandatory or voluntary limits on Japanese auto imports. Have you
decided which you would recommend going with?

A. We haven't reached a decision on this. We have a task force under Secretary
of Transportation Drew Lewis. We've had one meeting with the task force, a
Cabinet meeting, and the second meeting is scheduled for next week. And until
then, no decisions have been made. Such things are part of the considerations as
well as whatever special things we can do mainly in the lifting of regulations
that have made it more costly to build American cars and so forth.

All of this is going to be discussed and the decision made when we have the
final report in from the task force. And I think also that, again, we get back
to our economic program. I think that in itself is one of the first steps in
helping not only that industry but other industries.

Prospect of War

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to ask this question in context of the campaign. One
of the major issues was what was called 'the war issue,' at that time; in fact,
the question whether you would lean more toward war than Mr. Carter. And, in
fact, exit polls showed that some of those who voted did feel that you might get
us into one faster. The first major issue in foreign policy has been El
Salvador, which has been called risky and reckless by some, and which the allies
who you have shown many times that are very important and key to any question,
have not jumped on the bandwagon supporting you in El Salvador. In fact, in
Canada there's some controversy. Aren't you worried about that fact, especially
since you go to Canada this week?

A. Not really, when you stop to think that I didn't start the El Salvador thing,
I inherited it. And the previous Administration, which probably was as
vociferous in talking about my threat to peace, they were doing what we're doing
- sending aid to El Salvador, of the same kind of aid that we're sending. So I
don't think that I'm doing anything that warrants that charge. Well, I didn't
think I warranted it before. And I've been here more than six weeks now and
haven't fired a shot.

Rights in El Salvador

Q. Mr. President, in addition to your decision to miliary aid and advisors to El
Salvador, what specific steps have you taken to insure that human rights
violations there are not repeated?

A. What steps to be sure that human rights violations will not be repeated. As
you know, an investigation was going forward with regard to an episode that
happened before I took office. But in addition to the military aid, we are also
supplying general aid. And they know our position with regard to the reforms the
Duarte Government has been trying to implement - the land reform, creating of
farms for the former tenants and all - and we support all of that.

And one of our reasons for the support of this Government is because we believe
that they do hold out the best hope for improving the conditions of the people
of El Salvador. So we're mindful of that and we think that when the terrorists
themselves, the guerrillas, boast of having killed - and they give a number
somewhere above 6,000 people in the last year, and that's their own claim of
what they've accomplished - we think that we are helping the forces that are
supporting human rights in El Salvador.

F.T.C. Nominee

Q. Sir, in the case of Mrs. Patricia Bailey, who was supposed to be named
chairman of the Federal Trade Commission and who 12 hours beforehand had the ill
fate to make a speech criticizing the cutback in money for her agency, you
participated in changing the papers on that supposed appointment which had been
promised to Senator Baker and others and you went along with your money czar,
Mr. Dave Stockman, in pulling her back. This involved money for an agency that
would protect consumers. Did you mean to give a signal to other Republicans that
if they don't conform that off will go their heads?

A. How can you say that about a sweet fellow like me? No, Sarah.  No, Miss
Bailey was one of the names under consideration and she did have the backing of
Senator Baker and some others on the Hill. But we also had forces that were
supporting other candidates and we hear everyone's case who recommends someone
for a position and then, comparing them all, we just make our decision based on
who we believe should have the job. And there had been no decision made one way
or the other until we named - made the final decision.

Canada Fishing Treaty

Q. Mr. President, sir, in advance of your trip to Ottawa next week, the most
serious bilateral tensions between Canada and the United States remains the
unratified East Coast fishing and boundaries treaty. Are you committed to
finding a solution acceptable to the Canadians? Or are you prepared to see the
fishing portions of the treaty at least put into diplomatic limbo?

A. No, I don't want to see them in diplomatic limbo and I want to see a
settlement of this whole issue and have so informed our people on the Hill of
that. But this meeting there is going to be the first meeting. It's going to be
one of kind of establishing a base for future negotiations.

I don't know whether we will get down to hard issues and make any settlements in
a first meeting of this kind but we'll certainly lay the groundwork for trying
to eliminate anything that could divide us or remain a stumbling block to better
relations.

I'm - this is part of what I talked about all during the campaign, from my first
announcement on. And that is to start here in the Western Hemisphere with
building an accord between the three great countries of North America - Canada,
the United States and Mexico. So I'm sure that all of these things will be out
on the table when we get there. But we'll set an agenda for trying to resolve
them.

Canadian Oil Policy

Q. Mr. President, the Canadian Government has an energy plan calling for 50
percent Canadianization of oil interests in that country and also added taxation
of their production. It's a plan that has caused some shift of production from
Canada - I mean of exploration from Canada - to the United States. What will you
be advising Mr. Trudeau next week, when you visit with him, on that plan? And
how is it going to affect U.S. investments in that country?

A. Well, again, I think - I wish you were asking me this after we'd had the
meeting. Things of this kind - I would rather not state a case in advance. These
are things that I would rather take up when I get there and see how we can, as I
say, set an agenda for getting them resolved.

With regard to energy, I am determined that the proper goal for us must be
energy independence in the United States - not that we would take advantage of
either of our neighbors there, with regard to energy supplies.

Q. To follow that up, would you advise Mr. Trudeau to follow in your footsteps
and speed up decontrol of oil and gasoline in that country, as you have done
here?

A. Well, there's a little touchy ground in a first meeting to try and advise
somebody how to run their country. I don't know that I'll do that. I might talk
about what we've done.

Policy on Drug Abuse

Q. Mr. President, in light of what appears to be a growing concern about the
drug abuse problem, especially among teen-agers, what will your priorities be,
and specifically, do you expect to have a White House policy on drug abuse?

A. Yes I do, and in fact it can be stated as clearly as this: I think this is
one of the gravest problems facing us internally in the United States.

I've had people talk to me about increased efforts to head off the export into
the United States of drugs from neighboring nations. With borders like ours,
that as the main method of halting the drug problem in America is virtually
impossible: It's like carrying water in a sieve.

It is my belief - firm belief - that the answer to the drug problem comes
through winning over the users to the point that we take the customers away from
the drugs, not take the drugs necessarily - try that of course, you don't let up
on that. But it's far more effective if you take the customers away than if you
try to take the drugs away from those who want to be customers.

We had a program in California -again I call on that - we had an education
program in the schools; we had former drug users who had straightened out. We
found that they were most effective in talking to young people.

You could go in, and I could go in, and anyone else, and try to talk to these
young people and tell them the harm in this and get nowhere. But when someone
stood in front of them who said I've been there and this is what it was like,
and this is why I'm standing here telling you today, we found they listened.

And I envision, whatever we can do at the national level, to try and launch a
campaign nationwide. Because I think we're running the risk of losing a great
part of a whole generation if we don't.

Aid to Turkey

Q. Mr. President, as you well know, Turkey has been hit hard during the
three-and-a-half years arms embargo from the United States. Do you consider to
increase aid to Turkey on and above the amount President Carter suggested for
fiscal 1982, which is $700 million?  And, also, would you favor military grant
to Turkey?

A. I - this is an awful thing to confess - I can't really, out of all the
programs, remember where that figure stands.  Q. The figure stands, Mr.
President, that the $400 million is the military aid and the $300 million is
economic.  A. But I mean I can't recall where our figures stand, in comparison
to that. But I know that basically our philosophy is one of continued aid. And
knowing the problems that have existed between Turkey and another friend and
ally of ours, Greece, we're hopeful that whatever we can do in resolving any of
the differences there we want to do.

But both countries are vital to us. I consider them the southern plank of the
NATO alliance. And yes, I think there will be improved relations.

Use of Tax Savings

Q. Mr. President, if you get the personal income tax cuts that you want, and if
people use their tax savings to just simply pay their bills as many of them may
do, and make down payments on consumer goods instead of investing the money in
things that increase productivity, where does that leave us? Wouldn't inflation
then be worse than it is now?

A. It might be if that happened. And we have done as much studying as we can of
that, including a thorough study of the two-year program of tax cuts under
President Ke - well President Kennedy started them and they went into effect
following his tragic death -and we have been very interested to note, because
there is a parallel between that type of tax cut and what it is we're proposing.

At the bottom of the ladder, spending la - yes. There were people pressed as
they are by inflation, who found that they needed that money for purchases. But
as you went up the scale of earnings, there was a great savings in - following
those - that two-year program, during the program and following - a great
increase in personal savings and investment by the American people.

Now, we have what I think has to include the total middle-class of this country
from $10,000 to $60,000 a year, pay 72 percent of all the income tax. They are
going to get 73 percent of all of the benefits. And it seems to me that in
there, maybe at the 10 level or below but as you begin to go up that ladder,
that is where there is going to be savings and investment. And every indication
we have from the past and from what we've been able to project now, indicates
that will take place again, under this plan. And that won't be inflationary,
that will be helpful to the business cuts we're promoting in stimulating
investment to increase productivity.

Decontrol of Oil Prices

Q. Mr. President, this morning's wholesale price figures seem to indicate that
the fuel prices are still one of the prime motivating forces behind spiraling
inflation. In light of this, are you having any second thoughts about your
decision to decontrol the price of domestic oil, especially in light of some
estimates by economists that it has caused the price of gasoline to rise as much
as 14 cents a gallon?

A. No, because decontrol was - we only advanced decontrol, it was supposed to
take place in a few months anyway. And the increase in the price of gasoline
today is only partly due to that decontrol.  Part of it was due to the decontrol
that had begun under the previous Administration; the major part of it was the
latest increase in OPEC prices and we - our decontrolling now only amounts to 3
or 4 cents of the increase in the price of gasoline. And that would have taken
place in October anyway - that same decontrol.

We do believe that as time goes on that we're going to see increased exploration
and development of oil in this country and that is the road toward lower prices,
when supply begins to match demand more.

So we don't see any reason, and I don't have any regrets about the change we
made. I think the increase in drilling that has taken place, the wells that were
unprofitable to pump - in 1976 we had some 400 wells in California that were
closed down simply because at the price that the Government would allow them to
charge they could not bring the oil to the surface for that price and sell it.
Well, wells like that now, under decontrol, can go back into production.

Soviet Grain Embargo

Q. Mr. President, at your first press conference you were asked about the Soviet
grain embargo and you said there were really only two options - either to
abandon it or to broaden it. Can you tell us which it's going to be and, if you
haven't reached a decision yet, can you tell us what factors are still at play
here?

A. We haven't reached a decision. I think all of us would like to lift the
embargo. I still think it has been as harmful to the American farmer as it has
been to the Soviet Union. But the situation has changed from the time when it
was first installed.

I was against it at the time. I didn't think it should have been used as it was;
that if we were going to follow that road, we should've gone up across-the-board
and had a kind of quarantine. We didn't. But now we have to look at the
international situation the way it is and see what would be the effect, not just
on the use of grain but the whole effect and what would it say to the world now
for us to just unilaterally move.

Now, we're hopeful that we can arrive at a settlement and a decision on this and
one that will benefit our farmers.

Start of Human Life

Q. Mr. President, since you've become a strong supporter of the right-to-life
movement, whose leaders in Congress have introduced an amendment that human life
begins at conception rather than birth, how can parents or election boards
determine a person's date of conception for purposes of registration and
eligibility for running for public office?

A. Well, I think with a matter that's in the - before the legislature now, there
is going to be testimony by medical authorities, theologians, possibly legal
authorities also, and I think what is necessary in this whole problem and has
been the least talked of in the whole question about abortion is determining
when and what is a human being.

Now I happen to have believed, and stated many times, that I believe in an
abortion we are taking a human life. But if this is once determined, then there
isn't really any need for an amendment.  Because once you have determined this,
the Constitution already protects the right of human life.

Stand on Contraception

Q. You said during the campaign you noticed that all the advocates of abortion
are already born. Since this also applies to all advocates of contraception, are
you opposed to contraception, which also denies the right to life? A. No, I am
not. Q. Are you going to explain it?

A. Helen, you just got even. No, as I say, I think the idea of human life, once
it has been created and establishing that fact - and maybe I should've just
taken your thank-you and left here on this - is the whole issue that we have to
determine.

It seems strange to me that we have a law, for example in California, a law that
says that if someone abuses or mistreats a pregnant woman to the point of
causing the death of her unborn child, that individual will be tried for murder.
We know that the law of the land gives an unborn child the right to inherit
property and the law protects property rights. Isn't it time we determined if
there was some question, if you found a body on the street and you didn't know
whether it was dead or alive, wouldn't you opt on the basis that it was alive
and not start shoveling dirt on it?

This is what I feel about the other: Until we determine and make, to the best of
our ability, a determination of when life begins, we've been opting on the basis
of that, well let's consider they're not alive. I think that everything in our
society calls for opting that they might be alive.

Now, thank you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VERMONT SOCIALIST PLANS MAYORALTY WITH BIAS TOWARD POOR

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KNIGHT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: BURLINGTON, Vt., March 6


Olive branches and soothing balm seemed in order, and so Bernie Sanders, a
39-year-old, self-styled Socialist from Flatbush who surprised Vermont on
Tuesday by narrowly being elected Mayor of its largest city, was being careful
to sound conciliatory.

''I'm not going to war with the city's financial and business community and I
know that there is little I can do from City Hall to accomplish my dreams for
society,'' said Mr. Sanders, whose election runs counter to both this state's
native conservatism and the nation's trend toward the political right.

Nonetheless, he plans to run the city with the aid of a steering committee of
poor people, labor unions and other representatives of what he calls the
''disenfranchised''; to push for enactment of some form of tenants' rights or
rent control measure; to tax or otherwise receive city revenues from the
numerous tax-exempt educational and medical institutions here, and to
investigate the morale problems of the city's Police Department.

And he said that he intended to run a city government marked by a distinct bias
toward the poor. ''We're coming in with a definite class analysis and a belief
that the trickle-down theory of economic growth, the 'what's good for General
Motors is good for America' theory, doesn't work,'' he said today.

Taking Office in April

Unless a recount demanded by his opponent overturns his 22-vote lead, Mr.
Sanders will take office in April in this prosperous city of 38,000 people, set
dramatically on a hillside with Lake Champlain and a picture-book view of New
York's Adirondack Mountains on one side and the rolling hills of Vermont's
intense rural poverty on the other.

In four unsuccessful races for Governor and United States Senator since 1970,
Mr. Sanders had ruffled some feathers by attacking the political, financial,
business and educational leaders of the state for directing their attention to
growth and development rather than the plight of the state's poor, politically
disenfranchised and elderly residents.

But his victory was met with restraint by some of those leaders.  ''I wish
Bernie Sanders luck and success,'' said Gov. Richard A.  Snelling, a Republican
whom Mr. Sanders has accused of being in thrall to business interests. And
Hilton Wick, president of the city's largest commercial bank, remarked in steely
tones that it was unlikely the new Mayor would have any ''significant, rapid
effect'' on life here.

Gordon Paquette, the city's five-term Democratic Mayor, declined to talk about
the election until after a recount is held next week. In five previous races the
former bakery delivery man had never lost an election, never lost a single city
ward. He had run unopposed, and thus with tacit Republican support, three times
and rarely garnered less than 75 percent of the vote.

Vietnam War Protester

Mr. Sanders, who ran as an independent, is a former freelance writer, carpenter,
film producer and political activist who came to Vermont in the late 1960's like
thousands of other young people upset over the Vietnam War and the plight of the
nation's cities. This time he beat Mayor Paquette by 43.2 percent of the 9,000
votes cast to 43.1 percent.

Mr. Sanders put together an unlikely coalition that included poor people's and
tenants' rights organizations, students and faculty members at the University of
Vermont here and members of the Burlington Patrolmen's Association and other
city workers groups upset over pay and working conditions.

''We have a city that is trying to help a developer build $200,000 luxury
waterfront condominiums with pools and health clubs and boutiques and all sorts
of upper-middle-class junk five blocks from an area where people are literally
not eating in order to pay their rent and fuel bills,'' he said. ''Building
luxury condominiums will not be the priority of this administration.''

Mr. Sanders did not campaign as a Socialist and Mr. Paquette did not make an
issue of it.  Nonetheless, Mr. Sanders' political beliefs are widely known, and
he said of his victory: ''Burlington will be on center stage because the country
has gone in one direction and we have gone in the other.  People will be paying
$10 a head to see the freak Mayor of Burlington and what we do can have an
affect.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bernie Sanders

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV View;
EXIT CRONKITE, A CONSCIENTIOUS SUPERSTAR OF TV NEWS;
by John J.O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words


It's official. Walter Cronkite is no longer the anchorman of the CBS Evening
News. Tomorrow at 7, Dan Rather takes over the position.  Mr. Cronkite, who
turns 65 in November, has not retired. He will remain at CBS for several more
years as a special correspondent and as the host of a new science series called
''Universe.'' But his depature from the daily news program has attracted
enormous attention, prompting much talk about the end of an era. Tributes to
''Old Ironpants'' have been pouring in steadily, sometimes effusively. A UPI
senior editor writes: ''It can be said of three men that, in their time as
communicators, this nation hung on their words, waited in eager anticipation of
what they were going to observe and report and treat in their special way - Mark
Twain, Will Rogers and Walter Cronkite.'' In the past four months, Mr. Cronkite
has been given 12 major awards, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom and
an Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University special citation for ''continuing heroic
service in informing the American public and maintaining the quality of
broadcast journalism.''

In brief, Walter Cronkite is a special television phenomenon, even something of
an institution, as immediately recognizable as an episode of ''I Love Lucy.'' In
Sweden, a news anchorperson is a ''Cronkiter.'' Uncle Walter, as he is
affectionately referred to by many in the business, became news anchor in 1962,
overseeing the expansion of the broadcast that year from 15 minutes to a
half-hour.  For most of the time since, he has kept CBS News at the top of the
ratings, garnering the lion's share of the 50 million viewers estimated to be
watching network news on any given evening. His competitors were always properly
impressed. Three years ago, speaking informally before a group of college
students, NBC's John Chancellor said that Mr. Cronkite was ''terribly important
in the history of American journalism.'' Mr. Chancellor added: ''When he goes,
I'm not sure what's going to happen.'' He was referring to the trend on local
news levels to be more concerned with pretty faces than with solid journalist
credentials.

Indeed, the role of anchorperson has always been loosely defined.  In the
simplest of terms, he is a news reader, giving the impression that he is looking
seriously into the camera but actually reading from a Teleprompter placed
directly below the lens. He is on the air for only six or seven of the 23 news
minutes contained on a half-hour broadcast. Like it or not, he must be aware of
entertainment values.  Proper lighting can remove unflattering facial wrinkles.
The color and design of the set can be crucial to the program's overall image.
Mr. Cronkite prefers blue suits and neckties because, his wife Betsy is reported
to have divulged, they bring out the blue of his eyes. He is also not above
periodic temper tantrums. He does not have an especially pretty face, but he
possesses an authoritative yet comforting voice that has been developed into an
indispensable performance tool. The Cronkite voice is as distinctive in its way
as Pavorotti's. In the end, the very presence and personality of Walter Cronkite
set the tone and style of the entire program. He himself once said that
anchormen are to broadcasting what typography and makeup are to newspapers -
''We are the familiarity quotient.''

Behind the on-air scenes, though, an anchorman's influence on content can be
substantial. Mr. Cronkite sees himself as a managing editor, meeting each
afternoon with his writers, carefully going through and changing their copy, and
then participating in editorial sessions that will determine which stories will
be covered in what sequence that evening. This is where his journalistic
credentials enter the picture.

In the words of Mr. Chancellor, ''Walter has paid his dues.'' From cub reporter
on The Houston Post to UPI correspondent in World War II, from anchoring CBS's
coverage of the national political conventions, beginning in 1952, to reporting
space shots and the assassination of John F. Kennedy, he has covered the big
stories. And he has survived, though not without momentary snags. At the 1956
political conventions, he was replaced by the team of Roger Mudd and Robert
Trout as CBS sought to erase the ratings lead of the team of Chet Huntley and
David Brinkley. The move didn't work, and a ''vindicated'' Mr. Cronkite was soon
back in command for good. His longevity alone has ensured him a place in the
public's recollection of every major story of the past couple of decades.

In the final analysis, Mr. Cronkite is a television superstar. He is more of a
celebrity than most of the people he covers. As a journalist, however, he
possesses neither the brilliance of a Walter Lippmann nor the charismatic
dedication of an Edward R. Murrow. Mr.  Cronkite is exceptional primarily in
light of the awesome power and responsibility that prolonged national television
exposure has thrust upon him. His disenchantment with the Vietnam War was
instrumental in shifting public opinion to the side of the peace movement.
Lyndon Johnson is reported to have concluded, ''If we've lost Walter, we've lost
the country.'' In 1977, ''Cronkite diplomacy'' was established when the
anchorman personally telephoned Anwar Sadat and learned that the Egyptian leader
was willing to meet Menachem Begin of Israel to talk peace without any
preconditions. A CBS News crew quickly contacted Mr. Begin and, within minutes,
the Israeli was on the CBS Evening News inviting the Egyptian to make an
historic visit.

This kind of power for a journalist is unprecedented and, for many observers,
disturbing. Referring to the Sadat-Begin story in a Panorama magazine article,
Theodore H. White writes: ''So a new chapter had begun in the meaning of
television, and Cronkite, who had opened television's role at American political
conventions and widened that role as the first signature on television's evening
news, had transformed television into the actual stage of international
politics. I do not like this transformation; nor, actually does Cronkite seem to
like it either. We were talking while the war between Iran and Iraq was at its
height. 'Suppose,' said Walter, 'you could get Hussein and Bani-Sadr on the same
show. Would that put an end to the war? In that case, what's our duty? Should we
do it? Should we deal with a foreign power? Is it within the law?' ''

The questions are entirely characteristic of the man. More than anything else,
Mr. Cronkite is serious about his craft and responsible about his obligations.
Sensing this, the television audience finds him unusually trustworthy. A famous
1972 survey, dealing with the public's degree of trust in prominent figures,
found Walter Cronkite in the lead, substantially ahead of the average Senator or
governor and such notables figures as Richard Nixon, Hubert Humphrey and George
McGovern.

Occasionally, Mr. Cronkite let his personal feelings seep into a story. He made
no secret, for instance, of his excitement about the space shots. And at least
one columnist, Nicholas Von Hoffman, has denounced what he perceived as
Cronite's chauvinistic biases in coverage of the Iranian hostages story. But for
the most part, Mr.  Cronkite has diligently tried to keep out of the reporting,
to the extent that most of the public doesn't know if he is liberal or
conservative, Democrat or Republican - even those who have asked him to run for
assorted political offices. Off the air, in speeches to groups around the
country, Mr. Cronkite has several pet causes: international human rights,
freedom of the press under the First Amendment, and the improvement of
television news in terms of both expanded air time and its ability to handle
more complicated stories beyond headline-service dimensions. He is outspoken on
all of them.

I don't think the nation ever hung on the words of Walter Cronkite. He is not
exceptionally insightful or witty. Primarily, he brought a reassuring presence
and persona to whatever the news happened to be that day. And I suspect even Mr.
Cronkite would wince at his works being called a ''heroic service.'' As
anchorman, he was a conscientious and responsible journalist. That is service
enough.  That is a valuable legacy, and television news would be fortunate to
have more of the same in the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS;
Administration Diversifies the Line on Salvador

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 413 words


Robert D'Aubisson, a cashiered army major, came out of hiding last week hinting
broadly that a coup was in the offing in El Salvador and asserting that the
Reagan Administration ''would not be bothered'' by it. Denials thundered forth
from Washington and, as if on cue, after weeks of stressing the military nature
of an alleged Soviet-and Cuban-supported insurgency, the Administration directed
attention to political and economic concerns.

A coup ''would be of the gravest concern to us,'' President Reagan said,
asserting, ''We're opposed to terrorism of the right or left.'' He rejected
comparisons with American involvement in Vietnam, saying El Salvador ''is, you
might say, our front yard'' and that outside forces were ''aiming at the whole
of Central and possibly later South America and, I'm sure, eventually North
America.'' He insisted, however, that sending American troops to El Salvador
''is not in our reckoning at all.''

There were worries nonetheless. Speaking for American bishops, Archbishop James
A. Hickey charged that increased military aid ''is risky to the point of being
reckless.'' Alarmed at talk of a coup, President Jose Napeoleon Duarte canceled
a trip to West Germany where he had been expected to pursue efforts by fellow
Christian Democrats and the Socialist International to start a ''dialogue'' with
Salvadoran leftists. But he announced a commission to supervise elections to a
constituent assembly next year. ''All the extreme leftist parties who are
willing to incorporate themselves and drop their arms'' could participate, he
said. But he offered no guarantee to protect them from right-wing death squads
who have murdered politicians of the middle as well as the left.

The distance between Washington and Mr. D'Aubisson's hair-triggered friends
widened when gunmen fired at the United States Embassy in San Salvador and
rightists were held responsible. A coup, warned Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr., ''would have serious consequences'' for continuation of United States
aid.

Military aid was increased to 45 advisers and $35.4 million. Mr.  Duarte said he
didn't object to having military instructors, so long as they did not accompany
Salvadorans into combat. With coffee prices dropping and land reform slowing
agricultural production, upwards of $200 million in economic assistance is
vital, he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS AID AND ADVISERS: DEBATING THE NEW POLICY IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2319 words


WITH the controversy over United States involvement in El Salvador heating up,
Members of Congress for Peace Through Law, a bipartisan group from both chambers
headed by Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, invited Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, and Robert
E. White, who was the Carter Administration's Ambassador to El Salvador, to
debate the issues. A transcript of their colloquy at a private luncheon in the
Capitol on Feb. 26 was made available to The New York Times. Excerpts follow.

Mr. White. The ultimate enemy of Western civilization and of the U.S. in El
Salvador is a Marxist-Leninist group dedicated to the overthrow of the
Government by force, and the elimination of all U.S. influence from the region.
When I went down to El Salvador one year ago, there was not one intelligence
analyst in Washington who said there was a prayer of the present Government
lasting more than a month or two. The only question was, how fast I would return
and the leftist government would be installed.

That did not happen and is not about to happen. There's no way that the leftist
forces can take over in El Salvador. One of the real misanalyses - or lack of
accurate, objective, intelligence - has been this myth that El Salvador is ripe
for falling to leftist elements.  This is simply untrue.

We have supported the reforms - the agrarian reform and other reforms - and this
has had a profound effect. When I went down there, the left could put 200,000
people into the streets and today, they cannot put 2,000 people into the
streets. When they called a general strike, everything closed down; today, when
they call a general strike, people go to work.

We have, over the last few weeks, seen a great emphasis on the enemy without. I
applaud this Administration for emphasizing that danger and for sealing off El
Salvador from this influx of arms - from Communist and Communist-related
countries. A great number of mixed signals were sent during our election
campaign - Nicaragua and Cuba really believed that a destabilization campaign
was going to be activated against them - and they made a terrible error. I don't
mean in any way to find excuses for them. What they did was wrong. They tried
desperately to force the pace of that revolution and bring in huge quantities of
arms, in the expectation that the populace would rise up when they announced
this final offensive. And they brought in those arms and they announced the
final offensive and they called on the people to respond. And nothing happened.
They gave a war and nobody came.

The important thing to realize is that this present Government stopped the
leftists cold, without receiving one rifle from the United States. Now is not
the time to emphasize military assistance.  Now is the time - when the leftists
have been defeated - to emphasize a political solution.

To the extent that you emphasize a military solution in El Salvador, you are
going to be buttressing one of the most out-ofcontrol, violent, bloodthirsty
groups of men in the world. They have killed - at a minimum - 5,000 or 6,000
kids, just on the mere suspicion that they were involved with the leftists.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Certainly when we think about the character of the Government
in El Salvador, Bob White and I probably agree 99.9 percent. The one thing that
one can say about the character of the Government is that it is the best
Government available for El Salvador.

El Salvador is almost the caricature of the banana republic, in the sense that
very few families have throughout its history had almost everything worth having
in that country.

One of the few fairly honest elections ever held in El Salvador produced (Jose)
Napoleon Duarte as its victor (in 1972) and in a fashion characteristic of that
political tradition, Duarte was prevented from taking power by a military coup.
We have heading the Government of El Salvador the only man in the nation and in
the nation's history who has a reasonable claim to have been elected in a
reasonably honest election, with reasonably broad participation. He just wasn't
elected just before he came to power this time.

The Reagan Administration would like nothing better than to see a civilian and
democratic government in El Salvador. Everyone would like to see El Salvador
pacified. We would all like for the people of El Salvador to be permitted to
choose their rulers. That is the only political objective the current
Administration has - that and the objective of making certain that the
guerrillas do not by force of arms deny the people of El Salvador that choice.
No one would like anything better than to have the decision left to the people.
It gets complicated because one side, the guerrillas, are receiving large
quantities of arms from outside El Salvador.

We are confronted with two policy questions: Whether we do anything at all, or
whether we leave the government unsupplied while Cubans or the Soviet Union
supply the guerrillas; and, if we do something, what do we do and how much do we
do? I can say, on the basis of discussions at the National Security Council and
elsewhere in the Administration, that no one in this Administration desires to
do anything more than the absolute minimum designed to permit the Government to
turn back the armed guerrilla attack in order to arrive at a point where the
people of El Salvador can choose their own government in free elections.
Where Is the Real Power?

Mr. White. What Latin America needs desperately is a non-Communist model for
revolution and this is what we were trying, with some success, to achieve in El
Salvador. And regardless of this history, of which Ambassador Kirkpatrick spoke,
those military governments existed in large part because we actively encouraged
military governments.

The idea that Latins are not capable of democracy is just racist nonsense. The
Latin Americans are perfectly capable of democracy if we want to assist
democracy, but if we place ourselves against democracy and on the side of an
oppressive military, then democracy is going to fade away. And this is the great
contribution of the human rights policy of the Carter Administration which I
will defend forever. That policy gives you a litmus test to distinguish between
people who are anti-Communist only because it serves their purposes to stay in
power and people who share authentic Western values - such as Napoleon Duarte.

Representative Stephen Solarz, Democrat of New York. Even though the political
leaders of the left, like Guillermo Ungo, have impeccable democratic
credentials, the men with the guns - according to Ambassador White - are
committed Marxist-Leninists. But to a certain extent, if you drop the
ideological categorizations, wouldn't you say the same thing about the junta -
where you have people like Napoleon Duarte with impeccable democratic
credentials, but where perhaps the real power is in the hands of right-wing
military extremists who, as the Ambassador has said, are responsible for the
murder of 5,000 to 6,000 people on mere suspicion of association with leftists?

On what basis do you come to your conclusion about the prospect of democracy in
either eventuality? Mr. White. No leader of the leftist forces, whether it be
Ungo or (Roman) Mayorga or (Hector) Oqueli, has ever -and I have asked that they
do so publicly - made any effort to stop the leftist forces from murdering,
kidnapping, assassinating. The left takes bus drivers out of their vehicles and
guns them down in front of the people. The day that Dr. Ungo condemns that, he
starts to gain some moral authority in my eyes. The Government of Napoleon
Duarte, on the other hand, and many of the moderate military officers have
explicitly condemned the excesses of the security forces. They have tried and
thrown out a large number of enlisted people and have transferred a number of
officers out of the line of command.

I can guarantee you that, up until the time I left El Salvador, there was no
request for military advisers and that they were fully satisfied that they had
received all the military equipment they could absorb. Remember, we put in $10
million dollars of equipment in a couple of days and we've got $10 million more
programmed over the next fiscal year. This is going to be very difficult for the
Salvadoran military to absorb. They are better armed now than they have ever
been. If you get a request from Napoleon Duarte for military advisers, it will
be because there has been direct communication between the Pentagon and the
Ministry of Defense in El Salvador, stating that we urge you to urge Napoleon
Duarte to request military advisers.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. I'm sorry. I really can't let this pass. It's only fair that
everybody who heard that comment also know that it is widely said by some people
who were involved that one of the reasons that no requests for military
equipment came forward during Ambassdor White's tenure was that he declined to
forward them.

Mr. White. That is a total falsehood. In my embassy, any officer was free to
send any message that he wanted at any time; I might attach a comment to the
message. Except for one instance: The chief of the military group came to me on
the 19th of January with a fiveor six-page telegram which gave a rationale and a
request for putting something like 75 military advisers into El Salvador. Thus,
one component of the United States Mission presented the Ambassador with a
full-blown telegram, drafted in final form, without any discussion with the
country team.
'A Straight Pentagon Power Play'

I said, 'Colonel, what possessed you to do this?' He said, 'I'm under
instructions to do this from the Pentagon and from South-Com (the United States
joint military command in Panama).' I said, 'Well, you obviously know that this
telegram would totally change United States foreign policy.' So I said, 'We will
discuss this tomorrow' - the day the new Administration took office.

And then I reread the telegram, discussed it with certain members of the country
team and I sent in a telegram, which stated something to the following effect:

'The Chief of the Military Group has presented me with this bizarre message
totally recasting U.S. foreign policy toward El Salvador. This just as a new
Administration is taking office, before it has a Secretary of State, before it
has a foreign policy team in place. This embassy stands ready to make
recommendations to the new Administration as soon as we receive a signal that
the new Administration is in a position to receive those recommendations.' But -
and this is my own comment right now; it was not part of the telegram - this was
a straight power play by the Pentagon, to have on the desk of the new
Administration a request for so many military advisers, and to bypass the
Ambassador and the rest of the country team.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. I think that we have something of a reputation in Latin
America for being rather overbearing and trying to order things our way and for
wanting to run the shop. In fact, we don't want to run the shop. No one in the
Reagan Administration wants to run El Salvador. I think that there's only one
power that is really actively involved in revolution in Central America, and
it's the Soviets by way of the Cubans. They are the outside intervenors in
Central America. We should and we do have a significant interest in Central
America. It's a legitimate interest.

Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa. Are we going to win El Salvador at
all costs and lose Mexico, or lose one heck of a lot of other countries, because
of our actions there?

Mrs. Kirkpatrick. There are a great many people who think that the
radicalization of Mexico is an almost direct consequence of American impotence
in Central America and elsewhere in the hemisphere, which has led to the Mexican
President's concern about protecting himself against the left. If that's true,
then the worst possible thing that could be done for our relations with Mexico
would be to collaborate in the fall of El Salvador to the guerrilla forces.

Nobody is worried that we are about to put our foot down on that slippery slope
that led to Vietnam. The reason we're not concerned about that is that we know
about that slope now - we didn't know about that slope when we went down it to
Vietnam. We know what kind of a process was involved and what the consequences
were. We also think that to use American power in selected circumstances and in
an economical fashion does not risk the kind of wholesale commitment that we
made in Vietnam.

Mr. White. We have enormous power in Central America. What we lack are choices.
Because of erroneous American policies over the past 25 to 30 years, all the
political insttutions in El Salvador have systematically been destroyed;
therefore, we are trying now to help build those institutions back up.

I give you a personal, professional guarantee that the only way the left can
gain in strength sufficient to threaten the present Government is if this
Government moves substantially to the right.  And what I see the Reagan
Administration doing is encouraging this Government to move to the right, to
emphasize the military component at the expense of the civilian component. And
that way lies disaster.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Salvadorans Photo of Jeanne Kirkpatrick Photo
of Robert White

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN STICKS TO AGENDA THAT WON HIM THE ELECTION

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Arguments that President Reagan could create a second Vietnam in El Salvador or
trigger a new Depression with untested economic theories do not get much
attention at the White House these days. The President's advisers are convinced
that his hardline anti-Communism and supply-side economics are sound policies
and, beyond that, smart politics.

They argue that Mr. Reagan is giving the American people the foreign and
economic initiatives they voted for. Moreover, they argue that by quickly
putting his promises of hardline anti-Communism and deep budget and tax cuts
into practice, he can prove a main tenet of his political philosophy - that
bold, simple ideas can work in a complex world.

Such is the tone of Reaganite orthodoxy as it has developed in the first two
months of the new Administration. Ignoring criticism from the left and
complaints of ideological impurity from the right, Mr.  Reagan's senior staff
has set up an informal but powerful system for indoctrinating newcomers in Mr.
Reagan's campaign promises and enforcing those views in the development of
policy. The leaders in this effort have been Martin Anderson, the chief domestic
policy adviser, and Richard V. Allen, the President's national security adviser.

'Keepers of the Promises'

''In a sense, Marty and, to a lesser extent, Dick Allen have become keepers of
the promises,'' observed a White House aide last week. ''In every meeting where
a question of policy comes up, one of Marty's chief missions is to tell people
'This is what Reagan said as a candidate.' He brings out campaign letters and
says 'This is what we've got to be prepared for, what we're committed to. We've
been back to study those documents closely.' ''

This exercise arises both from conviction and from fear of repeating the
mistakes of the previous Administration.  The conviction has to do with Mr.
Reagan's own statement that he did not run for President simply to be a
caretaker for the policies of the past, but rather to achieve a fundamental
redirection of government. The fear has to do with the view among Reagan
advisers that the Carter Presidency failed because Mr. Carter was seduced by the
complexity of the job into losing touch with a few basic ideas - reduction of
the bureaucracy and tax reform, for example - that helped bring him victory in
1976.

''So far,'' Mr. Anderson observed last week, ''almost all the effort has been
implementing what Ronald Reagan wants done rather than toward 'How do you change
his mind?' or asking 'What do we really do?' - which was most of the effort in
the first years of the Nixon Administration.'' Added one of Mr. Anderson's
associates, ''We sometimes kid ourselves internally that the strange thing about
this President is that he's doing what he said he would do. That's a rare thing
in American politics.''

Mr. Reagan's advisers praise this narrow targeting of goals and the attempt at
one-on-one transfer between campaign promise and policy as a laudable devotion
to ''first principles.'' They speak with pride of the ''roundtabling'' and
''collegiality'' that is said to have replaced turf-fighting and ax-grinding at
the White House.

The natural question, of course, is whether the emphasis on cooperation and
faith in Mr. Reagan's ideas will create an intellectual closed-circuit at the
White House. After all, ''philosophical compatibility'' is an announced first
principle of its hiring process and the President himself has vetoed
appointments for suspected failings in that area.

Moreover, the emphasis on orthodoxy has resulted in a White House almost devoid
of the expressions of social concern that were commonplace in past
Administrations.

For example, energy policy discussions go forward with hardly a mention of
consumer gasoline prices. On domestic and foreign policy, the Administration
attitude is that the public must wait for the results rather than interfere with
the process. For example, Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to the President, was asked
recently if the public has a right to participate in foreign policy decisions.
''Yeah, they get to vote for President every four years,'' he said.

A typical response to criticism of such attitudes is that because Mr. Reagan's
proposals are simple and firm does not mean they are simplistic and wrongheaded.
In any case, it is argued, Mr. Reagan's positions, such as his decision to send
military training advisers to El Salvador and his coolness toward Soviet
proposals for early summit talks, reflect the true and blunt impulses of the
national will.

''We promised all along this President was going to re-define the national
interest and that's going to happen,'' asserted a senior foreign policy adviser.
''The public has the capability of understanding on a net basis, in
monosyllabics, simply communicated by a man such as this President, the state of
the world in regard to this nation. This may not be the mode of a Schmidt or a
Giscard d'Estaing or some sophisticated academic in the foreign policy field,
but it is the mode of Ronald Reagan and it is what put him in the Oval Office.''

It is possible to find some Administration officials who worry privately about
what Mr. Reagan calls ''the Vietnam syndrome'' and who caution that the
anti-Soviet thrusts represent a foreign policy that is yet to have a stern test.
''So far, so good,'' said one such official. ''But we're still at the rhetoric
stage. We haven't been faced with a major issue - Poland hasn't been invaded,
the Middle East hasn't blown up and stopped the oil supply.''

Even allowing for the rare word of caution, however, the dominant conviction at
the White House is that Mr. Reagan has led the nation to an historic turning
point. The comparison cited most often is that of the former President whose
philosophy of government Mr.  Reagan proposes to overturn in the main. ''It's a
fair comparison of when F.D.R. came in and lifted the national mood before he
ever got a single program passed,'' said an in-house booster happy with Mr.
Reagan's anti-Soviet line. ''The amazing thing is it's been done mainly with
words. We sure haven't gained a single ship or a new division in the past
month.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR'S DANGEROUS FRIENDS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


To the Editor:

In ''The Savings of Salvador'' (column Feb. 26) William Safire has dramatically
reduced the complex situation in El Salvador to its most simplistic level:
''us'' and ''them.''

he United States is once again portrayed as a swaying domino in the face of the
''global tide'' of Communism, which in turn assumes demonic proportions.
Anti-Communism thus becomes the over-arching imperative in U.S foreign policy;
El Salvador is the staging ground for the continuing saga of good vs. evil.

The ''discovery'' of documents implicating an international Communist
conspiracy, and Alexander Haig's blunt threats to Cuba, the Soviet Union and
even Western Europe, are indeed reminiscent of the Korean War. But despite Mr.
Safire's fond recollections of a heroic West, Korea (and Vietnam) were American
foreign policy at its most juvenile. George F. Kennan has long deplored the
perverted doctrine of containment now attributed to him. The sacrifice of two
million Korean people, and a like number in Vietnam, was not in the
''interests'' of the United States.

Yet the same simple-minded anti-Communism now motivates U.S policy in El
Salvador.  Human life is considered irrelevant. ''If need be'' we must support a
military junta that kills the opposition, says Safire, ''considering the
aggressive totalitarian alternative'' (what kind of linguistic twist is this?).
Democracy and self-determination are also expendable: ''Rhetorical deference to
the wishes of the people,'' as in the Mexican model, would suffice to make El
Salvador a ''functioning republic'' and a ''showplace for the triumph of free
enterprise.'' By this logic, we will have ''saved'' El Salvador if the only
surviving individual declares himself against Communism.

The ''buy-them-off or kill-them-off'' anti-Communism espoused by Mr. Safire has
grisly implications for both domestic and international politics. It does indeed
spell the death of the shortlived ''Vietnam syndrome,'' which represented a
healthy recognition of the limit of U.S. military power; instead, the pervasive
cold-war mentality of the Truman Doctrine still paralyzes U.S. foreign policy,
almost 35 years after its in-ception.

The new Administration does not even pay lip service to diplomacy and
nonmilitary options, preferring to rail about international conspiracies.

It is not in our interest to make El Salvador a puppet state or a corpse. By
pursuing a just, negotiated settlement, the United States might regain some of
its ill-spent prestige in the international sphere. If, on the other hand, the
U.S. Government continues to fuel the slaughter, it will isolate itself from
even its closest allies.  In no sense can this be construed as ''victory for the
West.'' SAMUEL J. STOLOFF New York, Feb. 27, 1981

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
HAIG'S BEST-LAID PLANS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Secretary of State Haig chose to begin by concentrating his public energies
on El Salvador, he evidently calculated that he had a political winner. The
public seemed to be in the mood for tough talk of a military stand against
Communism. But things have not worked out exactly as planned.

Haig's strident words caused immediate uneasiness among our allies; there were
expressions of concern in Bonn, Paris, London, Ottawa. In recent days it has
become clear that a good many Americans, too, are worried about what we are
doing in El Salvador. The question is being asked in newspapers, in churches, on
college campuses. The policy is not going down so easily.

At his press conference the other day President Reagan was asked whether he
thought there was a valid analogy between El Salvador and Vietnam. He answered
no - predictably, and in a narrow sense correctly: the two situations are vastly
different in geography and history and military posture.

But the reason Vietnam is in people's minds is not that the analogy is exact. It
is that in El Salvador, as in Vietnam, we must beware of simplicities - of a
policy based on slogans, on ignorance of the indigenous reasons for disorder in
a society.

When we went into Vietnam, we knew nothing of its history or culture. Our
politicians said we were drawing a line against Chinese Communist expansionism -
a theory so absurd that it is hard to imagine anyone ever believed it. And the
present Adminis-tration's statements on El Salvador ring with the same kinds of
empty simplicities.

El Salvador is under attack by ''terrorists,'' General Haig and the President
say; Cuba and the Soviet Union are trying to infiltrate terrorism into the
Americas. But anyone who cares to know is aware that most of the killing in El
Salvador has been done by security forces nominally but not really under the
Government's control. And everyone knows that the revolutionary movement did not
originate abroad but began as an indigenous response to a century of right-wing
exploitation enforced by state terrorism.

To portray U.S. policy as protecting Central America from external intervention
is in any case laughable. The United States has been intervening there for a
century. The term ''banana republics'' was not coined in Moscow. In Guatemala,
next door to El Salvador, the C.I.A. in 1954 installed a right-wing regime whose
heirs have just been charged by Amnesty International with mass political
murder.

Or consider the argument that Secretary Haig is using El Salvador to signal the
Russians - to warn them that they had better behave in Afghanistan and Poland.
Is that really the message Moscow is going to get? Not bloody likely.

The message of the Haig policy is that a superpower will not tolerate political
upsets in its own back yard. If that is true for us in El Salvador, why should
it be any different for the Soviet Union in Poland or Afghanistan? What we are
doing in El Salvador will in fact make it easier for Moscow to justify
intervention in Poland if it ever takes that fateful step.

General Haig's policy on El Salvador puts the United States down hard on the
side of the status quo. Is that a line likely to serve American interests in a
world of poverty and discontent and change?

These are some of the questions giving rise to public doubts about El Salvador.
The Administration may have the votes in Congress to send its arms and advisers.
But doubts of this fundamental kind matter. Americans are not informed in detail
on El Salvador, but after Vietnam they are skeptical of a policy based on
simplicities and bluster.

By now it is a good guess also that the White House is wondering about the
political wisdom of General Haig's El Salvador caper. For one of its effects has
been to subordinate what President Reagan and his advisers wanted to keep at the
top of the public agenda: the Reagan economic program. The television news
programs are giving more prominence now to El Salvador, and it was the subject
of more questions at the President's press conference than his tax and budget
proposals.

In Washington generally, murmurs of doubt are beginning to be heard about the
sagacity of Alexander Haig. It is not just El Salvador.  Even his advertised
skill at bureaucratic in-fighting has proved flawed. He suffered an unnecessary
public setback right at the start when the White House held up his plans to
reorganize the national security structure. He accepted a dodo, the President's
friend William Clark, as his deputy.

The contrast with Henry Kissinger is asserting itself in people's minds. For all
his love of right-wing governments and military force, Kissinger would never
have been so self-defeatingly crude in El Salvador. He would have managed his
relations with the White House more smoothly, too. But then Haig has an
inescapable problem with the President's men. They know that he aches to be
President himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETURN OF 'JUST DESSERTS';
by James Lieber

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


The institution of the prison in the United States began as an institution of
reform. After the American Revolution, the new nation rejected British justic,
under which common penalties were branding, lashing, ear-cropping, expulsion to
penal colonies, and, last but not least, execution. More than 200 crimes, many
of them minor, were punishable by death.

The earliest reformers, Quakers, believed that repentence and Bible study in
solitary confinement would lead inmates to see their errors and turn from evil.
Instead, apparently many grew violent or became mad. As a result, during the
19th century, punishment rather than rehabilitation became the justification for
prisons, which often packed killers, thieves, first offenders, vagrants, women
and sometimes children together in filth.

Progressive leaders, including Zebulon Brockway of New York and Jane Addams of
Illinois, began advocating special facilities for women and youths, and the
first "reformatory" was opened in 1876 at Elmira, N.Y., with Brockway, a
religious zealot and educator, as warden. Sentences were not fixed. Once an
inmate received sufficiently high scores in education and religious instruction,
he was regarded as reformed and released. The idea spread to prisons with male
felons, and parole boards sprang up across the country to judge whether
prisoners were rehabilitated and could be freed. By 1935, most states had
adopted indeterminate sentences with parole, and by 1962, the writers of the
influential Model Penal Code wrote individualized treatment and rehabilitation
into their sentencing goals - without once mentioning punishment.

Reformers of the 1960's stressed a "medical model" of corrections.  Karl
Menninger, the forensic psychiatrist, declared: "I most certainly... believe the
majority of (criminal offenders) would prove to be curable." During the early
70's, academic researchers studied rehabilitation. The late Robert Martinson, a
sociologist at the City University of New York, analyzed 231 therapy, vocational
and educational programs and concluded that "the rehabilitative efforts that
have been reported so far have had no effect on recidivism." Others showed that
parole boards, too, were ineffective, having no real basis for predicting which
inmate, if released, would obey the law.

By and large, rehabilitation has again fallen out of favor and been replaced by
the "just-desserts" theory of Prof. Andrew von Hirsch of Rutgers University:
Imprisonment meets the community's need for retribution following a serious
offense. A less-heeded part of the idea holds that prison should be used as a
last resort and that term lengths should rarely exceed five years, as is the
case in Western Europe.
Some authorities, however, continue to believe that certain inmates c an be
successfully returned to society. They cite recent successes w ith work-released
programs, and they point out that a high p roportion (estimates in some prison
systems range up to 25 percent) o f incarcerated men are veterans, primarily of
the Vietnam War, g rounds and who are often motivated and responsive.  Conjugal
p rivileges, now available to inmates in three states and the Federal s ystem,
also seem to have a positive effect. The New York Family R eunion Program, which
allows a prisoner with a good institutional r ecord to spend weekends with his
spouse and other family members in a neatly appointed trailer, has a 5 percent
recidivism rate c ontrasted with 30 percent for the whole system.

Now, for the most part, prison administrators hold little faith in
rehabilitation. - J.L.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Haig's Connecticut Home Picketed by 35 Protesters

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 202 words

DATELINE: FARMINGTON, Conn., March 8


Singing ''We Shall Overcome'' and carrying placards, about 35 opponents of
United States involvement in El Salvador marched today in front of the home of
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.

The demonstration was staged by a group from the University of Hartford to call
public attention to what it called the possibility of ''another Vietnam.''

A spokesman for the protesters, Richard Greeman, said that the demonstrators had
targeted Mr. Haig's home because the Secretary ''is a member of this community
and he's the one most responsible for dropping bombs on other people's
communities.''

The demonstrators carried signs that read, ''Halt Haigal Intervention'' and ''Be
a True American - Don't Support Reagan Adventures.''

Patrolman Roger L. Bogdan of the Farmington police said, ''Haig hasn't been
there in months.'' He quoted ''special Federal agents'' on duty as guards inside
the home as saying ''any statement would have to come from the State
Department.'' In Washington, Joe Reap, a State Department spokesman, said there
was no comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE MEANEST WAY

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Michigan


Despite the relaxed banter of the President in news conferences and despite the
approving polls, there is a low, mean hiss to be heard in the land.

In Detroit, Free Press writer Betty de Ramus offers some vignettes of the mood,
the snarling, deliberately nasty way people are coming to treat each other, with
no immediate provocation but their own despair. The aggression ranges from
insult, to bashing a stranger's car for no apparent reason, to casual murder.

''The struggle going on in Detroit these days is not just to survive,'' she
says. ''The struggle is to keep from drowning your troubles in a bottle of Mad
Dog or shooting your best friend in a quarrel over 50 cents.''

Michigan, said a resident of the pleasant, still-cheerful but apprehensive
university town of Ann Arbor, ''is now a basket case.'' Seasonally adjusted
unemployment for the state in January was 12.7 percent compared to the national
average of 7.4 percent. In Flint, which is planning a kind of Disneyland
monument to celebrate the dying automobile industry (as though a binge would
revive it), one out of seven workers is jobless.

Governor William G. Milliken, who has been chopping fiercely at the budget,
reported in his annual ''state of the state message'' that despite his drastic
cuts, ''plummeting revenues and simultaneously expanding public assistance
expenditures'' foreshadow a huge deficit for fiscal 1982. The welfare caseload,
said his aide, is still climbing at an ''alarming rate.''

But the ugliness isn't only in the cold, gloomy climate of Michigan. In Miami,
The New York Times's Jo Thomas reports, ''opulence and violence, money and
corruption'' have become so pervasive that even comparisons with the raging
decadence of the Prohibition Era that preceded the Great Depression fail to
convey the atmosphere.

There is plenty of sunshine and there are masses of luscious, vitamin-rich
oranges. But ''the biggest retail business in our state,'' Florida Attorney
General Jim Smith told Miss Thomas, is drugs. She said the local trade was
''conservatively estimated'' at $ 7 billion a year, feeding garish subsidiary
booms such as a shop offering a $ 5,000 hat and banks that do a side-business
laundering narcotics cash into nice, clean multimillion-dollar accounts.

In a poor section of the town lining a major boulevard, I saw on a recent visit
a shop window covered with a huge sign advertising the purchase of jewelry, gold
and silver, valuable antiques. It was obviously the enterprise of a fence, and
it could not have been more brazen if the sign read ''stolen goods bought
here.''

Local authorities just sighed when asked about it. They said the police are
trying to push through an ordinance requiring such shops to keep the merchandise
for 10 days before resale, to give the victims of robbery at least a chance to
identify or perhaps even buy back their treasures. But there isn't much they can
do about this sort of thing when they have to cope with daily murders.

Maybe that's urban jitters, nerves on edge. But out in the wilderness, in the
woods of Georgia and the scrublands of Wisconsin and the pure, strong air of the
California mountains, there are now thousands of people preparing doomsday
hideaways and learning to shoot so they won't have to share with neighbors.

They call themselves ''survivalists.'' The A.P.'s Peter Arnett, who earned great
distinction as a clear-eyed, unflappable war correspondent in Vietnam, looked
into their doings in a dozen states and found them spending huge sums to pile up
caches of freeze-dried food, medicine and ammunition against the day of
dog-eat-dog rule in America. One woman in Georgia told him, ''We are not just
concerned about nuclear war. What if we have a serious tornado? We will still
need to protect ourselves from others.''

The prevailing view among such people, Mr. Arnett notes, is that the social
order of the country is breaking down and they need not only to develop
self-reliance in case of disaster but to be prepared to beat off panic-crazed
hordes from the cities who haven't arranged their own refuges and supplies.

He cites a Treasury Department estimate that 140 million rifles, shotguns and
handguns are owned by private citizens, two for every three men, women and
children in the land. Some states permit the sale of machine guns to anybody who
thinks they're handy for selfdefense.

And what has all this to do with the call for a revival of wholesome,
Judeo-Christian morality, for a renewed sense of national honor and competence
that can win respect for America in the world once again? It is the frightening
underside of the demand for strength and self-protection first. The country
needs more than smiling reassurance that it can do. It needs inspiration to
restore the sense of community and to reject the meanest way as the safest way
out of trouble.

*

Note: I've just eaten a large plate of crow. I am now satisfied that the
document on El Salvador discussed in my column last Friday, which I believed was
an official paper, was indeed spurious, as the State Department later said. Many
of the facts checked out, but it wasn't a Government paper. I'm abashed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
PAPER MONEY. By Adam Smith. 335 pages. Summit. $13.95.  UNDERSTANDING INFLATION.
By John Case. 228 pages. Morrow. $9.95.

IT'S good to have Adam Smith back on the money beat, from which he strayed to
write ''Powers of Mind'' and to which he has now returned in ''Paper Money.''
True, his wisecracking style seems a little thin for the financial tornadoes of
the 1970's and 80's. But we need him to explain that ''skidding feeling'' he
began to get ''almost a decade ago.'' He continues: ''You know the feeling. You
are in your car, listening to the radio or just thinking, and very momentarily,
the wheels are not solidly on the road, which is wet from rain or snow.
Subliminally, you sense that slide, you snap back to awareness, you react. I was
getting this feeling, not in a car, but sitting at a desk, reading about prices
and money rates. Sometimes I got the feeling in the supermarket when the clerk
gave me change - very little change. I made an appointment to see Dr. Burns,''
chairman of the board of governors of the Federal Reserve.

We need Adam Smith to explain why the economists are always wrong: ''Assume a
can opener,'' said the one on the desert island with the sealed can of tuna and
no way to open it. We need him to connect the disappearance of the anchovies
from the coast of Peru with the price of eggs in New York City, and the Texas
Railroad Commission with the formation of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, which Milton Friedman, may Adam Smith remind us, said would
never hold together. We need him to tell us why houses may no longer be such a
great hedge against inflation, and why, if the Saudis keep still and the rivers
don't rise, the stock market's hour may have come around again at last.

Fancy Footwork

The only thing that is bothersome about ''Paper Money'' is the tendency of the
fundamentals to get lost in the fancy footwork. And when you finally get around
to asking the basic questions, you have to wonder about some of his answers.
What exactly does he mean by implying that we can only solve our present
problems by establishing a better ''sense of community,'' which he says we lack
to a greater degree than even the Germans did in 1923, when hyperinflation drove
them to shopping with wheelbarrows full of money?

Does this mean that our lack of community has been the cause of inflation?
Obviously not, since Mr. Smith also blames the decline of the dollar as the
world's ''key currency'' and the rise of OPEC, with its attendant ''greatest
transfer of wealth in world history.'' Still, it's a somewhat hyperdramatic
cartoon world that Adam Smith creates with his dollars arriving ''in Euroland
with Caribbean tans'' and his Saudis rooting for U.S.C. against Notre Dame.
Surely, there is something more concrete that we can do for our future than
reacquire Puritan virtues and root for the welfare of the Saudi kingdom's royal
family.

This cartoon impression is reinforced when you read a book as sensible and
methodical as ''Understanding Inflation,'' by the political scientist John Case.
Mr. Case may possess certain radical credentials, having helped to found the
magazine Working Papers for a New Society for the Gar Alperovitz-Christopher
Jencks Cambridge Institute. But Mr. Case's analysis of inflation is so
evenhanded that in one section, on government spending as a cause of inflation,
he plays devil's advocate for both the liberal and conservative points of view.

Mr. Case sets out to prove that the causes of inflation can be divided into
''predisposing'' and ''precipitating'' factors. And he goes about doing so by
listing and describing the contributions of big business, not-so-big business,
labor and government among the ''predisposing'' factors; and Vietnam, the
international currency crisis of the 1970's and the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries' rise among the ''precipitating'' ones. But what his case
boils down to is that, what with one historical development and another, the
marketplace has become rigged - and rigged to produce inflation - and the only
possible ways to get rid of inflation are to unrig the marketplace by
dismantling big business, the labor unions and the New Deal, or to shock the
economy by hitting it over the head with a heavy recession or to institute a
system of counterrigging, namely wage and price controls.

No Going Back to 1914

No one, argues Mr. Case, not even President Reagan, is going to take the system
back to 1914 and limit the size of business enterprises. There is no guarantee
that a heavy recession would stop inflation, even if we thought it was worth the
price in suffering, which we don't. So that leaves wage and price controls, as
well as other ways of restructuring the economy once controls are in place.

Of course, Mr. Case says, such controls are at best ''a messy and imperfect
solution.'' Still, he confronts and faces down some of the more obvious
objections, such as, ''Controls are like putting a lid on a boiling kettle
instead of turning down the heat,'' or, ''Every time price controls are lifted,
inflation reappears.'' He makes it sound as if it's only a matter of time and of
coming to our senses before we are forced to embrace his solution. Obviously,
that time is going to be an inflationary one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SEEKS BIG FOREIGN-CRISIS FUND

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


The Reagan Administration hopes to gain approval for a $350 million foreign aid
''contingency fund'' to be used at its discretion during foreign policy
emergencies, Congressional aides said today.

Staff members of the House Foreign Affairs and Senate Foreign Relations
Committees were told about the plan today at a State Department briefing on the
proposed security assistance budget for fiscal 1982, which begins Oct. 1. The
Administration wants to spend about $7 billion, a $900 million increase over the
Carter Administration request.

The security assistance budget covers grants to enable countries to buy American
weapons, credits for arms purchases and military training.

The officials also told the Capitol Hill aides that an additional $25 million in
foreign military sales credits would be sought for El Salvador. This is likely
to be resisted by some Democrats who have already objected to the commitment in
January of $5 million in emergency assistance, and last week's decision to
provide $30 million in fiscal year 1981.

In the overall security assistance budget, the State Department officials said
the increases sought included $350 million in contingency funds, $100 million in
grants and $250 million in ''economic support funds,'' or assistance aimed at
helping nations buy weapons.

The $100 million in grants would revive a program that Congress phased out last
year.

Need for Flexible Response

The officials said the contingency fund was needed to help the United States
respond quickly to crises. They noted that it has frequently taken years to win
approval for aid to countries in need of arms aid.

Congressional aides said privately that the plan would enable the Administration
to circumvent the normal authorization and appropriations process in Congress.

''What this amounts to is an international military slush fund,'' a House staff
member said.  Several said they doubted that Congress would agree to such a
large fund. Before the Vietnam War, the contingency funds were $25 million to
$100 million a year.

Congress gradually reduced the funds. Last year, when the foreign aid bill
provided $50 million in economic support funds, the Carter Administration
requested that the amount be doubled, but Congress did not approve.

Ceilings on Arms Transfers

Several Congressional aides said the Administration also planne to loosen
restrictions on the sale of arms to Argentina and would ask Congress to raise
the ceilings on weapons transfers that must be reported to the Congress.

The Arms Export Control Act requires the Administration to report any transfers
of military services valued at more than $7 million and arms sales greater than
$25 million. The Administration wishes to double these reporting levels.

The plan to provide more than $900 million in direct credits - lowinterest loans
to buy military equipment - is also likely to stir debate on Capitol Hill. The
figure is almost triple that requested this year by the Carter Administration.

In addition to El Salvador, the credits are intended for Turkey, Egypt, Israel,
Somalia, the Sudan, Kenya, Thailand, Yemen, Portugal, Liberia, Zaire, Honduras,
Jamaica, and the Dominican Republic.

The security assistance budget contains several substantial increases over the
Carter Administration requests. The Reagan Administration is seeking an increase
in military sales credits for Egypt from $800 to $900 million, $400 million of
which is in direct credits; $700 million in security assistance and economic
support funds for Turkey, compared with $450 million requested by Mr. Carter,
and substantial rises for Kenya and Somalia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ADVISERS TAKING CARE IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


uf881

By EDWARD SCHUMACHER

SAN SALVADOR, March 9 - The military advisers here live cautiously, avoiding
publicity with almost as much care as they avoid the Marxist guerrillas who
might want to shoot them.

They have tried to blend in, but a group of several hundred journalists here has
been hounding them for pictures and interviews.  The fear among the advisers is
that they might become walking targets if pictures are published.

At a news conference arranged by the United States Embassy today, one adviser, a
helicopter maintenance instructor, said: ''What makes you nervous - and I'll be
honest with you guys - is the press. We have more problems with the press than
with these people we are supposed to be aware of.''

Salvadorans Called Capable

More than 30 of the 45 noncombat advisers assigned to El Salvador have arrived
and their presence is a major world issue. But until today, the commanders of
the United States Military Group, their formal organization, had refused
interviews even under tightly controlled conditions.

The two officers who met with the press today at Ilopango Air Force Base on the
outskirts of San Salvador declined to give their names, ages or places of birth
or to speak of their families.  Nonetheless, in 15 minutes they painted a
picture of apprehensive but patriotic American volunteers training capable and
highly motivated Salvadorans.

The maintenance instructor, a veteran of the Vietnam War, said there was ''no
comparison'' between the Salvadoran soldiers and the South Vietnamese he had
trained. He said the Salvadorans were superior in discipline, organization and
motivation.

''The Salvadorans' problem is not their capability,'' he said.  ''It's their
support, their equipment. They are very capable. Their ingenuity is amazing.''

Helicopter Pilots Retrained

The two officers are part of a helicopter training team of 14 that came here a
month ago. The pilot said his job was mostly a matter of training Salvadorans to
fly the 10 American Bell Huey transport helicopters on loan from the United
States. The Salvadorans are already experienced in flying El Salvador's
French-made helicopters.  The pilot said he trains four Salvadorans every five
weeks.

''The pilots are extremely capable, willing and eager to learn,'' he said.  The
training, he said, takes place near the air base and the international airport.
The helicopters are sometimes taken away for combat missions, but the pilot said
no American goes along.

Among the other advisers who have arrived or are on the way are five specialists
in ship maintenance, five specialists in planning and operations who will work
with the senior command, and 15 who will teach small-unit tactics, including
intelligence, interdicting weapons traffic and helicopter assault. In addition
to the 45 advisers, seven men are also being temporarily assigned to provide
support, bringing the headquarters and administrative staff to 12.

Weekends at the Beach

United States officials said they hope that the advisers will be able to
complete their work in six months, though there is no firm time limit. One of
the officers said today that he had a month to prepare before coming; the other
said he had just three days notice.

The advisers live off base in private accommodations and are free to move about
the city. On weekends, some go to El Salvador's unspoiled beaches.

They said they always carry a pistol. Their orders are not to get involved in
any combat, but they are authorized to shoot in selfdefense or to protect a
fellow adviser.

''If another one of our members is about to get killed, I will take action,''
one said today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a salvadoran airman

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SALVADOR STRATEGY;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1329 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, March 10


A year ago, the Carter Administration quietly resumed ''nonlethal'' military aid
to El Salvador's junta, arguing that it would help the Salvadoran armed forces
to respect human rights while combating leftist insurgents. But last year more
than 13,000 people were killed in El Salvador, most of them reputedly by the
security forces.

Last March, however, Washington also persuaded the junta to adopt a sweeping
land redistribution program and other political measures aimed at neutralizing
growing popular support for the left. And when the guerrillas opened their
''final offensive'' in January this year, they found few Salvadorans willing to
join them in a general insurrection.

Now, with the Reagan Administration stepping up military aid to El Salvador,
many officials in the region fear that the lessons of the past year have been
forgotten. The junta has survived, they argue, because of its political
measures, while emphasis on a military solution will merely keep the extreme
left alive.

Negotiated Solution Asked

As a result, the key governments in Latin America - Mexico, Venezuela, Brazil
and Argentina - have responded to United States charges that the Soviet bloc is
supplying weapons to the Salvadoran guerrillas with warnings against deeper
United States military involvement in El Salvador. And with rare unanimity they
have called for a negotiated solution to the simmering civil war.

''I don't see why it is any more legitimate for the United States to arm the
junta than for the guerrillas to get weapons from wherever they can,'' a Mexican
official noted. ''At the moment, the junta has no more legitimacy than the
guerrillas. That's why there must be a cease-fire and a genuine referendum.''

Mexico's President, Jose Lopez Portillo, noted last month: ''The crisis that has
its temporary epicenter in the Salvadoran conflict has become a spiral that
threatens to involve all the states in the area. For this reason, it is
necessary to avoid the internationalization of the crisis through a combined
policy that has the objective of rigorously preserving the principles of
selfdetermination and nonintervention.''

Mexico and Venezuela, in particular, seem worried that further militarization of
the Salvadoran conflict might polarize the entire isthmus, heightening the
domestic crises in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua and prompting regional
governments to meddle openly in each others' affairs.

Already, El Salvador's leftists have charged the Guatemalan and Honduran armies
with attacking guerrilla positions inside El Salvador. Guatemala's military
regime has accused Nicaragua and Cuba of sending arms to leftist guerrillas in
its territory. Nicaragua in turn asserts that Honduras tolerates the activities
of supporters of the ousted Somoza regime who make regular incursions into
Nicaragua.

Memories of Vietnam

In the region, Washington's decision to send ''lethal'' equipment accompanied by
military advisers to El Salvador has revived memories not only of the United
States role in Vietnam, but also of the pledge of the late Cuban revolutionary,
Che Guevara, to create ''one, two, three, many Vietnams'' in Latin America.
''The United States will not make the Vietnam syndrone disappear by repeating
it,'' a well-placed Mexican observed.

The specter of prolonged instability and outside interference in Central America
has led Mexico and Venezuela, which until recently supported opposing sides in
El Salvador, to adopt a common position in favor of a political settlement, with
Mexico urging the left to negotiate directly with the junta and Venezuela
pressing the junta to court at least the non-Marxist sectors of the opposition.

Even Nicaragua's Sandinist Government, which has been accused by Washington of
helping to funnel arms to the Salvadoran left, is now also pressing for talks
between the two sides. ''In El Salvador, the guerrillas could not defeat the
army and the army could not defeat the guerrillas,'' Interior Minister Tomas
Borge Martinez said in a recent interview. ''Things cannot continue like this.
It is convenient neither for the Government nor the guerrillas, neither for the
United States, nor for us.''

So far, however, while agreeing to provide the junta with $35 million in
military aid this year and studying requests for over $200 million in economic
assistance, the Reagan Administration has refused to endorse any of several
negotiation formulas currently circulating in the region, including a mediation
effort backed by the Socialist International that would begin with talks between
President Reagan and Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor, who now
heads the worldwide Social Democratic Union.

In the short term, though, perhaps the greatest fear of the liberal regimes in
the area - a fear apparently shared by Jose Napoleon Duarte, the Christian
Democratic President of El Salvador's junta -is that United States policy will
strengthen the political position of the Salvadoran Army high command and erode
the power that civilian officials have accumulated over the last year.

Rightist Calls for Coup

Significantly, just as President Duarte was announcing plans to organize the
first free elections in El Salvador in 50 years, a right-wing former army major
with a considerable following in the armed forces, Roberto D'Aubuisson, last
week called for a military coup. President Reagan quickly reiterated his support
for the junta and noted that ''we would have to view very seriously such an
attempt and such a coup.''

Nevertheless, eager to underline the dangers of military answers to deeply
rooted political problems, many students of the region have pointed to the
long-term results of Washington's response to Cuba's first effort to ''export''
revolution to Latin America in the early 1960's.

At the time, President Kennedy created the Alliance for Progress and committed
huge resources to promoting development and social change in the continent in
the hope of neutralizing the appeal of a Castroite revolution. But he twinned
this political approach with increased funds for military and police training to
strengthen the security apparatus of the area.

In the mid-1960's, though, as Washington turned its attention increasingly to
Vietnam, economic support for the Alliance for Progress faltered and United
States policy toward Latin America began to lean increasingly on the security
pillar. By 1969, President Nixon had endorsed the rising tide of military
dictatorships.

Leftist Insurgency Grows

In several countries, however, while leftist guerrilla groups were dismantled,
the social and economic problems that frequently inspired young radicals to take
up arms remained untouched. And, particularly in Central America, heavy-handed
repression seemed to accelerate the advent of a new surge of leftist insurgency.

In El Salvador, armed rebels did not appear until 1970, but, fed by fraudulent
elections in 1972 and 1977, mounting repression and the refusal of the ruling
army to accept even modest reforms, their appeal grew steadily until the
civilian-military junta began responding to political unrest with political as
well as military measures in mid-1980.

Western diplomats with experience in the region therefore argue that United
States support for a military solution in El Salvador might not only lead to
continuing bloodshed, but could also sow the seeds for a new cycle of leftist
violence. They also fear that, unless the opposition can be accommodated in a
political solution, leftist terrorism will continue and the country will remain
ungovernable indefinitely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Salvadoran soilders

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PROPOSALS DETAIL FURTHER TRIMS IN BUDGET

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


The Reagan Administration today identified more than 200 proposed budget
reductions affecting almost every department and agency in the Government.

Most of these reductions are relatively small and are in addition to the 83
major policy and program changes that were proposed Feb. 18 and described in
detail in a chart published Feb. 20 in The New York Times.

In some cases, the new changes amount to deeper cuts in programs already
identified Feb. 18 as subject to reduction. In other cases, the changes
announced today would be in programs that were not affected by the Feb. 18
announcement.

Here are some of the most important budget reductions proposed today:

Veterans

No change in basic veterans' compensation and pensions. A decrease in the
interest subsidy on insurance loans. Elimination of proposed two-year extension
of eligibility for readjustment benefits for disadvantaged Vietnam-era veterans.
Ceiling on bonuses for Veterans Administration doctors and dentists.
Cancellation or delay of some hospital construction projects. Reduction: $800
million below the $24.2 billion Carter Administartion budget for the Veterans
Administration for the fiscal year 1982.

Education

Consolidation of 44 separate grant programs into two block grants, one to states
and the other to localities. Reduction of total spending by about 25 percent, or
$1.1 billion, in the fiscal year 1982. A 25 percent, or $100 million, cut in
vocational education programs in the fiscal year 1981. Maintenance of bilingual
education as separate grant program.

Food and Nutrition

Conversion of $1.1 billion in Food Stamps now paid in Puerto Rico to a $900
million block grant. Limitation of assistance to pregnant and lactating women
and infants to those who have very low incomes and exhibit nutrition
deficiencies, spending $200 million less than the $900 million now being spent.

Social Security

Elimination of the automatic $255 payment now awarded upon the death of an
insured worker, unless there is a spouse or surving minor child to receive the
benefit, saving $200 million from what would otherwise be spent in fiscal year
1982.

Job Training

Consolidation of a variety of separate youth and adult employment training
programs into a single block grant. Reduction of total spending by $700 million
in the fiscal year 1982. Placing of summer youth jobs program under the block
grant by summer of 1983. Abolition of Young Adult Conservation Corps by the end
of 1982 and of Youth Conservation Corps by the end of this year. Reduction of
spending for state employment services by $150 million. Additional reduction:
$857 million below the $5.5 billion employment and training budget proposed by
Reagan Administration last month.

Science

Further reduction of science education and behavorial research programs of the
National Science Foundation. Additional reduction: $79 million, making Mr.
Reagan's proposed foundation budget for the fiscal year 1982 a total of $1.034
billion.

Water Projects

Cuts, large and small, in water projects in 20 states, including such major cuts
as stoppage of all work on Yatesville Lake dam in Kentucky, saving $6.9 million;
reduction of spending on Big South Fork National River and Recreation area in
Kentucky and Tennessee from $26.9 million to $9.9 million; reduction of spending
on Red River Waterway in Louisiana to $27.4 million from $120 million; a $10
million cut in spending from Central Valley Project in California; $7.4 million
from Yuma Desalting Complex in California, and $5 million from Central Arizona
Project and $4 million from Central Utah Project, to be achieved by extending
deadline for completion.  Other sizable reductions: a $2.9 million cut, to
$201.1 million, in the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway project; a cut from $14
million to $11.9 million in Kentucky's Taylorsville Lake project; a $2 million
cut, to $15.5 million, in Alaska's Chena River Lakes project; a cut to $14.5
million from $19.7 million in Missouri's Harry S. Truman Dam; a cut to $2.94
million from $6.24 million in North Carolina's B. Everett Jordan Dam and a cut
to $11.5 million from $14.6 million in the state's Falls Lake Dam, and a cut to
$10.3 million from $12.8 million in additional units for Washington's Chief
Joseph Dam. Other water-related cuts: a $57 million cut in survey, operations
and maintenance activities and an $8 million cut in salaries for the Army Corps
of Engineers; elimination of funds for the Office of Water Research and
Technology in the Department of Interior, saving $66.7 million, and elimination
of funds for the Water Resources Council, saving $44.8 million.

Parks

Spending of $105 million budgeted by Carter Administration to purchase new parks
on maintenance of existing parks instead. A moratorium on state recreation
grants, grants to urban areas for park facilities and grants to states for
historic preservation, saving a total of $188 million a year in the fiscal years
1981 and 1982.

Maritime

Reduction of Federal support for shipbuilding below the Carter Administration
budget by $21 million in fiscal year and by $40 million in fiscal year 1982.

Housing

Reduction of mortgage insurance and loan guarantee commitments of the Federal
Housing Administration and the Government National Mortgage Association.
Termination of the G.N.M.A. tandem and Indian housing programs. Savings would be
negligible in the short term but could eventually amount to billions of dollars.


Weather

Closing of 38 National Weather Service forecasting offices, including the one in
Trenton, and reduction of the staff at eight others, including the one in
Albany. Total saving: from $7 million to $8 million a year.

Farm Loans

Reduction of the Carter budget by $25 million in the fiscal year 1981 and by
$100 million in the fiscal year 1982 for on-farm storae facility loans. Saving
of $84 million in the fiscal year 1981 and $212 million in the fiscal year 1982
by reducing or eliminating the interest subsidy to farmers on Commodity Credit
Corporation loans.

Permission for $254 million to be spent to develop the Clinch River Breeder
Reactor in Tennessee, but no allowance funds to buy a plant in Barnwell, S.C.,
to reprocess spent nuclear fuel. A $27 million cut in the Carter budget for
solar energy development and a $18 million cut for geothermal energy
development. Reduction of the budget of the Office of Surface Mining by $66.8
million below the Carter figure by cutting funds for strip-mining control and
reclamation.  Increase in funds for offshore oil and gas leasing but cut in
funds for environmental studies of outer continental shelf leasing.  Reduction
of the Bureau of Mines budget for mine health and safety research.

Legal Services

Abolition of the Legal Services Corporation, which has a budget of more than
$300 million a year to provide legal aid for the poor.

Small Business

Reduction of the Carter budget by $45 million in the fiscal year 1981 and by
$116 million in the fiscal year 1982 by placing limits on the lending authority
of the Small Business Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Barber Conable

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES HINT CUBA CUTS ARMS TO SALVADOR LEFT

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


Administration officials said today that recently acquired information indicates
that the anti-Government insurgents in El Salvador are running low on ammunition
because of an apparent decision by Nicaragua and Cuba to reduce their
assistance.

Although the officials said that the intelligence information was not
conclusive, there was a growing belief within the Administration that the flow
of arms to the left-wing rebels in El Salvador through Nicaragua had been
drastically reduced in the last several weeks.

The officials said also that there has been less activity and involvement by
Cuba in helping the El Salvador rebels during the same period.

U.S. Is Proceeding Cautiously

The Reagan Administration has been cautious in handling the intelligence
information. It does not want to undercut its own justification for increased
military aid for El Salvador but it is also tempted to assert that its ''tough''
position exposing Sovietbloc assistance to the insurgents may have been
decisive.

Some analysts in the Government trace the shortage of ammunition to the ''final
offensive'' launched by the insurgents in January, before the Reagan
Administration took office. The offensive failed to gain much public support and
was stopped by Government forces.

Since then, the Reagan Administration has given considerable publicity to
information it had gathered, largely from what were said to be captured
documents, that is meant to demonstrate that the leftwing insurgents, at the
instigation of Cuba, were given large quantities of arms and ammunition from
Soviet-bloc nations at the end of last year.

Arms Reportedly Go Through Cuba

Most of the equipment, the United States charged, was American-made and was
shipped from Vietnam to Cuba and then to Nicaragua. From Nicaragua, it was
allegedly sent into El Salvador by land, through Honduras, or by sea and air.

Since the offensive in January and even as the Administration was publicizing
reports that large shipments of arms were reaching the guerrillas, the rebels
themselves told reporters in El Salvador that they were running low on supplies.

American officials said Nicaragua, under heavy pressure from the United States,
which has threatened to cut off economic assistance, has apparently stopped or
sharply curtailed using its territory as a funnel for arms to the insurgents.

Officials were reluctant to say whether the present situation would be
permanent.

A Difficult Logistical Problem

Without Nicaragua's cooperation, it would be logistically difficult for Cuba to
help the insurgents in El Salvador, the officials said.  This may explain the
slackening of the Cuban involvement, officials said. Some intelligence analysts
believe that the failure of the January offensive may also have persuaded Cuba
to avoid further large-scale involvement in El Salvador.

The reported problems for the insurgents comes against a major effort by the
Reagan Administration to increase military and economic support for the El
Salvador Government.

The Administration has authorized $30 million in military help for the current
fiscal year and is seeking another $66 million in the next fiscal year. The
amount of emergency economic aid to be provided El Salvador is due to be
announced by the end of the week, and it is expected to be between $100 million
and $200 million.

Some officials believe that the Soviet leadership has become wary of major
involvement in El Salvador and may have sent word to its East European,
Vietnamese and Cuban allies to avoid further largescale assistance to the rebels
for fear of provoking an American military response against Cuba.

Brezhnev Didn't Mention the Issue

Administration officials said that Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, did
not mention El Salvador either in his speech to the 26th Communist Party
Congress or in his recent letters to President Reagan and other Western heads of
government.

Mr. Brezhnev has been urging the start of an ''active dialogue'' with the United
States, including a possible summit meeting with Mr.  Reagan. This may be a
factor in the Soviet refusal to be drawn into a public defense of the El
Salvador rebels.

Several Administration officials also said that the Russians seem much more
concerned at the moment over the continuing crisis in Poland, which could
provoke Soviet military intervention, and in Afghanistan and are not likely to
seek a confrontation in another part of the world where the United States is
predominant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Salvadoran guerrilla (page A10)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEJA VU, C.I.A.- 'WISE';
by Kenneth C. Bass 3d

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: RESTON , Va.


Ironically, the proposed increased role for the Central Intelligence Agency in
domestic clandestine activities through infiltration, surveillance, and
searches, conflicts with the recommendations of the (Rockefeller) Commission on
C.I.A. Activities Within the United States, on which Ronald Reagan, then a
private citizen, served. The proposal is contained in recommendations for
sweeping changes in regulations governing intelligence activities that
intelligence agency representatives have developed and that the C.I.A.
leadership and others are reviewing.

If adopted, the proposal would represent the first time a President had
specifically authorized extensive domestic spying by the C.I.A.  Issues of
privacy, free speech, and personal liberty are raised, but the proposal also
presents a critical issue for the Administration in defining the C.I.A.'s role
and thereby setting a tone for the intelligence process. In fact, the proposal
might presage the deterioration of the process rather than its invigoration.

Collection of information about foreign powers is essential to wise foreign
policy. At times, the Government must gather the information clandestinely. But
it makes a difference which agency collects it, and how.

When the C.I.A. was established, a central concern was avoiding creation of an
agency to spy on Americans. In 1975, in its first recommendation, the
Rockefeller Commission urged that the C.I.A.  avoid engaging in ''collection
efforts within the United States directed at securing foreign intelligence from
unknowing American citizens.'' It also recommended a prohibition on infiltration
of domestic groups unless a group posed a threat to the agency that
law-enforcement authorities could not meet. Other recommendations were to
prohibit C.I.A physical surveillance of persons other than Agency employees and
a flat ban on ''unconsented physical searches'' in America. President Ford
accepted these recommendations in Executive Order 11905; President Carter
preserved the thrust of them in Order 12036. The proposal being considered would
conflict with each commission recommendation and rescind the key provisions of
both orders. Some see the ghosts of CHAOS, COINTELPRO, and other Watergate-
Vietnam abuses in the proposal - indeed, perhaps recurrences are not precluded.
But the real threat to the integrity of our institutions - and to the integrity
of the C.I.A. and the intelligence process - lies elsewhere.

The C.I.A.'s mission is not to investigate dissident groups, and there is behind
the proposal probably no conscious intention to authorize such investigations.
The C.I.A. undoubtedly intends to improve its ability to gather foreign
intelligence. We may hear an argument that the proposal would only eliminate
unnecessary inhibitions on the proper collection of intelligence. There is some
truth behind such an argument - some changes are needed -but this proposed
solution far exceeds actual needs.

A great deal of information about foreign powers is publicly available in the
United States. Much private information is provided discreetly to the C.I.A. by
individuals acting for the best reasons.  Some data in America not readily
available may be vital to informed decision-making. But that possibility does
not justify the C.I.A.'s placing agents in American organizations that have data
the C.I.A.  believes is not otherwise available. Situations could arise where it
would be in the national interest for a deal between an American business and a
foreign organization to fall apart, but should the C.I.A. cause that failure?
Washington needed American banks' cooperation in the hostage crisis, but if a
similar situation arose, should we resort to clandestine activities rather than
executive orders or voluntary cooperation?

These questions are not flights of fancy. Each reflects an authority that would
be granted to the C.I.A. under the suggested new executive order. Each reflects
a major change in the C.I.A.'s traditional role within America. The proposed new
powers could lead to the acquisition of additional information, but at what
cost? Would these powers produce better National Intelligence Estimates, or
would they lead inevitably to a new CHAOS directed not at anti-Government
dissidents but at mainstream organizations? Would the additional data be worth
the potential cost to the self-esteem of intelligence professionals who could
again be dragged through exposes and reactive solutions to real or perceived
problems? These are some questions the Administration must ask and answer as it
considers the proposal.

It is easy to focus on recent regulations as the cause of C.I.A.  problems
-easier than to grapple with the continuing absence of sufficient human
resources to cope with the inundation of raw intelligence. The easy road may be
attractive to those who want to improve the intelligence process; however, it
may produce diversions from the C.I.A.'s important role overseas and provoke
critical reactions that consume management attention and weaken, rather than
heal, an agency that has already suffered unfairly because of past errors, many
not of its own making. Let us hope the proposal is only a passing wave that has
run ashore and spent its force with little permanent effect.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Kenneth C. Bass 3d, a lawyer, headed the Justice Department's Office of
Intelligence Policy and Review from its creation in 1979 until recently. He
helped draft the executive order regulating intelligence activities that Jimmy
Carter signed in 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DR. HEINRICH E. K. HENEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


Dr. Heinrich E. K. Henel, Sterling Professor Emeritus of German at Yale
University, died last Saturday at the Yale-New Haven Hospital. He was 75 years
old and lived in North Haven, Conn.

Dr. Henel, who was born in Saigon, received a doctorate in 1927 after studying
at the Universities of Frankfurt and Munich. He joined the Yale faculty in 1957,
was appointed to the Sterling chair in 1963 and retired in 1973.

He is survived by his wife, Ingebord; a daughter, Bettina Elliott of Watertown,
Mass.; a son, Rolf H. of Franklin Lakes, N.J.; a sister, Carolina Starke of
Schleswig, West Germany, and four grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Region;
Ketter to Leave Post At State U. in Buffalo

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 101 words


BUFFALO (AP) - Dr. Robert L. Ketter, who guided the State University at Buffalo
through the Vietnam War era, has announced his resignation after nearly 11
years.

He will step down next Jan. 1 and , take a one-year leave of absence before
returning to the 23,000-student campus as a professor of engineering and applied
sciences, Dr. Ketter wrote the university council.

The 52-year-old educator was named president after the spring semester of 1970,
which ended prematurely because of campus clashes between student activists and
Buffalo police.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

15 U.S. GREEN BERETS TO AID SALVADORANS

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


The Reagan Administration disclosed today that 15 of the American military
advisers being sent to El Salvador are members of the Army's Special Forces who
would train troops in counterinsurgency.

Senators said that they had been assured at a briefing today that there were no
plans to increase the number of advisers being sent to El Salvador beyond the 54
already announced, including the members of the Special Forces, who are known as
Green Berets. Senior officials also said at a Senate briefing that the
Administration, acting to help El Salvador economically, would request an
additional $60 million for assistance in this fiscal year, according to Senate
sources.

The Administration plans to seek $80 million to $100 million in economic aid for
El Salvador in the next fiscal year. This is roughly $100 million less than the
aid requested by President Jose Napoleon Duarte. Officials stressed, however,
that the economic aid was three times greater than the military help.

The economic assistance package was discussed briefly during a closed briefing
of the Senate Appropriations Committee by senior officials from the State
Department, the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence Agency.

Under Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel Jr. sought to assure concerned
senators that American military commitment to El Salvador would not result in a
Vietnam-like involvement. ''El Salvador is not another Vietnam,'' Mr. Stoessel
said.

Administration officials said new emphasis on economic aid was aimed at calming
concern in Latin America and Europe that the United States was emphasizing
military factors in the Salvadoran struggle at the expense of economic issues
and was embarking on a risky strategy.

Senators Wary of Vietnam Sequel

''There was a consensus at the meeting on both sides of the aisle and both sides
of the table,'' said Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, chairman of
the Appropriations Committee. ''The Senate is not about to retrace those steps
that led us into the longest war in Southeast Asia.''

Several senators expressed concern about the Administration's policy toward El
Salvador.  ''It was very clear,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, ''that the Administration has not thought through the implications of
its policy in El Salvador for the rest of Latin America.''

The witnesses, he added, were unable to answer questions about what the
Administration would do if the Duarte Government was overthrown or if Cuba
increased its involvement.

''What I found disturbing was the lack of a bottom line,'' agreed Senator Warren
Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire. ''There don't seem to be any contingency
plans and none of the witneses would assure us that additional military and
economic aid would not be necessary.''

Mr. Rudman added that he thought the committee and the Senate would support
President Reagan's policy in El Salvador but only if the Administration did not
treat Congress to a series of increases in United States involvement.

Senator Rudman and others said they were particularly disturbed by a statement
in Mr. Stoessel's testimony, which was not distributed by the State Department,
indicating that the level of assistance to El Salvador had to respond ''not only
to the present situation, but to the potential of the other side to create
further violence.''

''There is, thus, an element of deterrence built into the level of our total
support,'' the testimony continues.  ''We made it very clear that we don't
expect to be subjected either to padded budgets or incremental changes down the
line,'' Mr. Rudman said.

The panel met to consider the Administration's request that Congress redirect $5
million in military assistance to El Salvador.  Mr. Hatfield's aides said that
they expected the measure to win subcommittee approval, Mr. Hatfield said that
he would finish polling the subcommittee members by Monday.

Mr. Hatfield added that Mr. Stoessel said there were no plans to increase the
number of American military advisers for El Salvador, which now total 54.

''We were assured that we could regard the 54 as a cap,'' Mr.  Hatfield said.
Mr. Stoessel told the committee that the Administration had not completed work
on its economic assistance packages for fiscal 1981 and 1982. In fiscal 1980,
the United States provided roughly $58.8 million in economic assistance. This
fiscal year, the Carter Administration planned to provide $63 million in
economic assistance and $9.6 million in emergency military aid.

The Reagan Administration announced late last month that it was requesting $25
million in additional military aid.  The new $60 million-plus package of
economic aid would be in addition to current funding, but White House officials
said today that the Office of Management and Budget had not yet approved the
State Department's economic package.

For fiscal year 1982, the Administration is requesting $25 million in military
loans and low-interest credits, $1 million in military training funds and $40
million in ''economic support funds'' intended to help El Salvador purchase
weapons.

The Pentagon has reported that the United States had sent military training
teams to six countries. By law, they must not take part in any fighting.

The countries and numbers, as of Thursday, were El Salvador, seven teams
totaling 42 soldiers; Honduras, two teams totaling four men; Liberia, one team
of six members; Morocco, two teams totaling 22 men; Thailand, one two-member
team, and Yemen, two teams of five men.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Under Secretary of State Walter Stoessel (page
8)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SIDE EFFECT OF EL SALVADOR;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


The Reagan Administration has succeeded in focusing world attention on El
Salvador, but its monthlong campaign has also produced some negative side
effects not to Washington's liking. Many key members of Congress and foreign
governments that were only dimly aware of El Salvador's problems before are now
openly concerned about the possibility of ''another Vietnam,'' even though the
Administration insists such a comparison is unfounded.

When Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. sent officials to Europe and Latin
America last month to explain the Administration policy and ordered an
information blitz on Congress and the press, his purpose was to expose what he
said was Soviet-bloc support for the leftist insurgents in El Salvador and to
gain sympathy for future United States countermoves. But as a senior Haig aide
told reporters yesterday, Mr. Haig ''perhaps opened the jar and he didn't,
perhaps, realize how many genies were in it.''

The briefing by the State Department official, who is a specialist in Latin
American affairs, underscored the Administration's dilemma in handling the
''crisis.''

On the one hand it wanted to focus world attention on the alleged Soviet-bloc
involvement, to discourage the Nicaraguans and Cubans from continuing to funnel
arms through Nicaragua to the rebels.

On the other hand it wanted to persuade allies and members of Congress that the
campaign did not mean there would be a major investment of American military
forces in El Salvador.

The arms supply to the insurgents has, in fact, been cut significantly. Whether
that was a result of the Administration's efforts is a matter of conjecture. But
whatever the reason, there is now a glimmer of optimism in the State Department
that the Salvadoran situation may be less of a military problem than was first
thought.

The Administration is now saying what the Salvadoran civilianmilitary junta has
been saying all along - that priority should be given to more extensive economic
support and quiet and effective backing for political moves to bring about
''social justice.'' Congress was told today that the Administration would seek
an additional $60 million in economic assistance for this fiscal year and more
in the next fiscal year to help El Salvador regain its economic health.

''We have moved into a period which is looking very favorable,'' the official
said, ''and so it may be we have to go through a period in which there is not
much news until we can have a more reasonable period of time to make a
judgment.''

Concern About 'Obsession'

But many governments and members of Congress are concerned about what they have
regarded as a Reagan Administration ''obsession'' with El Salvador.

For instance, on Capitol Hill today, Walter J. Stoessel Jr., the Under Secretary
of State, in testifying in a closed-door session of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee about United States aid to El Salvador, went out of his way to assert
''that we are doing this with the greatest prudence and caution and with the
lessons of the past very much in mind.''

''El Salvador is not another Vietnam,'' he said.  President Sandro Pertini of
Italy, reflecting concerns in Europe, said in an interview in Rome today that he
had sent messages to President Reagan urging him not to turn El Salvador into
another Vietnam.

Complaints From Latin America

From Latin America, the State Department has received numerous complaints that
the Administration was more interested in confronting the Russians over El
Salvador than in the ''real'' issues of economic growth and social justice that
are important for the hemisphere as a whole.

The Latin Americans, the department official said, want ''a more balanced
attitude, in the North-South sense, than in the East-West sense.''

The campaign has made it seem, he said, that ''the Latin American part of the
Reagan Administration will depend upon El Salvador - that there is no interest
in South America, for example, in the countries which are doing quite well in a
number of ways.''

Several officials speculated that the White House has been annoyed at the number
of questions put to Mr. Reagan about El Salvador, overshadowing his efforts to
focus his attention on his economic program. And in Ottawa this week,
Administration officials did not enjoy the hecklers who were protesting the
Reagan position on El Salvador.

Haig Must Balance Concerns

For Mr. Haig this has become a test of his ability to orchestrate a difficult
policy - of being tough enough to convince the Russians not to allow their
allies to run risks in Central America, while at the same time keeping this
country and its allies persuaded that the United States itself will not run
unacceptable risks in that part of the world.

The official who briefed reporters yesterday under ground rules of anonymity
seemed to be saying that the press was responsible for overdramatizing the
story, but it has been evident for the last month that Mr. Haig himself had
seized upon El Salvador to show his willingness to counter the Russians, perhaps
in the knowledge that it was a ''war'' the United States need not ever fight.

Today, Mr. Haig said that official ''was a little bit off the mark'' in his
comments. But he went on to say that he believed it would be wrong to be totally
preoccupied with El Salvador when there were other major problems such as Poland
that needed attention.

''We would be better served in the long run if we could keep all this in
balance,'' Mr. Haig said. ''It wasn't an effort to say we've got to de-emphasize
El Salvador.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ASIANS CHOOSE SINGAPORE ENVOY TO HEAD U.N. LAW OF SEA PARLEY

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 467 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., March 13


The conference to write a sweeping code for the deep seas today chose Tommy Koh
of Singapore as its president.

Since Monday, the Asian nations, whose turn it is to pick a president of the Law
of the Sea Conference, have been wrangling in private over whom to choose.
United Nations practice holds that major posts must be filled by consensus or by
unanimous vote.

Mr. Koh, a widely respected, Harvard-trained lawyer, would not hold himself out
as an active candidate. So the 45 Asian nations were dividing their votes
between C.W. Pinto of Sri Lanka and Satya Nandan of Fiji. When they finally
withdrew, the way appeared clear for Mr. Koh, who has played a key part in
drafting the complex code.

But a last-minute hitch developed when five Soviet supporters - Afghanistan,
Yemen, Vietnam, Laos and Mongolia -refused at first to join the consensus. After
a pause for reflection and what was believed to be consultations with the Soviet
Union, the five dropped their objections and Mr. Koh won the post.

His selection was made necessary by the death last December of H.  Shirley
Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka, who headed the conference since it began more than
seven years ago. A president is an important figure in conferences of this kind
since he is the person delegates turn to for mediation and compromise solutions
when they reach a deadlock.

Delay Imposed by Reagan

The conference was supposed to end its work next month but the United States has
made that impossible. The Reagan Administration insists on reviewing all the
decisions taken so far, particularly those involving the mining of minerals from
the ocean floor. American officials said that Washington was now prepared to
bargain only on technical matters like the harmonizing of draft texts in
different languages.

If the code is completed it will have important strategic and economic
implications. A major section opens up the seas to within 12 miles of any coast
to all ships and provides freedom of navigation through critical straits like
those of Gibraltar and Hormuz. The United States Navy regards this as vitally
important in order to bring its power to bear anywhere in the world.

The major economic section imposes strict mining limits on the nickel, copper,
cobalt and manganese deposits that lie in abundance at the bottom of the sea.
This curb on production will prop up the prices for land-based producers of
these metals.

Some American mining companies that welcome the protection of prices oppose the
code's insistence that third world nations share in any profits from exploiting
the minerals. This was believed to be one reason for President Reagan's decision
to review the package.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM ADMINISTRATION'S STATEMENT TO SENATORS ON HELPING EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


Following are excerpts from a statement by Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs Walter J. Stoessel Jr. before the Senate Appropriations
Committee today on proposed assistance to El Salvador:

Our actions with regard to El Salvador have as their goal the reduction of
violence and instability in order to facilitate a peaceful transition to an
elected government. This is the goal of the Salvadoran people and of their
current Government, headed by Christian Democratic President Jose Napoleon
Duarte, which we strongly support.

In recent months, our understanding of the situation in El Salvador has changed
with the discovery that large quantities of arms and munitions were being
supplied to the guerrillas. Last summer and fall, far away Vietnam, Ethiopia and
some Eastern European countries joined Cuba to take the initiative to transform
an essentially domestic conflict in Central America into an international
confrontation.

The United States cannot stand idly by while a reformist government comes under
attack by externally advised and armed guerrilla groups that lack popular
support. If we fail to make clear that the external encouragment of violence and
instability in El Salvador will have serious costs, we insure that other
countries seeking domestic solutions to domestic problems will find their
efforts thwarted by guerrilla groups advised and armed from abroad. In turn, our
failure to respond adequately to externally supported attempts to overthrow
governments committed to reforms and to electoral solutions would cause other
friendly countries to doubt our ability to help them resist assaults on their
sovereignty.

Role of Domestic Ills

While the guerrillas in El Salvador are externally supported, they also feed on
domestic ills. These include years of repressive and unresponsive governments
and inequitable distribution of resources and life opportunities. For this
reason, the major emphasis of our assistance program for El Salvador is economic
rather than military.  The Government of El Salvador welcomes this emphasis.

On the economic front, we provided roughly $58.8 million in FY 80 for the
Government's reforms and its programs for the most needy. The Carter
Administration had planned to provide about $63 million in FY 81 to create jobs
through public works, to feed the hungry and to improve health, education and
housing. An intensive interagency study has now concluded that additional
economic aid to El Salvador will be necessary. We will be consulting further
with the Congress on this.

At this point, it appears likely that additional assistance in the range of $60
million will be needed this year. At that level, economic assistance would be
more than three times larger than our military assistance. For FY 82, we will
request the Congress to make available between $80-$100 million in economic
assistance to insure the continued viability of the reform process.

American Military Aid

Now let me address our security assistance efforts. We are providing the
necessary military assistance to the Duarte Government in its battle against the
externally supported guerrillas. Let me assure you that we are doing this with
the greatest prudence and caution and with the lessons of the past very much in
mind. El Salvador is not another Vietnam. Our objectives are limited: to help
the Government with its problems of training, equipment repair and maintenance,
mobility and resupply. Let me quickly review our assistance effort to date.

Prior to Jan. 16 of this year, the Carter Administration had confined defense
aid to El Salvador to nonlethal equipment, like trucks and radios.

It also had provided training for selected Salvadoran officers and had sent a
number of training teams to Salvador. On Jan. 16, after a week of hard fighting
initiated by the guerrillas with the aid of externally supplied arms and
munitions, President Carter authorized the provision to El Salvador of some arms
and munitions - the first such U.S. shipments since 1977 - to replace some of
the stocks depleted during the guerrilla offensive.

Military Personnel to Total 54

Since taking office we have made a grant of articles and services valued at $20
million and have notified Congress of our intent to reprogram $5 million in
additional loan guarantees. This additional assistance includes sending a small
number of personnel on temporary duty to help train the Salvadoran Army and
Navy. One six-man team will help with repair of ships and ship-board equipment
for coastal patrols; five men have been added to an operations planning
assistance team in El Salvador since January; five will supplement the U.S.
military group in its largely administrative duties, and three teams of five men
each will help provide in-garrison training for the Salvadorans' new
quick-reaction force.

These additional training specialists will bring the total number of U.S.
military personnel working with Salvadoran forces to 54.  Although in a country
torn by violence no place is totally safe, all U.S. trainers will work in some
of the safest places in El Salvador: military garrisons and regional command
centers. For FY 82, we are requesting $25 million in financing for purchase of
weapons and military equipment and $1 million for training. Additional grant
military assistance is not contemplated at this time.

Anticipating Future Needs

While the January offensive was successfully repelled, the guerrillas continue
to pose a serious military threat. Estimates of the number of guerrillas are
around 4,000 with approximately 5,000 irregulars. The Government's regular armed
forces - the recipients of our security assistance - total about 9,000. Various
police or constabulary forces have a similar combined strength.

It has been alleged that our support goes beyond minimum requirements, that the
armed forces of President Duarte are successfully defeating the guerrillas, and
hence that no further U.S. assistance is called for.

Experience has shown, however, that for our support to be credible, it must
respond not only to the present situation but to the potential of the other side
to create further violence. It takes time for new equipment to be absorbed and
training to take effect. We must anticipate future needs rather than being
merely reactive. There is, thus, an element of deterrence built into the level
of our total support.

War Powers Resolution

In giving military help to El Salvador, we are most mindful of our obligations
to you under the terms of the War Powers Resolution. The activities assigned to
our military personnel in El Salvador do not call for them to ''command,
coordinate, participate in the movement of or accompany'' Salvadoran forces at
any time or place where involvement in hostilities is imminent. The U.S.
personnel are specifically instructed to avoid situations of potential
hostilities, and our assessment of the risk at the locations where they will be
assigned is that there is no imminent likelihood of hostilities involving these
U.S. personnel. The assignment of our training personnel to El Salvador is not,
in our view, ''an introduction of U.S. armed forces into hostilities or a
situation where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicted by the
circumstances'' - the standard of the War Powers Resolution.

There are three alternatives in El Salvador today - the forces of the extreme
right, the forces of the extreme left and the present Government. Of these, the
Duarte Government is the only one that promises to lead a transition to full
constitutional order. Should it come to power, the extreme left would probably
create a government modeled, like Cuba's, on the Soviet Union. Such governments
can vary among themselves, but we do know from history that they have an unusual
ability to establish a rigid grip. To passively accept a Cuban-coordinated
attempt to impose their kind of political order by force of arms would be to
close off all but one narrow path for the future development of the Salvadoran
people. This is what we want to help prevent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'CATONSVILLE NINE'

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


The drama of a courtroom often makes a difficult transition in becoming the
courtroom drama of a theater, but this certainly does not seem to have affected
the powerful and tasteful performance of ''The Trial of the Catonsville Nine''
now being re-enacted in the comfortable new home of the Spectrum Theater on
Vandam Street.

''The Trial'' was originally done in New York in 1971. It was written by the
Rev. Daniel Berrigan, one of the nine who had destroyed draft-office files in
Maryland, went to court and were convicted. The drama, drawn largely from the
trial records, has been redone for this new presentation by Susan Woodward, with
additional text by its director, Walter Scholz, who adapted it based on the
texts by Father Berrigan and Saul Levitt.

This is a most dramatic piece, little more than an hour and a half long, and it
is eloquent in its statement of radical nonviolent resistance and objection to
the Vietnam War and in general to governmental oppression of people. In it, each
defendant speaks movingly about his or her own past and the experiences that
inspired moral disobedience to the law. It is almost a series of vignettes that
give us the view of the defendants as fully dimensional individuals rather than
as a deck of cardboard symbols, although they emerge, perhaps exasperatingly, in
heroic mold.

What emerges is argument, but it is presented in a rational and civilized
context in which emotion and passion are seen as intellectually moral processes
rather than sheer gut symptoms. While a spectator is gripped and must sympathize
with the pure and orthodox morality of the uncompromising defendants, the
prosecutor and the judge are not made into caricatures; they are heard as
rational proponents of law who evince very human feelings but just as devotedly
put their faith in the system they are working for.

The cast is excellent, the very actors who are needed to flesh out testimony
theatrically. James Secrest has charm and passion as Daniel Berrigan, who serves
as something of a commentator to the proceedings and makes his own forceful
statements. Herbert Rubens, with considerable skill, portrays the defense lawyer
slipping from initial cheerful legalist to final orator, impassioned in a way
that he says lawyers should never be. Joseph Culliton as Philip Berrigan,
Daniel's brother and the first priest in this country ever prosecuted for civil
disobedience, is also most effective, and so is Ruth Nerken, who, as Mary Moylan
is the most purely emotional of all; but then, each member of the cast acquits
himself nobly in this stage trial.

As for the staging, Mr. Scholz has done it simply but strikingly, achieving
enough movement to avoid static speeches but at the same time keeping the
movement subordinate to the play of words and thoughts. At times, ''The Trial''
seems somewhat mawkish, what with the heroic gripping of shoulders and hands,
the praying and the intense group cohesion, but on the other hand this would
seem to reflect the mood and manner of the times and the trial.

Last weekend, the Berrigan brothers were again adjudged guilty on three counts
and not guilty on five as members of the so-called Plowshare Eight who
demonstrated at a Pennsylvania missile plant. The ''Catonsville Nine'' may be
wrapped up in a play, but the Berrigan story goes on.

The Cast
THE TRIAL OF THE CATONSVILE NINE, by Daniel F. Berrigan; adapted by Susan
Woodward, based on texts of Mr. Berrigan and Saul Levitt, with additional
dialogue by Walter Scholz; directed by Mr. Scholz; scenic design by Kevin
Golden; lighting design by Richard Harmon; sound design by George Jacobs;
costume design by Laura Gelles. Presented by the Spectrum Theater, Benno
Haehnel, artistic director.  At 15 Vandam Street.  Daniel Berrigan
.........................James Secrest Prosecution
..............................Carla Charny Defense
................................Herbert Rubens Judge
...............................Jane Newton Staab Witness
................................Esther Jenkins Philip Berrigan
.......................Joseph Culliton David Darst
...............................Neal Ashmun Mary Moylan
...............................Ruth Nerken Thomas Lewis
.............................Steven Burch John Hogan
..............................Thomas Dawber George Mische
............................Stephan Maro Thomas Melville
.....................Steven Abbruscato Marjorie Melville
.....................Carolyn Halpert

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OREGON, BETWEEN SNOW AND SUN BELTS;
by David Sarasohn

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore.


To a resident of Oregon, the current deepening of the country into Sun Belt and
Snow Belt is somewhat perplexing. It's not that we object to the other states'
choosing sides; it's just that it's not clear which side we're on. Neither sun
nor snow is the dominant feature of our climate; mostly it tends to be cloudy,
with chance of showers.

Aside from being sunny, the Sun Belt is supposed to be growing in population and
economically booming, while the Snow Belt is losing people and is deep into
recession. Without the explosive numbers of Texas, Oregon has had a population
increase well above the national average; the state will get another Congressman
next year. But Oregon doesn't exactly qualify as economically booming. It
currently has the seventh highest unemployment rate in the country, and, in
parts of the state heavily dependent upon the timber industry, conditions can
match anything the Snow Belt is suffering.

The Sun Belt-Snow Belt dichotomy is also a political one; liberalism, as Kevin
Phillips explained in ''The Emerging Republican Majority,'' is being overpowered
and driven into the northeastern corner of the United States, the way Federalism
and Hoover Republicanism were in the early 1800's and the 1930's, back before
they realized they were being Snow-Belted. Conversely, Reagan Republicanism is
the triumph of the Sun Belt, bringing tanned conservatives into control of the
White House and Senate.

Oregon went for Mr. Reagan last fall, and it has two Republican Senators. But
they're not exactly the kinds of Republican Senators who seem to be emerging
from the Sun Belt. Mark Hatfield, the new chairman of the Senate Appropriations
Committee, was an early opponent of the Vietnam War, and has already stated that
he will use his position to try to block military programs such as the MX
missile. Bob Packwood, the new chairman of the Commerce, Science, and
Transportation Committee, was perhaps the only Republican Senator in the Snow or
Sun Belts to be re-elected last fall with the aid of a fund-raising letter from
Gloria Steinem. In its internal politics, Oregon, like the Snow and Sun Belts,
is preoccupied with problems of economic development and growth. But its debate
reflects neither the near-desperation of Snow Belt remarks on the question, nor
the glorying in growth and economic advance exemplified by that archetypal Sun
Belt figure J.R. Ewing of television's ''Dallas.'' Growth makes many Oregonians
nervous; several communities have, through careful zoning and limits on building
permits, essentially sought to outlaw it in their vicinity. The emotion loosed
in the Sun Belt by the phrase ''Federal spending,'' or in the Snow Belt by
''OPEC,'' tends to flash in Oregon upon use of the word ''subdivision.''

Probably a large part of Oregon's differences with its Western and Southern
colleagues in population growth is explained by the origins of its new settlers.
The additional inhabitants of Florida and California are mostly still brushing
the snow from their hair; when the New York Mets play at Dodger Stadium, in Los
Angeles, it seems that all of Queens has settled on the third-base line. The new
Oregonians, by contrast, have left the areas to which other people are moving.
The 1970 census (1980 figures are not available yet) showed that 83 percent of
the quarter million who had moved in between 1965 and 1970 came from the

South and West, mostly from California.  This situation also explains some of
Oregon's internal attitudes.  Those most alarmed about growth are not always the
native Oregonians, who sometimes see development as a means to gain urban
amenities such as sewers, or to replace vanished logging and sawmill jobs. Very
often, it is the newer arrivals who maintain that they don't want to see again
what they experienced elsewhere, and who often seem to want to be the last ones
allowed into the state.

Given all of this resistance to categorization, it seems that Oregon, and the
Pacific Northwest, constitute a third force, the Rain Belt. Not only is the
image atmospherically descriptive, but also it suggests something about the
region's ties to the rest of the country: Somewhere between Snow and Sun, but
distinct from either. As Snow Belt and Sun Belt coalitions form, the Pacific
Northwest remains unique, growing but skeptical about growth.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David Sarasohn is senior editor of Oregon Magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LAND PROGRAM IS TAKING HOLD IN EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, March 14


A year after its inception, El Salvador's bold and disputed land redistribution
program is taking hold.  The first crops are in and, despite predictions of
economic disaster, the harvests on newly formed cooperatives were about the same
as they were last year under the former owners.

Perhaps more important, the American-aided program appears to be fulfilling its
political objectives of undercutting the power of rightist oligarchs and winning
peasants from leftist guerrillas.

Right-wing efforts to undermine the program by assassinating peasant leaders and
Government officials - including the Salvadoran head of the program and two
American advisers in January -have proved futile and appear to have stopped.

Second Phase Has Begun

The largest plantations have already been expropriated, turning over 15 percent
of the country's farmland to the cooperatives, which have 10 to 15 percent of
the rural population. A second phase, begun last month, is turning over to
sharecroppers the small plots they farm.

By conservative estimates, the two programs, if completed, will benefit more
than a million people, or almost half the rural population, in one of the most
sweeping agricultural changes ever undertaken in Latin America.

Visits to three cooperatives and interviews with many peasants in recent months
reveal a program that is still spotty in places and may not fulfill all its
promises. Its successes, nonetheless, after just one year are such that even
rightist business leaders say the program is irreversible, and the peasants
credit the Government with making a genuine effort to improve their lot.

''Before, we were marginal,'' said Mateos de Jesus Vega, a 53-yearold peasant
who taught himself to read and write. ''Now there is a much closer relationship
between the peasants and the Government, and we have an opportunity to improve
ourselves. We have sympathy for the Government.''

But many difficult problems remain. The Government has yet to decide whether to
proceed with the planned third phase in the program, in which medium-size farms,
those between 250 and 1,250 acres, would also be turned into cooperatives owned
by their workers. The uncertainty has caused farmers in that range to delay
investment, hurting national production.

Farms of more than 1,250 acres have already been expropriated, but most owners
have not yet received the 250 acres they are supposed to be able to keep and
have not been paid the Government bonds promised for the balance of land taken.
The Government announced last week, however, that it would soon begin paying the
6.5 percent interest on the bonds.

Among sharecroppers, some are reportedly being evicted from their farms by the
owners before they have a chance to apply for the land.  The country's
balance-of-payments deficit is so large that it does not have enough foreign
exchange to import the fertilizer, seed and insecticide needed to plant next
year's crops, which should be done now. International creditors are afraid to
make loans to El Salvador because of the guerrilla war.

American Aid for Program

The United States has given nearly $30 million in direct aid for the agrarian
program this fiscal year and last. The United States is also giving $27 million
in indirect aid, most of it through grants to the private sector. The Reagan
Administration is considering an additional emergency economic aid package of
more than $200 million, including help from international agencies such as the
International Monetary Fund, partly to help the country import the products the
farmers need.

Behind many of the shortcomings are the difficulties of quickly setting up the
administrative machinery to run the program. The assassination and intimidation
of officials robbed the Government of needed talent, but it is using officials
from other agencies to carry out the program.

Jose Antonio Morales Ehrlich, a liberal Christian Democratic member of the
ruling junta who is head of the program, is optimistic, however, that the
problems are being overcome.

Last Sunday, speaking to several hundred peasants in a first anniversary
celebration at San Isidro, one of the largest cooperatives in the western part
of the country, he exhorted: ''We have to be united. We have to be clear in our
work. We want to help you, not bully you.''

''It is the peasants,'' he said afterward in an interview, ''who are going to
save this country.''

Criticism Is Heated

Since the program began, there has been much heated criticism of it. Landowners
charge that the cooperatives are, in effect, socialist collectives. Leftists
charge that the program is only creating more private rural capitalists.

Landowners charge that the country's economy is tumbling because the peasants do
not have the expertise to run the cooperatives.  Leftists charge that the
program was based on American theories, not Salvadoran peasant experience.

Both sides charge that the program was begun too hastily and predict its
collapse.  Laurence R. Simon and James C. Stephans Jr., who studied land
redistribution for Oxfam America, a private aid group, recently wrote, ''Most
peasants consider the reform a cruel hoax intended to buy time and divert
international attention from the counterinsurgency campaigns terrorizing the
population.''

Jose Eduardo Palomo, a former president of the National Association of Private
Businesses and the general manager of a fertilizer company, said: ''I know my
people and what they want. Land should belong to the people who know how to work
it, and not the people who do work it.''

Government Cites Harvest Figures

Salvadoran officials say they are partly vindicated by the success of this
year's harvest on the cooperatives. Nationally, according to revised estimates,
cotton production is down 35 percent from last year, coffee is down 10 percent
and sugar is up slightly.

But almost all the decline, according to Salvadoran and Western experts, is in
guerrilla-controlled areas where harvests went unpicked and in the middle-sized
farms where owners were uncertain about the future. Many mid-sized cotton farms
switched to corn, a cheaper crop to plant, and national corn production was up
this year.

The experts concede that the program was hastily carried out, but they say the
critics fail to recognize that the situation was politically pressing. The
country was disintegrating last year in growing violence between right and left.

The killing of thousands of peasants last year and of at least 10 Government
field workers led to charges that the Government was cynically pushing the
program publicly while secretly trying to insure its failure.

Moves to Curb Violence

However, much of the problem has been that neither the junta nor high military
commanders have had much control over local security forces, particularly the
National Guard and national police in the countryside. Small units of fewer than
10 people in most villages and towns are commanded by corporals and sergeants
and have historically been on the payroll of local landowners.

Some rightist commanders in the military condoned and abetted the violence,
according to Western sources, but in recent months many of these have been
transferred to administrative positions. More than 400 national guardsmen have
been dishonorably discharged, according to military commanders, and visitors to
many rural villages find that members of the local units have been moved around,
breaking old loyalties.

Neither the junta, led by Jose Napoleon Duarte, a Christian Democrat, nor the
military high command, however, has cracked down on the abuses, for fear, they
say, of undermining the morale of the troops in the face of the guerrilla war.

Some critics charge that the changes under the program have not been as
extensive as the Government contends, but agrarian experts here say the critics
are relying on a faulty 1971 land census. Part of the confusion, they say, is
that the critics speak in terms of arable land, which technically is land that
can be plowed and excludes coffee land. The Government bases its statistics on
total farmland, which includes forests and pastures on farms.

The Extent of the Program

A census is being taken, but Western experts estimate that 40,000 to 70,000
families are members of the private cooperatives that now run 282 farms under
the first phase of the program. The Government had intervened on 292 farms, but
55 of them were found to be just under the size limit. The farms were offered
back to their owners, but most chose instead to sell anyway, agrarian officials
said.

The members of the cooperatives are the former full-time workers, but Mr.
Morales said the Government planned to expand the cooperatives with former
part-time workers to raise the number of families to 100,000, thereby reducing
the large number of the landless unemployed who do not benefit from the program.

The ''land to the tiller'' effort for sharecroppers was devised partly by Roy L.
Prosterman, a University of Washington law professor, who created a similar
program of the same name for what was then South Vietnam.

Under the program here, 125,000 families are expected to receive the plots of
three to four acres they now farm. A campaign for applications is just
beginning. The Government hopes to complete all titling within five years, but
several complications are yet to be worked out. Landlords usually rent to
several peasants, who move around among different small plots, making plot
designations difficult.

The two phases under way cover 28 percent of the country's farmland. Making
cooperatives of the 1,700 middle-size farms in the proposed third stage would
add 23 percent more of the farmland to the program, equally distributed among
major crops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of coffee workers at cooperative farm

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REDISCOVERING POLISH JEWRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Annette Insdorf, who teaches film at Yale, is writing a book on film and the
Holocaust through a Rockefeller Fellowship.

By ANNETTE INSDORF

Many current films explore the Nazi period - from Francois Truffaut's ''The Last
Metro'' to the German director Peter Lilienthal's ''David,'' soon to open in New
York -but few delve into the cultural heritage that was destroyed by World War
II. ''Image Before My Eyes,'' which opens Thursday for one week at the Manhattan
II, attempts to fill this gap by rediscovering the rich civilization of Polish
Jewry between the wars.

The feature-length documentary took shape under the auspices of the YIVO
Institute for Jewish Research, which is devoted to the preservation of Eastern
European Jewish culture. To film a photographic exhibition of the same title in
1977, they sought out a young filmmaker named Josh Waletzky. ''I had made a
half-hour Yiddish-language film as an N.Y.U film school student,'' he recalled.
''This of course perked the interest of the YIVO Institute since it was probably
the first Yiddish-language film to be made in America in 20 years.''

Mr. Waletzky was not content to merely record the exhibit. He persuaded YIVO to
let him ''translate'' the photos into a film by introducing interviews and rare
home movies of the period. These scratchy but revelatory records were integrated
into a dense album of Jewish life in prewar Poland.

YIVO's successful application to the National Endowment for the Humanities
enabled the film to be made. Mr. Waletzky was joined by the writer Jerome
Badanes - whose background was in antiwar street theater - and Susan Lazarus,
who joined the project as photo researcher and ultimately became the
co-producer. She and Mr.Waletzky had met while working on another independent
documentary, ''Joe and Maxi,'' (which will be shown at the Art Theater March 27
and 28). For them, ''Image Before My Eyes'' was a three-year task that included
poring over 15,000 photos from the YIVO collection and conducting 30 exploratory
interviews.

With a budget of $180,000 and ''extremely supportive'' individuals at both YIVO
and NEH, they accumulated fragments of Polish-Jewish culture that covered
everything from Yiddish writers' groups to political organizations. ''Image
Before My Eyes'' ends on Sept. 1, 1939 with the German invasion of Poland,
before the actual violence of the Holocaust can be seen. There is, nevertheless,
a special poignancy throughout the film which comes from learning that of 3.5
million Polish Jews, only 250,000 survived the genocide.

The rationale for ending the film in 1939 was that ''the whole destruction of
the world of Eastern European Jews has received a great deal of attention, and
deservedly so,'' said Mr. Waletzky.  ''It's obviously a cataclysmic event that
has stirred the imaginations of a lot of people. But that prewar world is
totally unknown by Americans -American Jews included.''

For Mr. Waletzky, the scene in the Polish city of Vilna is especially
interesting because it had a Montessori school - ''the most modern theories of
education, but being applied in a very traditional Yiddish-speaking setting.''
The 32-year-old director thus feels kinship to a film like ''Free Voice of
Labor: The Jewish Anarchists'' (recently shown on PBS) ''because it, too, brings
to light the unpublicized, unsung threads of Jewish history,'' and raises
complex political issues. Mr. Waletzky believes it is ''important for people of
progressive political involvement to know that Jewish politics had this variety
- including the Bund, for example, a Jewish socialist party.''

It is perhaps no coincidence that both Mr. Waletzky and Miss Lazarus also worked
on ''The War at Home.'' This documentary by Barry Alexander Brown and Glenn
Silber, which opens today at the Art Theater as part of a three-month
independent film series, chronicles the anti-Vietnam War movement in America.
According to Miss Lazarus, '' 'The War at Home' meant a lot to us: it was about
an almost similar period in our lives to the period we were treating in 'Image
Before My Eyes' -a time of activism and idealism.''

Moreover, the notion of resistance links the two documentaries, and one of Mr.
Waletzky's reasons for making ''Image Before My Eyes'' was to show the Jewish
youth movements that laid the groundwork for acts of largely-unknown resistance.
''The man who composed our music, Moses Kligsberg, wrote an article that made a
profound impression on me in one of the YIVO journals,'' Mr. Waletzky explained.
''He said that it was impossible to understand the Warsaw Ghetto uprising unless
you know the history of the Jewish youth movements in prewar Poland. Of course
there's more interest in that critical moment of life-and-death in horrible
conditions. But the kind of plodding-dayto-day organizing which can build the
capability of heroic acts is equally important to present in film,'' Mr.
Waletzky insisted.

The director is already doing research for a film about Jewish resistance during
the Nazi era. But first he will follow ''Image Before My Eyes'' through its
forthcoming showings -Los Angeles in late April as part of a Jewish Film
Festival sponsored by the American Film Institute, Detroit in May, and perhaps
Poland in June, as the the Cracow Film Festival has asked for a showing of the
film.  (The city of Cracow lost a particularly high number of Jews, and today
happens to be the 38th commemoration of the liquidation of the Cracow Ghetto.)

The filmmakers' avowed intention is to stimulate audience interest - both Jewish
and non-Jewish - in the vitality and diversity of a forgotten culture. ''If
anything, what most people know about that world is the shtetl - the
romanticized, nostalgic world of the small town that Sholom Aleichem wrote
about. Then there's this big blank, and then comes the Holocaust,'' Mr. Waletzky
lamented. To counteract the widespread ignorance, the filmmakers tried ''to
destroy as many stereotypes as possible in the film.

''Our hope,'' said Mr. Waletzky, ''is that after seeing 'Image Before My Eyes,'
no one will retain the idea that all the Jews in Eastern Europe were like
characters in 'Fiddler on the Roof.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR BECOMES A SMALLER BIG DEAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


Having drawn the line in El Salvador, the Reagan Administration tried last week
to redirect public attention to the big picture of United States-Soviet
relations.

A senior State Department official asserted that the press was overplaying El
Salvador, a complaint that might strike some as odd considering that Secretary
of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., among others, had sought publicity for reports
of Soviet-bloc arms deliveries to Salvadoran guerrillas to mobilize support for
American military aid to the El Salvador junta. William P. Clark, Mr. Haig's
deputy and a man who is learning foreign policy on the job, told an interviewer
last week that if the junta fell, he foresaw a dominolike effect on Honduras,
Guatemala, Belize and even Mexico.

Mr. Haig, however, cautioned against a ''total preoccupation'' with El Salvador
to the exclusion of such other pressing concerns as Poland and Afghanistan.
State Department sources said the Administration would ask Congress to repeal a
1976 ban on aid to anti-Soviet guerrillas in Angola. As for anti-Communist
insurgents in Afghanistan, President Reagan said if they asked for weapons, he
would consider giving them some.

Reasons for the softer talk on El Salvador include some allied opposition to
American intervention and unease with domestic critics who have invoked memories
of Vietnam. Washington also asserts that the arms flow to the guerrillas has
been reduced.

The Administration still wants to give El Salvador about $35 million in military
aid and $120 million in economic aid this year.  Among the 54 military advisers
it is sending to El Salvador will be 15 Army Green Berets to instruct soldiers
in counterinsurgency techniques. (Economic roots of instability, page 4.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUNS-AND-TAX CUTS MAY PROVE AS DIFFICULT A TRICK AS GUNS-AND-BUTTER

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


WASHINGTON THE three weeks of debate and analysis since President Reagan's
address to a joint session of Congress Feb. 18 and the release of last week's
176-page budget document have brought into full focus the ambitiousness of the
Adminstration's effort. It lies not just in the specific cuts proposed but the
willingness to pursue so many major and potentially conflicting goals at once.

The tensions and the tautness of the budget that has emerged are evident just
from the numbers. Despite plans for unprecedented spending reductions and
economic assumptions so rosy they would ordinarily result in large projected
surpluses, the Reagan budget shows only a $500 million surplus in 1984. By
comparison, President Carter in January projected a 1984 surplus of $32 billion.

In the case of the Reagan plan, the most dramatic potential strain is in the
attempt to implement record peacetime spending increases, and, at the same time,
record tax cuts. Comparisons with the 1960's, when the Vietnam War was paid for
while social spending rose dramatically, are inevitable.

''We Democrats in 1967 made a great mistake when we thought we could have guns
and butter both,'' said Representative Henry S.  Reuss, Democrat of Wisconsin.
''Now Republicans are about to make the same mistake - guns for a heated-up cold
war and butter for the affluent by way of tax cuts.''

Not that guns versus taxes is the only issue. Mr. Reagan's advisers have tried
to fashion a politically saleable package that would reduce spending right away,
but would not make more profound and more controversial changes, such as cutting
the link between Social Security and other Federal benefits and the Consumer
Price Index.  And, in the tax area, a debate rages over whether the
Administration has succeeded in proposing equitable tax cuts which would also
promote investment and productivity.
In All, Defense Increases Are Startling

In defense, the concern stems from the size of the increases proposed by
President Reagan. They are startling, particularly because they come on top of
large increases already recommended by former President Carter. For 1982, for
example, the military's authority to spend would rise by nearly 20 percent after
adjustment for inflation. Over the next three years, actual spending would run
27 percent above the rate of inflation and in 1983, the increase would be larger
than in any year in the last two decades except 1967. (By comparison, the
buildup during Vietnam was 47 percent over three years.)

''Additional resources are clearly needed for this nation's armed forces,'' said
Charles L. Schultze, chairman of President Carter's Council of Economic
Advisers, in testimony last week. ''But the proposed buildup is so large and, in
particular, is scheduled to proceed so fast, as to warrant very careful scrutiny
by the Congress during this year's budget process.''

Mr. Schultze's concern was about the inflationary potential of defense spending.
The prospect runs counter to the Administration priority on reducing price
escalation. The possible inflationary bias of defense spending stems from the
fact that expansion of the defense industry not only adds little to the nation's
overall productivity, but it also diverts often scarce capital and workers from
other industries. Already, evidence is appearing that the military will have
difficulty spending all the money it is being given. Only last week, the size of
the Reagan defense spending increase in 1982 was cut by $1 billion from the Feb.
18 estimate.  The reason, said budget director David A. Stockman, was ''slower
spendout on long lead-time items.''

Meanwhile, the Administration is seeking to reduce the tax burden, arguing that
the Federal bite has climbed to an all-time high and that even the three-year,
10-percent-a-year tax cut known as Kemp-Roth would merely return the tax burden
to levels of less than a decade ago. Yet not increasing taxes to pay for Vietnam
is often cited as a main cause of today's inflation. Sam I. Nakagama, chief
economist at Kidder, Peabody & Company, recently asked, ''How can you have such
a massive tax cut when in a sense you're having wartime spending?''

The Administration has also touted the across-the-board nature of its tax
reduction, insisting that it opposes attempts to redistribute income by means of
a tax program. But income redistribution toward the wealthy is at the heart of
the Administration tax program to increase saving, on the grounds that the
wealthy save more.

''Where you'll have to put your emphasis is on the area of the taxpayers who
would be the most apt to save and invest,'' was the way Secretary of the
Treasury Donald T. Regan put it recently. By 1984, a single American making
$50,000 in taxable income would have 6.9 percent more after taxes. For an
American making $15,000, the comparable figure would be 3.9 percent.

Questions have also been raised about the budget cutting strategy.  On one
level, the Reagan effort represents the most ambitious effort ever to trim both
Federal spending and Federal involvement in areas ranging from credit markets to
social policy. But at the outset, the Reagan team suggested another goal as well
- bringing an increasingly distorted and uncontrolled Federal budget back into
balance. Whether that can be done without restructuring, say, Social Security
and Medicare remains in doubt. The costs of those programs have been escalating
because of built-in adjustments for inflation.  ''A direct attack should be made
on the problems of indexing in Federal programs,'' Mr. Schultze said last week.

For their part, Reagan Administration officials argue that the various goals
they have selected are all in need of immediate attention; that lower taxes,
higher defense spending and more modest social programs are required now. ''The
plan I outlined will stop runaway inflation and revitalize our economy if given
a chance,'' President Reagan said in a statement last week. ''There is nothing
but politics-as-usual standing in the way of lower inflation, increased
productivity and a return to prosperity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph Federal tax receipts and outlays, 1970-1986 graph
comparing Carter and Reagan spending proposals in specific areas cartoon of
Reagan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DAVID STOCKMAN: THE PRESIDENT'S CUTTING EDGE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6567 words


Sidney Blumenthal is the author of ''The Permanent Campaign,'' a book about
political consultants. By Sidney Blumenthal ithin a week of the inauguration,
David A. Stockman began summoning the members of the Reagan Cabinet, one by one,
into his high-ceilinged conference room in the ornate Old Executive Office
Building to inform them how he intended to slash their budgets. In a polite but
relentless manner, the 34-year-old director of the Office of Management and
Budget, a generation younger than the Cabinet secretaries, was defining the
limits of their jobs.

Some accepted his decisions - which led to unprecedented cuts of more than $40
billion in the 1982 budget proposed by the Carter Administration - with no more
than a murmur. But others threatened open warfare. ''Frank and brutal'' is the
way a Presidential adviser characterizes some of these exchanges. Behind
Stockman's back, Cabinet members made wisecracks to Reagan aides about the media
attention he has been receiving - and they have not. One Cabinet secretary,
frustrated by weeks of Stockman control, despairingly asked a Presidential
assistant, ''How do I increase the role of my department?''

Stockman is the cutting edge of the economic revolution Ronald Reagan promised
the voters, and he is very vulnerable. ''We won't leave you out there alone,
Dave,'' the President jokingly assured Stockman at the conclusion of one White
House meeting on the budget.  ''We'll all come to the hanging.''

Overnight, this young, relatively obscure, two-term Michigan Congressman has
attained a position of astonishing power. He is the Administration's chief
theoretician and intellectual voice for the doctrine of supply-side economics,
which underlies the President's package of substantial tax cuts and drastically
reduced Federal spending. He has run the most arduous budget-review process in
history, telescoped into six weeks. Not since the New Deal has there been such a
top-to-bottom, item-by-item rethinking of fiscal priorities; it would involve
the transfer of billions of dollars from domestic services to military hardware,
from the urban centers of the Northeast to the burgeoning cities of the Sun
Belt. And Stockman has emerged from his behind-the-scenes role to become,
unexpectedly, the leading salesman for the budget in Congress and in the media.

High stakes are at risk in the Reagan-Stockman experiment, economically and
politically. If it does, in fact, stimulate booming prosperity without untoward
inflation, the Republican conservatives may establish themselves as the leaders
of a governing majority that could last well into the 21st century. If the
experiment fails, the entire process that led to a Reagan Presidency and the
conservative renaissance may unravel.

Much will depend upon Stockman, the budget master, who has come to power by a
circuitous route, his career a series of startling transformations - from farm
boy to Harvard scholar, from student radical to neoconservative.  David Stockman
grew up in St. Joseph, a small town in the southwest corner of Michigan, where
his father, Allen, is a fruit farmer. His grandfather, William Bartz, was
Republican county treasurer for 30 years, and as a teen-ager, Stockman held
views that were middleclass, rural traditional. ''I was a country conservative
from a Republican family,'' he says. ''I thought Goldwater was the greatest
thing since sliced bread.''

In 1964, Stockman began his studies on the East Lansing campus of Michigan State
University. As the Vietnam War escalated, he lent his name to an ad, paid for by
the local chapter of the Students for a Democratic Society, that appeared in the
student newspaper. The ad declared an intention ''to refuse to fight against the
people of Vietnam and refuse to be inducted into the armed forces of the United
States.'' In 1967, between his junior and senior years, he served as the chief
organizer of the Lansing area Vietnam Summer project, which sent volunteers into
neighborhoods to urge residents to oppose the war.

H. Lynn Jondahl, a liberal Democrat, now a Michigan State Representative, chose
Stockman for the post. He recalls: ''Dave felt that the Government of Ho Chi
Minh was a legitimate government and that the war was a manifestation of an
imperialist goal.''

In East Lansing, Stockman came under the influence of the Rev.  Truman Morrison,
senior minister of the Edgewood United Church, the first of a series of mentors
who would help the young man along his way. Morrison had taken his divinity
degree at the University of Chicago, writing his thesis under the guidance of
Reinhold Niebuhr, and Stockman and Morrison had long discussions about Niebuhr's
work.

Says the minister today: ''David missed the point on Reinhold Niebuhr, who was a
socialist with qualifications and knew better than to be unskeptical about
concentrated economic power. Niebuhr felt that no matter how immoral we are, we
are motivated by more than self-interest. I'm very worried, frankly, about what
I'm learning about David. He thinks of himself as hard-nosed and tough-minded,
but there's something naive about him. Compassion. That's what I'm looking for
from David. I wish David and I had done more theological investigations than we
did.''

Stockman began to drift rightward as a senior. ''I discovered,'' he says, ''that
the world wasn't as neatly explained as some pamphleteers at the time
believed.'' Still, he did serve that year as a member of the steering committee
of the Greater Lansing Community Organization, a multi-issue left-wing group
that was an outgrowth of the Vietnam Summer project. But Jondahl and Morrison
both recall symptoms of change; Stockman's earlier conservativism seemed to be
reasserting itself.

In the fall of 1968, Stockman enrolled at Harvard Divinity School, intending to
devote himself as a layman to the study of Reinhold Niebuhr. He says he was
disappointed to discover that ''nobody was interested'' in Niebuhr, and much of
his course work became centered in the fields of government and politics.
Seeking a place to live cheaply - and perhaps a political home, as well - he
became a houseand baby-sitter for the family of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, an
early advocate of the political view that has come to be known as
neoconservativism, who was teaching at Harvard and commuting to Washington where
he was President Nixon's special assistant for domesticy policy. ''I was looking
for a way out of the left,'' Stockman says today, ''and here was a respectable,
impressive, thoughtful, alternative, antileft ideology. I read all of Moynihan's
books and articles and the memos he brought home. He had a great influence.'' So
did some other noted neoconservatives, including two under whom Stockman studied
at Harvard, James Q. Wilson and Nathan Glazer.

The Harvard mentors had been radical or, at the least, very liberal, when they
themselves were young. They had become deeply disillusioned with the Soviet
Union and with the ability of the Federal Government to achieve positive social
change. The second generation of neoconservatives, however, received their
doctrine in a distilled form; their move from left to right lacked the same
emotional content, the sense of betrayal. For David Stockman, this political
point of view provided a fresh, intellectual basis for his farm-country
conservatism; he was soon ready for another rightward shift.

In 1969, Stockman attended a study group taught by David Broder, a political
columnist for The Washington Post who was then a fellow at Harvard's Kennedy
Institute of Politics. ''He was antiwar, as almost everyone was,'' says Broder,
''but he was listening to Pat and had second thoughts about his liberal
position. He identified himself as a Republican.''

Among the guest speakers at Broder's seminar was John B. Anderson, a Republican
Congressman who was, at the time, little known outside his Illinois district.
Broder recalls: ''He wrote me later that he had a staff job on the House
Republican Conference (of which Anderson was chairman) and said that he'd be
interested in my students. I mentioned Stockman.'' Moynihan also recommended
him. And so Stockman left Harvard, without completing his degree, in order to
take on a new post and a new mentor.

''When I worked for Anderson,'' says Stockman, who became the executive director
of the conference in 1972, ''my job was to keep him a Republican. There was a
great danger he'd be knocked out of his caucus chairmanship unless he could
constantly remind the Republicans by initiatives, speeches and floor activity
that at heart he was a Republican.'' He says he urged Anderson to espouse such
newly popular but acceptably Republican notions as deregulation.

Bob Walker, a Washington-based political consultant who was chief domestic
policy adviser for the Anderson for President campaign, had earlier been
Anderson's legislative assistant and had worked intimately with Stockman. ''I
don't share Dave's view of the past,'' Walker says, ''although Dave did very
good work for Anderson. If you look back at Dave's views then, he was mainly a
Keynesian. I don't think Anderson ever envisioned Dave's role as keeping him
fiscally conservative. Dave was soul-searching in the area of economics. He's
self-taught.''

As a colleague, Walker says, Stockman was competent, intelligent and relentless:
''For him, nothing exists but work. He was not the type of person to whom you
would say, 'Hey, let's have a beer.' I don't feel hostile to him, but I don't
feel friendly to him.''

Anderson himself refuses to comment on Stockman, a telling silence. One senses a
feeling of betrayal. The two men had been close - Anderson, for example, gave
jobs to two of Stockman's brothers. The relationship was damaged, according to
those close to Anderson, by Stockman's very realistic impersonation of him
during Reagan's preparation for the Anderson-Reagan debate - a role that enabled
Stockman to make his first personal impression on the President-tobe.  Not long
after beginning his service with Anderson, Stockman began studying his home
district with an eye to running for Congress. And he was beginning to find his
way toward an economic vision to match his neoconservative revelation.

Stockman was introduced to supply-side economics by Republican Representative
Jack Kemp, of New York, a different kind of mentor - more an equal than an
elder, a political older brother, a football player who could tutor a Harvard
graduate student. ''Dave spent a lot of time in our home, '' says Kemp, who
introduced him to Dr. Arthur Laffer, the supply-side Copernicus, and Jude
Wanniski, Laffer's chronicler. ''I discussed with him the whole intellectual
underpinnings of supply-side economics.''

This theory holds that tax cuts can provide fresh capital to fuel the engine of
American industry, the supply side of the economy, and to spark a new era of
growth. Its advocates believe that the Keynesian techniques of deficit financing
and credit expansion, used since World War II to boost public demand for goods
and services, no longer can achieve economic growth, and, in fact, creates
inflation.

Stockman believes that, unrestrained, the market operates as a natural order,
maintaining equilibrium; it is its own best guardian.  Government regulation and
high taxation confound the market. As a philosophy, supply-side economics is a
contemporary recasting of the original liberal doctrine expressed by Adam Smith,
who wrote in ''The Theory of Moral Sentiments'': ''Every man is by nature first
and principally recommended to his own care.'' That makes Stockman a liberal of
the right. He believes that private gain is public benefit and that the
successful self-seeker becomes the social benefactor; wealth is its own
justification. Without the freedom to fail, there can be no freedom to succeed,
and thus the supply-sider seeks equality of opportunity, not of results. ''I
don't accept that equality is a moral principle,'' says Stockman. ''That's the
overlay, the idea around the welfare state. A safety net is different - it's the
minimum to which you'll allow anyone to fall.  To go beyond that and seek to
level incomes is morally wrong and practically destructive.''

It is here, Stockman believes, that his two philosophies converge: ''The thing
that marries supply-siders of the more recent vintage, classical
free-market-oriented people and neoconservatives is that they are all suspicious
of state power. The classical free marketers, because they know the state always
screws up the market. The supplysiders, because they know the state uses the tax
system to discourage production. And the neoconservatives, because they see the
state as the instrument to achieve equal outcomes.''

Stockman's virtues were readily apparent to the supply-sider leaders. Stockman
was one of the few people Wanniski trusted to read his seminal supply-side book,
''The Way the World Works,'' while it was still in manuscript. In 1976, Laffer
and Wanniski rented two adjoining suites in a Washington hotel where they cooked
hot dogs, drank iced beer and debated the manuscript with the few local true
believers. ''We called the group The Cabal,'' says Wanniski. ''We were plotting
and scheming how to take over economic policy.'' Even as Stockman and the others
plotted, he was taking what would be a major step in that direction - closing in
on his dream of having a Congressional career of his own.

Chester J. Byrns, a Michigan Circuit Court judge and Republican, had made an
unsuccessful run for Congress in 1962. When Stockman looked around for help with
his own Congressional ambitions, he decided to approach Byrns. ''He knows how to
respond to an older person,'' Byrns says. ''He knows how to ask them for advice.
He went out of his way to get to know me. I could see how he and Reagan could
come together.''

In 1975, a year before the primary, Stockman assembled the first modern campaign
apparatus ever to operate in the solidly Republican district. For example, he
set up campaign committees to which he appointed hundreds of influential
citizens, who suddenly had a stake in his effort.

Stockman won new stature that same year with the publication of an article
entitled ''The Social Pork Barrel'' in The Public Interest, a leading
neoconservative journal. The Federal budget, he wrote, had been used by
politicians and bureaucrats, liberals and conservatives alike, to create
self-perpetuating constituencies: ''... what may have been the bright promise of
the Great Society has been transformed into a flabby hodgepodge, funded without
policy consistency or rigor, that increasingly looks like a great social pork
barrel.'' Irving Kristol, co-editor of the magazine, wrote a column in The Wall
Street Journal praising the Stockman article.  ''That's like getting into the
Bible around here,'' says Byrns.

The judge, for his part, arranged for Stockman to meet with corporate managers,
who provided funding for the campaign. But Stockman had a lot to learn as a
politician. ''If you saw Dave then, you would think he was a church deacon in a
rural church,'' Byrns says. ''There was an awkwardness, perhaps, in dress and in
the way he cut his hair, a sort of pageboy style. I encouraged him to talk
before Kiwanis and Rotary Clubs. His answers were long, detailed and maybe
boring. Dave can't project warmth too well. He's not a great big jokester. He's
not hilarious.''

Congressman Edward Hutchinson, an old-fashioned Republican, was the incumbent.
''Hutchinson was a cipher,'' says Byrns. ''But nobody recognized what a
nonentity he was until the Watergate investigation. He was the senior Republican
on the House Judiciary Committee. He didn't know what to do. This came as a
dreadful shock to people around here. The ice and hard ground cracked under
Ed.'' Hutchinson pulled out of the contest before primary day, and Stockman's
election was assured.

As a new House member, his ascribed status was that of a backbencher, but he
quickly won a reputation as an aggressive intellectual gadfly, pouring out a
torrent of bills and research papers. And as a member of the Commerce Committee,
he kept up an unrelenting ideological attack upon the Democrats at hearings.
Representative Edward J. Markey, a 34-year-old Massachusetts Democrat on the
committee, says, ''He was able to redefine a debate. He is as formidable an
adversary as one can have.''

In 1980, Stockman outdid himself. Together with Representative Phil Gramm, a
Texas Democrat and professional economist, he offered on the House floor his own
version of a Federal budget, a giant task sometimes attempted by an opposition
party but not by individual members. The Stockman budget was an anticipatory
exercise, advocating huge cuts.  As the jockeying began for the 1980
Presidential campaign, Stockman broke ranks with his fellow supply-siders and
supported John B.  Connally. When Connally's bid failed, Stockman transferred
his allegiance to Reagan. But Stockman had never met the candidate, and he was
on the fringe of the Reagan primary campaign. His main link to it was through
the supply-siders like Jack Kemp, who were waging a fierce battle for control of
economic policy against more traditional conservatives, many of whom - like
Arthur F. Burns, former Federal Reserve chairman, and George P. Shultz, former
O.M.B. director - had served under Presidents Nixon and Ford. In that contest,
the traditionalists held the edge, but Stockman was not to be totally denied. He
ended up, for example, as the principal author of the section of the party
platform dealing with energy.

Stockman had become convinced that the directorship of the Office of Management
and Budget was potentially the most significant economic post in the Cabinet. At
the Republican convention, he began talking to friends about getting a
supply-sider into the job.  ''Stockman had the idea the O.M.B. director would be
almost a deputy President,'' says Wanniski. ''But he didn't have himself in
mind.'' Stockman's choice was William M. Agee, the chairman of the Michiganbased
Bendix Corporation; its political action committee supported Stockman
financially in the 1978 Congressional campaign.  ''I had a party at my house for
Jack Kemp during the convention,'' says Agee. ''Just as Dave was about ready to
leave he said, 'If the governor is elected, there's an appointment for you,'
referrring to O.M.B. I said, 'No, I'm a private-enterprise man. But that's the
job for you.' ''

Stockman gained Reagan's undivided attention in unexpected fashion. As
preparation for the debate with Anderson, Reagan decided to engage in a mock
debate. But he needed a sparring partner, someone who could offer a reasonable
facsimile of Anderson's style and position. Stockman was proposed, and he so
impressed Reagan, the veteran actor, with his bravura performance that he was
cast for a later mock debate as Jimmy Carter.

Says Alan Greenspan, a Reagan economic adviser who was in attendance: ''Not only
was Stockman exceptionally close to Carter's position - he took the position in
a sophisticated way - but he tried to capture the Carter style. Had Carter
played Carter as well as Stockman did, he might still be President. Reagan was
very impressed. I remember a dinner party given by Katharine Graham (chairman of
The Washington Post) during the transition. Stockman and I were standing
together. Reagan came up and said to him, 'You sure beat me in that debate.' ''

After the election, the President-elect summoned his issue task forces to his
Pacific Palisades home to outline an agenda for the first 100 days of his
Administration. An internal memo was drawn up by George Schultz and unanimously
agreed to by Reagan and the participants in the economic task force, including
Kemp, the only supply-sider on the team. But then Stockman, together with Kemp
and Lewis E. Lehrman, owner of the Rite Aid drugstore chain and a leading
supply- sider, wrote a 23-page statement, ''Avoiding a G.O.P.  Economic
Dunkirk.'' It was not inconsistent with the Schultz memo, but it was far more
dramatically written, giving the issues a heightened sense of urgency within the
ranks, and it placed greater emphasis on the supply-side aspects of the program.

They wrote: ''The momentum of short-run economic, financial and budget forces is
creating the conditions for an economic Dunkirk during the first 24 months of
the Reagan Administration.'' The memo urged the President to declare a national
''economic emergency.''

Reagan essentially accepted this analysis. In December, when Wanniski, without
consulting anyone, leaked the ''Dunkirk'' analysis to Leonard Silk, economics
columnist for The New York Times, the public for the first time became aware of
the new influence wielded by supply-side theorists in the Reagan camp. They also
became aware of David Stockman. Says Wanniski: ''It elevated Stockman into a
pivotal force.''

Meanwhile, Stockman had begun actively seeking his own appointment as O.M.B.
director -while making it clear that he would not accept the job of Secretary of
Energy, which was headed his way. Inside the Reagan camp, Kemp, of course,
pushed for him for O.M.B., and there were others as well. Richard Whalen, a
Republican intellectual, former Nixon speechwriter and senior Reagan adviser
during the campaign, says: ''I took Dave over to see Paul Laxalt right after the
election. We handed him a copy of the Dunkirk memo. We talked about the
importance of getting at the budget issue. Paul said, 'I'm for you, and you've
got support elsewhere.' ''

Although Laxalt says he did not know Stockman well at the time, he was familiar
with his views: ''He was the only Michigan Congressman who stood up on the
Chrysler bailout (voting against Federal loan guarantees for the ailing
automaker). I took an article he wrote on the Chrysler issue for The Washington
Post and mailed it to the Governor (Reagan). This was our kind of guy.''

Regarding the O.M.B. post, Laxalt says: ''Reagan didn't need any selling on
Stockman. Dave was solidly there. The only one ahead of him was Cap
Weinberger.'' Then Casper Weinberger was named Secretary of Defense. And, in
mid-December, Stockman had the job he wanted.

Among Stockman's friends, only syndicated columnist George F. Will had advised
him against taking the post. ''I had anxieties,'' Will says, ''about who would
come to his defense when the shelling got heavy. People don't like prodigies.''
In the weeks before the new Administration took office, Stockman maintained his
customary 18-hour workday. He is thin and intense, a pair of aviator glasses his
only stylish touch - he wears standardissue business suits and white shirts.
Friends insist that he has a wry sense of humor, but observe that he exhibits it
only among those he knows well.

One of the first items on his agenda was a whirlwind tour of Wall Street
investment houses. ''We told them we weren't for scaring the market,'' says Jack
Kemp, who went along. ''Dave's credibility is extemely important to the
country.''

That evening, a dinner in honor of Stockman was given at Manhattan's Century
Club. In attendance were neoconservative supplysiders Lehrman, Whalen, Kemp,
Kristol, Wanniski, Robert Bartley, the editor of The Wall Street Journal, and
Jeffrey Bell, a New Jersey Republican politician; Greenspan dropped in for
drinks. In days past, such talk had been theoretical; now, one of their own had
been suddenly invested with tremendous power.

That power flows from the special nature of the O.M.B. itself, and from the
special function of the budget in defining the workings of the American
Government. All Federal agencies must filter their requests for funds through
the Department. These requests are studied by a professional field staff of over
300 examiners, who forward their recommendations to the O.M.B. director. This
constant flow of information about the bureaucracy gives O.M.B. ways to exercise
control over the agencies. The O.M.B. also offers the President a means of
dealing with Congress: Legislators have many pet projects, such as home-district
military bases and water projects, which the O.M.B. can fund or cut.

As for the budget, it is, according to James T. McIntyre Jr., O.M.B. director
under Jimmy Carter, ''always a political document.  It states the
Administration's philosophy and belief.'' To Stockman, the budget is not a
telephone book, a blur of unrelated names and numbers, but a tragic saga of
recent American history. He knows all the corruptions, all the indulgences, all
the sinners.

In January, after his first major meeting on the budget with Reagan, Stockman
gave his troops the order of battle. By then he had assembled his general staff.
His deputy director is Edwin Harper, who worked in the Nixon White House and was
hand-picked by Edwin Meese 3d, the President's counselor - a familiar method of
reinforcing a Department's loyalty to the President. Frederick Khedouri,
associate director, and David Gerson, executive assistant, had worked in
Stockman's Congressional office. And Lawrence A. Kudlow, chief economist with
the Wall Street investment firm of Bear, Stearns and Company, whom Stockman met
on his Wall Street safari, signed on as economic adviser. All four are in their
30's. His executive associate director, Glenn R. Schleede, 42 years old, is an
O.M.B. professional.

Examiners began producing dozens of large black looseleaf notebooks, listing
programs to be trimmed and justifications for doing so. The notebooks were
passed on to senior aides, who were faced with the task of making virtually
instantaneous recommendations about the future of incredibly complex programs.
(Says an O.M.B. aide of the process: ''There's no way to make it objective.'')
Then, armed with new black notebooks, Stockman led the powerful budget review
group in almost daily sessions. Its members included Martin Anderson, chief
domestic policy adviser to the President; Murray Weidenbaum, chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers; R.T. (Tim) McNamar, Deputy Treasury Secretary, and
Bill Brock, former Republican National Committee chairman and now special trade
representative. ''We agree 90 percent instinctively,'' says one of them. ''Our
meeting of minds is almost automatic.''

When these deliberations were done, the Cabinet secretaries were called in
individually to the conference room on the second floor of the Executive Office
Building. Each sat at one end of a large oblong table covered with dark green
leather, facing David Stockman and members of the budget review group - a
determined, united front.  Once, however, when a Cabinet Secretary pleaded for a
program that was slated for elimination, Stockman unexpectedly conceded. ''We'll
split the difference.'' Weidenbaum commented, ''I never thought I'd see the day
Dave Stockman would turn into a softy.'' To which the Cabinet Secretary replied,
''What is this, a good cop, bad cop routine?''

Some Cabinet members gave in quickly, others tried to bargain and still others
fought back. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., for example, staged in
January what one Stockman aide calls a ''preemptive strike.'' O.M.B. officials
believe, though Haig vehemently denies it, that the Secretary of State
personally leaked to the press word that the budget review group was planning to
cut $2.6 billion in foreign aid. Moreover, someone had put the news of the cut
on the international diplomatic cable, alerting and alarming foreign ministries
around the world. There was an outcry of indignation. On Jan. 30, Haig and
Stockman met privately to negotiate a treaty, and eventually, all sides accepted
a foreign-aid cut of nearly $2 billion.

Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan, former chairman of Merrill Lynch and
Company, had been initially billed as the Administration's chief economic
spokesman. With years of practical experience in the business world but none in
Government, he spoke the language of the chief executive officer but not that of
the supply-sider. When it developed that Reagan was in the supply-side camp, and
the budget - not tax policy - became the focus of attention, Regan found himself
eclipsed by Stockman. Yet the Treasury Secretary remains a formidable colleague.
A Presidential adviser comments: ''Does Regan have deep theoretical knowledge?
Of course not. But he's bright, and he's got staff to brief him. He's a shrewd
man. I would not underestimate him at all.''

Even as the budget-review process was proceeding, a group of economists was
gathering two or three times a week to develop a picture of how the entire
package would affect the economy.  Discussion revolved around an economic model
produced by the Claremont Economic Institute. Lawrence Kudlow was a director of
C.E.I., and at Stockman's behest he brought in his associate, John Rutledge, to
run computer simulations of the economy. The goal: to project the future
behavior of investors under the Reagan scenario.  The computer model makes
assumptions that reflect a free-market view - that the removal of government
from the market place will cause a spurt in economic growth, and that the market
place, when liberated from government intervention, will naturally enter into a
state of equilibrium. When the Reagan policies are programmed into the computer,
investors behave enthusiastically, with very positive results for the economy.

Supply-siders, led by Norman B. Ture, a Treasury Under Secretary, and Paul Craig
Roberts, a Treasury Assistant Secretary, argued that the model proved that the
Reagan program would produce widespread prosperity and lower inflation. Says
Ture: ''There is no hard-core inflation. We can get inflation out of the economy
very shortly, in five or six years. If we start on this path, there will be
major progress in a year's time.''

Monetarists - who believe in manipulating the money supply as the principal
means of managing the economy - were led by a Treasury Under Secretary, Beryl W.
Sprinkel, who accepted the validity of the computer model's free-market
assumptions. The monetarists were more anxious about the inflationary
consequences of the plan than were the supply-siders, however; they advocated
slow growth in the money supply, which would mean a lower rate of growth in the
gross national product.

In the middle were Greenspan, the only outsider, and Weidenbaum, who, as
chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, was responsible for defending the
official economic assumptions of the plan and the reliability of the figures on
which it is based. They believed that the monetarist and supply-side positions
were compatible. But they argued with the C.E.I. model's projections, which they
claimed were far too optimistic. Weidenbaum told the forecasters: ''I'm Peter
Pan. I want to believe. But you have to convince me, and you haven't done
that.''

On Feb. 7, Stockman and Weidenbaum made a command decision about what the future
would hold under the Reagan economic plan. By 1986, they agreed, inflation would
drop to 4.9 percent, unemployment to 5.6 percent and the rate of growth of the
G.N.P. would almost quadruple.  After his sessions with the Cabinet Secretaries,
Stockman and his black notebooks eventually found their way to the White House,
where what became known as the economic planning group, composed of the
President and his senior advisers, turned every looseleaf page.  Reagan did not
approve some of the cuts Stockman wanted - in the oil depletion allowance, for
example, and for the merchant marine. These disagreements were strictly in the
Reagan style. ''He doesn't vehemently oppose things,'' says a Presidential
adviser. ''He just doesn't do them.''

Stockman also consulted with Congressional leaders, trying to line up support
before the economic package was introduced. In his initial cuts, Stockman had
proposed that the Tennessee Valley Authority be denied low-interest loans from
the Federal Financing Bank, which would save Federal funds but increase
electricity rates. That notion did not appeal to Howard Baker, the majority
leader of the Senate.  On Feb. 16, Baker and Stockman agreed to keep those loans
going while the Treasury Department studied the issue. Stockman had also given
the Democratic leadership a briefing at the office of House Speaker O'Neill, who
says: ''It wasn't a dialogue. It wasn't a time to argue or debate him.''

On the morning of Feb. 18, the day the President would announce his economic
program to a joint session of Congress, Stockman breakfasted with 15 reporters
at 8 o'clock, briefed the Cabinet and the Congressional leaders, held a
full-dress press conference, and then spoke to the House Republican Conference.
Shortly before 9 o'clock that night, he marched into the Capitol, where he had
been a backbencher a few months before. Now, first among equals within the
Cabinet, he sat up front and listened to President Reagan present ''A Program
for Economic Recovery.''

The speech proposed a 30 percent, across-the-board income-tax cut, to be applied
over three years - a supply-side remedy Reagan had pledged to try during the
campaign. To inhibit inflation, he called upon the Federal Reserve to maintain a
stable money supply. And he announced drastic cuts in Federal spending - the 83
major budget cuts engineered by Stockman.

The plan amounted to an economic revolution. While the ''truly needy'' were to
be protected by a ''safety net'' of social welfare programs, many of these
programs were cut back, including food stamps, Social Security disability
benefits and public works jobs.  The Administration also cut back on funding for
the Export-Import Bank, dairy price supports and the synthetic fuels program. It
signified not simply a conservative impulse toward thrift for its own sake, but
a radical shift in national priorities.

Immediately after the President's speech, Stockman began selling the program
with the intensity he had brought to bear in framing it.  Stockman himself
readily admits that he has never been a suave campaigner, but he sees signs of
improvement. ''I've learned how to do it,'' he told an aide.

His sales efforts, however, were hindered by bad arithmetic. His estimates of
the budget had been off the mark by $3 billion to $6 billion. On Feb. 25,
Stockman had lunch in the Cabinet Room at the White House with the President,
Weidenbaum and Secretary of the Treasury Donald T. Regan to discuss the
miscalculation. The President told Stockman, ''You just have to cut more.''
Stockman tried, even proposing a two-cent tax on gasoline, a supply-side heresy
that Treasury Under Secretary Ture calls ''a boo boo.'' Reagan quickly dismissed
the idea.

Above all, as President Reagan said in a speech on March 2, the Republicans were
worried about ''parochialism.'' In fact, more than 150 groups, ranging from
labor unions to feminist and religious organizations, have formed coalitions to
lobby Congress against the budget cuts. And in Congress itself, Stockman and
Company face House Speaker O'Neill, the man who says: ''All politics is local.''
He comments: ''Of course, Republicans are saying it's equitable. They say the
wealthy will be paying fees to park their yachts. Well, when you exploit the
many for the advantage of the few, you have to look at this thing. Some
Democrats argue we ought to give them everything. They want the Administration
to fall flat on its face. I want to consider carefully without obstructing.
Often what the American people want is not good for them.''

The economic debate over the President's program is coming to focus on precisely
how the new capital released by tax and budget cuts will be used. During the
Depression, according to Keynes, individuals and corporations failed to turn
their savings into productive capital through investment; he called such savings
''leakage.'' Today, the options for such leakage are greater than ever, from
speculation in gold to corporate mergers. The Reagan planners refuse to
establish controls over investment, placing their faith in the inherent good
sense of investors. But will the supply-siders actually weaken the supply side?
''The Reagan plan is Keynesianism for the rich,'' says James Galbraith,
executive director of the Joint Economic Committee of Congress. ''It's a program
that will put more purchasing power in the hands of people who earn $50,000 and
up. The problem with that is: Where do those people spend the money?''

For David Stockman, the answer to such questions will explain his future.
Paradoxically, the more successful he is, the more enemies he will make. ''If
you want to be popular,'' says former O.M.B. director McIntyre, ''that's the
wrong job in Government. You have a constituency of one, and that's the
President of the United States.  If you are doing your job properly, you are not
pleasing very many people.''

In his office in the Executive Office Building, the cream-colored walls
decorated with paintings of landscapes, Stockman sits alone.  ''I don't feel
vulnerable,'' he says, as he chain smokes Salems.  ''I'm used to being
attacked.'' He gestures toward his dozens of black notebooks, scattered around
the room. ''That's what all those books are, people losing their benefits from
Government. That's a lot of enemies in those pages. No, it doesn't bother me.
Most of them have unjust claims. You've got to choose your enemies, I guess.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Stockman photo of Donald Regan photo of
Murray Weidenbaum

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETHINKING THE UNTHINKABLE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 45, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4850 words


Wade Greene has written widely on social and technological issues. By Wade
Greene In the 1950's and early 1960's, an unsettling fear of nuclear holocaust
imprinted itself on the consciousness of the American people. ''We will all go
together when we go,'' sang a lyrical satirist by the name of Tom Lehrer, and
for a while, apocalypse seemed imminently possible. The eschatological potential
of nuclear war had been made horrifyingly clear at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and
all thoughtful citizens wondered whether an exchange of nuclear bombs might
somehow erupt between the United States and the Soviet Union - and whether
humanity itself might be destroyed in the crossfire.

These two powerful nations were threatening each other - in Berlin, Cuba, where
next? - testing nerves and technologies, detonating ever more destructive bombs
in the atmosphere, some of them upward of one million times more powerful than
the biggest blockbusters of World War II. Radioactive fallout from these tests
was producing rising levels of debilitating, carcinogenic strontium 90. Marchers
then marched under ''Ban the Bomb'' banners; Dr. Strangelove became the antihero
of the day; the construction of backyard fallout shelters became a growth
industry - and the basis of some moral probing: What, it was asked, should a
citizen do if his or her shelter was full to capacity and other people tried to
get in while the bombers were on the way? ''Gun thy neighbor?'' wondered Time
magazine. Others, like Herman Kahn, began thinking the unthinkable. Nuclear war,
he argued, could be considered as a last-resort contingency, and he expressed
the view that the human race could survive.

Two decades passed. And we were all, after all, still around. We gradually
stopped worrying and learned to live with the bomb, if not to love it. Military
use was suggested at times by civilian armchair generals as a means of dealing
with some particularly frustrating corner of a disorderly world - ''We ought to
turn Iran into a parking lot'' -but though the number of nuclear weapons
increased steadily, they stayed dormant and wrapped in the metaphysics of
wargamesmanship, a sanitized megacalculus of deterrence, retaliation and
overkill, and the fears of nuclear holocaust seemed to fade.  But the specter,
now, is re-emerging. Signs are multiplying that a good many people, representing
a diversity of perspectives and values, are thinking about the bomb again.

Opinion polls during last fall's election campaign indicated that many voters
were worried about nuclear war and about how the Presidential candidates would
affect the chances of such a war breaking out. In his farewell address,
President Carter warned of the ''horrifying danger that is posed by the enormous
stockpiles of nuclear weapons.'' Members of the Reagan Administration have
raised the specter of nuclear war, too, but have tended to link it to a
perceived arms gap rather than excess, at least in Western arsenals, and have
tentatively proposed a major nuclear addition to those arsenals - the neutron
bomb.

But it is not only, or even primarily, at the national political level that
renewed thinking about the bomb is evident. The nuclear specter has become the
stuff recently of books (''The Fifth Horseman'' by Larry Collins and Dominique
Lapierre; ''Nuclear Nightmares'' by Nigel Calder; ''Apocalypse'' by Louis - Rene
Beres); of articles in specialized periodicals (Harvard Magazine's ''Danger:
Nuclear War''; Next Magazine's ''The First Nuclear War''; The American Journal
of Public Health's ''Addressing Apocalypse Now''); of television specials
(''First Strike,'' ''Nuclear Nightmares'' (based on the book); ''The Islamic
Bomb''), and an Off Broadway play, ''Dead End Kids.'' The last, an
impressionistic production, climaxed with someone brandishing a dead chicken
while an announcer read a National Academy of Sciences report, ''Effects of
Radioactive Fallout on Livestock in the Event of Nuclear War.''

Such an eventuality is being contemplated coolly by a new crop of thinkers who
believe that the possibility of nuclear war should not automatically be
dismissed, that it must be considered as an option.  One such latter-day Herman
Kahn is Colin S. Gray, who was a foreignpolicy adviser on the Reagan transition
team and whose headquarters is the same as Mr. Kahn's, the Hudson Institute.
Like Herman Kahn (who is the institute's overall director), Mr. Gray (its
director of national-security studies) dismisses the idea that nuclear war
between the United States and the Soviet Union is bound to be so devastating
that its course and aftermath are fruitless to think about. In a recent article
in Foreign Policy magazine entitled ''Victory Is Possible,'' Mr. Gray and his
co-author, Keith Payne, criticize the ''United States defense community'' for
''tending to regard strategic nuclear war not as war but as holocaust.'' They
hypothesize, in effect, a Soviet-American nuclear exchange in which
approximately 20 million Americans die but the United States becomes the
''victor'' with the ''destruction of Soviet political authority and the
emergence of a postwar world order compatible with Western values.''

Herman Kahn himself has been focusing mostly on futurist studies since the
mid-1960's and has not been particularly associated with the new thinking about
nuclear war. But in a recent interview he said he has, indeed, returned to
nuclear-war analysis. ''It looks to us as being very important now,'' Mr. Kahn
said. He is working, he said, on a study for the Pentagon of the philosophical
and historical context of nuclear war - ''in effect, an updating of 'On
Thermonuclear War' and other books I wrote in the 60's.''

What about updating the idea of a ''victory'' in which 20 million Americans
perished? Wouldn't many Americans, Mr. Kahn was asked, probably think of this as
a contradiction in terms? ''That's because we're crazy,'' he said, referring to
those who take the view that nuclear war is inherently suicidal. ''We don't
distinguish between an incredibly unpleasant experience and a thing which you
can survive.  If 20 million Americans were killed, there'd be 200 million
survivors.''

The idea of nuclear war being conducted this side of mutual annihilation also
received some official codification last summer from former President Carter, in
Presidential Directive 59, which indicated that American missiles might be used
not just for massive, punitive retaliation but for limited attacks, aimed at
Soviet missiles and at military and political control centers rather than at
cities. And Lawrence W. Beilenson, who was a foreign-policy adviser to Ronald
Reagan during the election campaign, has said that the effects of fallout are
exaggerated and quotes a scientist's view that, while the long-term toll of
fallout contamination could be a 30 percent increase in cancer incidences, this,
though undesirable, ''could be canceled out by neglecting to rebuild the
cigarette industry.''

In addition to policy advisers, ordinary citizens for the first time since the
early 1960's appear to be thinking the unthinkable as well - to the point of
actually making practical preparations for nuclear attack. For a decade,
''survivalists'' have been putting aside dried food, weapons, energy-producing
equipment and other resources in anticipation of economic collapse. Now it
appears that at least a corner of the survivalist movement is concerned about
surviving nuclear war.

The country's largest seller of survival food and equipment, SI Inc., based in
Carson, Calif., now markets equipment for use ''in case of nuclear attack.'' A
company called the Nuclear Fallout and Bombshelter Supply and Construction
Company in Pennsylvania is specializing in nuclear-shelter equipment as well as
in building shelters. Among the paraphernalia both outfits sell are
air-filtering ventilation systems for fallout shelters, radiation meters,
radiation-resistant clothing, anticontamination kits and survival guidebooks,
including ''Life After Doomsday.'' (''If you are serious about survival and
especially if you feel that nuclear war is a growing possibility, then this book
is a must for you,'' an advertisement declares.) Both companies say their sales
picked up markedly in the last year. Calvin Zehring, founder of the
Pennsylvania-based fallout-shelter company, said that he is now receiving at
least 25 inquiries a day, that often ''the phone rings off the wall,'' and that
he has customers in seven countries in addition to the United States.

Mr. Zehring has built a 20-by-14-foot fallout shelter for himself, his wife and
son, and said he is confident of their ability to survive a nuclear attack.
''We're in a very rural area nestled in the mountains. We're not going to be in
a bad situation. Two, three weeks, we'll be able to be walking around, as long
as we do it intelligently, using our (radiation) meters and staying outside the
right amount of time.''

While some Americans are now thinking about nuclear war as a strategic option
and others are even making practical plans for it as an actuality, still others
are working to try to diminish the chances of its occurring at all. Peace
groups, many of them distinctly more establishmentarian than their predecessors
of Vietnam days, are springing to life in various parts of the country, with
nuclear war as their focus of concern. Randall Forsberg, who runs an
organization called the Institute for Defense and Disarmament Studies in
Brookline, Mass., estimates that in the last 18 months more than 200
church-based community conferences have been held around the country on the
theme of the nuclear-arms race. ''The ones I've been at - they generally have an
audience of at least 200 -I've asked people in the audience how many of them are
old peaceniks and how many have never been to a meeting like this before. The
great majority say they've never been to a meeting like this before,'' she says.

A major new organization was formed in early 1980 under the working title of the
Committee to Prevent World War III. It has since gone public with a less
alarming and more encompassing name, the Committee for National Security. It is
promoting the position that, beyond a certain point, weapons can be a source
more of insecurity than of security and that what is needed is a broader
definition of national security than military preparedness. The committee has
enlisted a broad range of prominent Americans as active members, including Paul
Warnke, Wassily Leontief, Henry Cabot Lodge, Harrison Salisbury and Hodding
Carter 3d.

A full week of simultaneous, nationwide activities aimed at nuclear
consciousness-raising, to be called Ground Zero, is now in the planning stage
for the spring of 1982, and the early backers include the heads of such groups
as the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the National
Education Association, the United States Catholic Conference, the United
Steelworkers, the United Automobile Workers and the United Food and Commercial
Workers.

Most significantly, perhaps, some members of a generally inactivist
constituency, the medical profession, have been giving a good deal of attention
since early 1980 to what concerned doctors are calling ''the final epidemic.''
''The Medical Consequences of Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear War'' was the theme of
three conferences held in 1980, all heavily attended by health-care
professionals and medical students. Organized by the Physicians for Social
Responsibility, a group of activist, antiwar doctors, the conferences took place
in Cambridge, Mass., New York and San Francisco, drew more than 2,000 people in
all and were sponsored by prominent medical institutions in each region,
including the Harvard Medical School, Columbia University College of Physicians
and Surgeons, School of Public Health at Berkeley and Stanford medical school.

''The medical and environmental consequences of nuclear war'' have become the
subject of new courses in several medical schools as well, and will be the focus
of a gathering later this month that will include leading Soviet, Japanese,
French and British as well as American doctors. Physicians studying the subject
have invariably concluded that health effects are far beyond the capacities of
medical resources to cope with, even in ''limited'' nuclear attacks; it has been
estimated that a single one-megaton missile explosion over the San Francisco Bay
area would cause enough serious burns, not to mention the people killed
outright, to overwhelm all medical and surgical facilities in the entire United
States.

Reinforcing the physicians' diagnosis, Congress's Office of Technology
Assessment has produced a bleak report on ''The Effects of Nuclear War'' which
says that conventional projections are likely to be vastly exceeded in the event
of an actual nuclear attack. ''In addition to the tens of millions of deaths
during the days and weeks after the attack, there would probably be further
millions (perhaps further tens of millions) of deaths in the ensuing months or
years.  Nobody knows how to estimate the likelihood that industrial civilization
might collapse in the area attacked; additionally, the possibility of
significant long-term ecological damage cannot be excluded,'' says the report.
Why have so many people begun to think, at so many levels, about the bomb again?
Why, for that matter, haven't we been thinking about it all along, considering
that nuclear arsenals have never stopped growing? Since the early 1960's, the
number of intercontinental, strategic nuclear weapons has quadrupled and the
number of countries that have mastered nuclear explosive technology has tripled.
Currently, there are at least 50,000 nuclear warheads of all kinds throughout
the world. Their megatonnage is equivalent to more than one million
Hiroshima-sized bombs. Yet, while these arsenals have been swelling, only
intermittent and narrowly focused public attention has come to bear on
humankind's mounting capacity for selfdestruction.

Among the explanations offered for why we have tended to ignore the bomb since
the early 1960's is the fact that nuclear testing went underground after the
atmospheric-test-ban treaty in 1963; the bomb became less visible and less
immediately hazardous with the reduction of fallout. Also, international
tensions lessened between the principal nuclear adversaries, the United States
and Russia, with the birth of ''peaceful coexistence'' succeeded by detente. And
then there was the apparently stabilizing influence of MAD, the military theory
of mutual assured destruction that has endured as one of the few brilliantly
simple formulas of nuclear strategy: If nuclear powers have assured retaliatory
capability and can annihilate each other even if struck first, then no one will
dare attack another; it would be literally suicidal to do so.

Roger Molander, who worked for the Carter White House as the the National
Security Council's specialist on strategic arms limitation talks and is now the
principal organizer of Ground Zero week, says that, since the 1960's, most
people have fallen into ''one of three misconceptions about nuclear war: those
who think it might happen but is no big deal, that we could survive it without a
great deal of damage; those who think nuclear war is unthinkable, so devastating
that it would never be permitted to happen; and those who think it's a real
possibility but that there is nothing they can do about it.''

Herman Kahn attributes the lack of concern in the recent past to an inability to
''think of nuclear war as an event. We think of it as the end of history, which
means you don't worry about it. If history ends, it ends.'' Another level of
analysis is offered by Robert Jay Lifton, the Yale professor of psychiatry and
author of several books, including ''Death in Life'' about the survivors of
Hiroshima.  Professor Lifton has been involved in antinuclear-war efforts since
the late 1950's and has formed some definite theories as to why his has been a
lonely cause for many years. ''To begin with,'' he says, ''since World War II,
we've been living a double life in the sense of knowing that something close to
extinction is possible very quickly and very suddenly, while on the other hand
going about business as usual. ..We've been suppressing or numbing ourselves to
that image - although it hasn't been totally absent from our minds - and have
developed a pattern of resignation adaptation in a world with the bomb.'' But,
Professor Lifton says, the pattern has been interrupted by certain ''external
events,'' such as the accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear-power plant in
1979.

Dr. Leon Balter, summarizing a study by a group of fellow psychoanalyts and
social scientists, says it found that psychological mechanisms exist on the part
of the public for allaying anxiety over nuclear war. Foremost, he says, is
''dissociation,'' which he defines in part as a public inclination to turn the
problem over to the Government. ''There is a strong tendency to invoke the
national Government as a powerful, sophisticated, protective agency - even
though general cynicism also prevails about just these supposed qualities,'' Dr.
Balter says.

Taking Professor Lifton's and Dr. Balter's socio-psychological analyses
together, one can see the sudden resurgence of the nuclear specter as a product
of ''external events,'' together with an eroding post-Watergate, post-Carter
faith in the Government's capacity to control events.

Several others, in addition to Dr. Lifton, have referred to Three Mile Island as
the chief ''external event'' responsible for unnumbing psychic numbness to the
bomb. On reflection, the psychological connections are fairly obvious between
anxiety about nuclear war and the explosion at a peaceful power plant, spewing
forth radioactive material in the midst of a populated region. If Three Mile
Island jolted Americans, another such external event has been the unharmonious
chorus of expert assertions that the chances are increasing that the bomb may
actually be used.

On the one hand, some experts are saying that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
has given new and clear evidence of the global designs and aggressiveness of the
Soviet Union. They also point to signs of Soviet military buildup and to
calculations that by the mid-1980's Soviet missiles may become numerous and
accurate enough to destroy most of the United States' retaliatory capacity. One
fearful product of such reckonings is a widely broadcast television film, ''The
Salt Syndrome,'' which marshals arguments against strategic arms limitation
talks (SALT II). Looking at the Soviet Union, the film asserts that ''such a
rapid and intense armament program has not occurred since Hitler's armament of
Germany before World War II.'' Because of this buildup, the program goes on,
''we in the United States ... face greater danger than we did in December 1941
after Pearl Harbor.'' Solicitations for support for the film from its sponsor, a
group called the American Security Council Foundation, carry an even more
alarming message. Quoting Gen. Lewis W. Walt, one solicitation says that ''at
the current rate of Soviet military growth, they may soon be in a position to
offer the United States an ultimatum to either surrender or be incinerated.''

On the other hand, there are those experts who foretell possible nuclear
holocaust not because of Soviet intentions but because of the uncontrollability
of the arms race and the possibility that ever advancing nuclear-weapons
numbers, technologies and strategies will lead to war by miscalculation.

On each cover of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists is a clock that registers
the time remaining until the bomb is employed - midnight is doomsday. A year
ago, this pessimistic metaphor read seven minutes before midnight; it now reads
four minutes. ''For believers in nuclear-arms control,'' says a recent issue of
The Bulletin, ''the last few months have had a nightmarish quality - as though
the dikes were suddenly collapsing.'' Besides the American failure to ratify
SALT II and evident determination to build a new generation of more accurate,
mobile missiles (either the MX system or an alternative), The Bulletin also
refers to NATO's decision to introduce intermediate-range nuclear missiles into
Western Europe's anti-Soviet arsenals and the accompanying new ''limited nuclear
doctrine''; the upgrading by the Russians of first-strike rocket forces, and the
''general deterioration of Soviet-American relations.''

To this diverse collection of causes for alarm, those who fear a nuclear-arms
race generally add nuclear proliferation, the sheer speed of missile delivery -
nuclear missiles can now reach most American or Soviet cities in less than a
half-hour - and the consequent dependence on complex technologies to detect and
analyze signs of an attack. This dependence is described as putting
nuclear-attack decisions on a ''hair trigger'' and increasing the possibility of
war by computer error. Evidence of the possibility of such a technological
cataclysm is the 147 times the United States' missilewarning system detected
possible ''launchings'' over a recent yearand-a-half period; none, of course,
had taken place, but each warning was serious enough to require consultation
among human operators and one, on June 3, 1980, was disturbing enough to dictate
launching an airborne command post before the mistake was found - in a faulty
circuit that sent twos instead of zeros to a display terminal.

Perhaps the factor that most disturbs those who fear a nuclear holocaust arising
out of something other than outright Soviet military opportunism is the growing
inclination of some strategic policy makers to think of nuclear arms as usable
in conventional ways. John E. Mack, a Harvard Medical School psychiatry
professor and a Pulitzer Prize-winning author, said in an interview, ''I think a
great deal of (the danger of nuclear war's breaking out) has to do with the
shift in the atmosphere of strategic thinking, a kind of mental set that's
emerged in the last few months that suggests that we're beginning to forget what
nuclear war is - in other words, to treat it as if it were just like any other
kind of war that you can win or lose. This is an alarming notion.''

It is alarming to many arms-control advocates not only because they think the
damage from even the most limited nuclear attack would be immense, but also
because they think it is unrealistic to imagine that any nuclear attack could
truly be limited and would not, once the nuclear threshold was crossed, escalate
into all-out doomsday barrages and counterbarrages. Morever, the very idea that
nuclear war can be regarded, in Colin Gray's terms, as war and not as holocaust
may, it is feared, make crossing the nuclear threshold all the more likely - may
make it all the more enticing to use a mounting array of weapons that so far we
have dared neither employ nor discard.

Limited-war strategists, however, project scenarios in which one side
capitulates short of mutual holocaust. These strategists hold that for
deterrence's sake the United States must be perceived as willing and able to
engage in a nuclear exchange if pressed. This thinking is put forward as an
ultimate sanity, the harsh rationality of self-preservation in an armed and
dangerous world.  ''I wish the damned thing had never been invented,'' Robert
Donovan, a chronicler of much of the atomic age, once said. We all may wish so;
the bomb may well rank as our most supremely tragic instrument - in classical
terms, as a force we have set in motion but no longer control and whose course
is now determining our destiny.  But are we in fact bound to go on living with
the bomb and perhaps dying by it even though we may now be reawakening to its
menace?

George B. Kistiakowsky, who helped design the bomb with the Manhattan Project,
later served as President Eisenhower's science adviser and is now chairman of
the Council for a Livable World, is pessimistic when he considers bomb numbers
and hair-trigger technologies and then surveys global tensions and finds a
rising inclination to use nuclear weapons. He concludes: ''The possibility of
nuclear weapons' being used in your lifetime is very high.'' How high? ''I
wouldn't bet even money against it.''

Nor, it appears, would an inexpert group that presumably should have some faith
in the future. Harvey Cox, a professor of divinity at Harvard, who says he
himself has begun to worry about the bomb of late, tells of recently polling one
of his courses that has about 100 students. ''I picked the course especially
because there were people in it from various parts of the university,'' he says.
''There were undergraduates and divinity students and law students and students
from the schools of education and public health and so on. I wanted as much of a
cross section as you could get.

''Over 80 percent of the students thought both that there would be a nuclear war
and that they would not survive it. And here's a place where people are applying
for graduate school, doing their term papers. We think of this as the last
bastion of delayed gratification.'' What Professor Cox was not able to determine
is what various individuals among the 80 percent thought could or would be done
to head off this anticipated destiny.

Those who see the bomb coming with a hammer and sickle on it have a relatively
easy answer - to boost defenses, including retaliatory capacities. And this is
what the American people and their Government appear at present to be set on
doing. Those who feel that still more nuclear weapons cannot be a lasting
impediment to their potential use face a less certain course, especially at a
time when minimal armscontrol efforts, symbolized by SALT II, are in disarray.
And earlier this month the United States Government was reported close to a
decision to postpone even a routine meeting to monitor existing armslimitation
agreements.

Professor Lifton sees some possible movement toward removing the menace of the
bomb in the reawakened anxiety over it. ''If you don't have tension,'' he says,
''you just have numbing, and you do nothing about the danger.'' A prelude to
possible large-scale popular efforts may be glimpsed in a country where tensions
about the bomb are particularly high. In Britain, the specter of nuclear warfare
has become especially menacing because of plans to base a new generation of
intermediate-range nuclear missiles there, thus making that compact country a
potential target of Soviet countermissiles.  Nuclear disarmament has again
become a vigorously advocated cause, and last fall some 50,000 people in London
marched from Hyde Park to Trafalgar Square to protest against nuclear weaponry.
It was the largest antinuclear demonstration since the early 1960's.

Most antinuclear activism in the United States is aimed at the more modest goals
of arms control, of putting mutual limits on arms expansion and new missile and
antimissile technologies. Efforts to promote these goals are progressing with an
uncertain eye toward both Moscow and Washington. Meanwhile, at the current rate
of nuclear-arms production, it is projected that at least 10,000 new nuclear
weapons will be in place worldwide within the next decade.

The prospect is that the resurgent specter of nuclear annihilation will be with
us for a long time - assuming specter does not, after all, become substance and
that we will all be around for a good while longer ourselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperbacks: New and Noteworthy

BYLINE: Grosset & Dunlap, $11.95.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: MARILYN, by Norman Mailer.


62), America's quintessential sex symbol, told through 100 off-screen pictures
taken by 24 photographers and more than 110,00 exuberant words by Norman Mailer.
On its publication in 1979, our reviewer Pauline Kael called this ''a
metaphysical cocktail-party book''; it is now available in large paperback
format.

BERNARD BERENSON: The Making of a Connoisseur, by Ernest Samuels.  (Harvard
University Press, $8.95.) The first 40 years of the career of Bernard Berenson
(1865-1959), a Lithuanian-born, Boston-reared American who, as a resident of
Italy, became a counselor to collectors and shaped the art tastes of his time.
Ernest Samuels, a Pulitzer Prize-winning biographer, has used fresh archival
material to provide an objective, illuminating portrait of a complex man.

THE MAN WHO LOST THE WAR, by W.T. Tyler. (Berkley, $2.95.) David Plummer, an
American, is slowly recovering from the memory of his labyrinthine life as a spy
in Central Europe when the 1962 Berlin Wall crisis develops and his old
acquaintances drag him back into his old ways. Fortunately he has an old
girlfriend to serve as the light at the mouth of the tunnel. Stanley Ellin
called this account of the quandaries of the intelligence agent ''a most
remarkable book.''

CHARMED LIVES, by Michael Korda. (Avon, $3.50.) The story of three brothers -
Sir Alexander Korda, principal creator of the postwar British film industry,
Zoltan Korda, one of its great directors, and Vincent Korda, their art director
- told by Vincent's son, Michael.  In his review, Mel Gussow described it as ''a
rare, intimate family portrait, crowded with anecdotes, comedy and drama,
supported by a cast of theatrical and political celebrities.''

THE LAST MISSION, by Harry Mazer. (Dell/Laurel-Leaf, $1.75.) Jack Raab, an
American Jew who lied about his age to get into the Army Air Force in 1944 when
he was 15, is on his 25th and final combat mission when he's shot down and
obliged to endure terrifying experiences in a German P.O.W. camp. A vivid,
moving account of what war is really like, for readers aged 12 to 16.

MISS HERBERT (THE SUBURBAN WIFE), by Christina Stead.  (HBJ/Harvest, $5.95.)
Eleanor Herbert, a Junoesque peaches-and-cream English beauty, dreams of
becoming a successful suburban housewife, but on the way gets distracted by
various young lovers, a slight talent as a writer, a marriage to the leader of a
spurious religious group and an affair with a kinky publisher. Helen Yglesias
called this 1976 novel ''a stunning addition to Christina Stead's stunning body
of work.''

HERMANN HESSE: Life and Art, by Joseph Mileck. (University of California Press,
$5.95.) A critical biography of Hermann Hesse (1877-1962), the German Nobel
Prize-winning novelist and poet, some of whose work (''Siddhartha,''
''Steppenwolf,'' etc.) enjoyed great popularity among young American readers
during the 50's and 60's.  Joseph Mileck has devoted many years to a study of
the man and his work; his distillation of it is not likely to be replaced soon.

BALLERINA, by Edward Stewart. (Berkley, $2.95.) Two talented teenage girls,
Stephanie and Christine, share a relentless stage mother, an apartment and even
a lover during their pursuit of a career in the tense, often vicious world of
professional ballet in New York. Edward Stewart's account of their experiences
is more notable as an informative guided tour of that world than as a work of
fiction.

THE GENERATION OF 1914, by Robert Wohl. (Harvard University Press, $8.95.) A
comparative survey of intellectual life in five European countries - Spain,
England, Italy, France and Germany - between 1900 and 1930 that in every case
focuses on the careers and contributions of individual men of ideas. There is
also a consideration of the idea of a ''generation.'' Our reviewer Martin Green
observed that this work of a U.C.L.A. historian is especially successful in
capturing the atmosphere of each nation's culture.

THE DEBRIEFING, by Robert Littell. (Dell, $2.75.) When Kulakov, a Soviet
courier, turns himself over to the United States Embassy in Athens, it falls to
Stone, head of a super-elite American intelligence organization, to debrief him.
Is Kulakov a ''plant''?  Stone goes to Russia to find out for himself, bringing
this example of what Newgate Callendar calls ''superior entertainment'' to ''an
ending that's cold, cold, cold.''

THE 1970s: Best Political Cartoons of the Decade, edited by Jerry Robinson.
(McGraw-Hill, $8.95.) From early 1970, when President Nixon widened the Vietnam
war by an ''excursion'' of 25,000 American troops into Cambodia, to late 1979,
when a student mob made hostages of some 50 Americans in our embassy in Teheran
- the political history of a sorry decade is graphically chronicled in 540
cartoons assembled in this album from newspapers in this country, Canada, Mexico
and western Europe. The 263 contributors include such award-winners as David
Levine, Bill Mauldin, Jeff MacNelly, Pat Oliphant, Paul Szep and Garry Trudeau;
all live up to the tradition of their craft that an editorial cartoonist should
combine the roles of artist, social critic and political analyst. Reproduced
above is a 1970 cartoon that has again become timely - a depiction by the
Belgian cartoonist Jean-Paul Walravens of the agonies that befall Uncle Sam when
he steps into a military quagmire abroad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A CLOSE-UP VIEW OF THE STRUGGLE IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 503 words


To the Editor:

As U.S. citizens working in Costa Rica and first-hand observers of the Central
American scene, we feel compelled to express our fears regarding the increased
U.S. role in propping up the repressive Salvadoran junta. Indeed, U.S. officials
have not denied the possibility that U.S. troops may be sent into that troubled
country.

Most American press reports hold that a Marxist extreme left is pitted against
right-wing extremists, with a ''moderate'' military/civilian junta trying
desperately to maintain order and implement reforms. This leads U.S. policy
makers and public to deplore the actions of the right-wing extremists but to see
their behavior and that of the junta's own repressive forces as justified in the
light of a possible Marxist takeover.

Unfortunately, it is not sufficiently appreciated in the United States that the
Salvadoran opposition, rather than being merely a group of left-wing extremists,
embraces a variety of interests that span the political spectrum, including
among its members former ministers of the junta as well as a significant portion
of President Duarte's own Christian Democratic Party.

The close collaboration between the right-wing paramilitary bands and the
junta's security forces is too seldom recognized in the United States. The great
majority of the victims of political violence have died at the hands of these
two groups, according to almost all independent observers. The present
Government, like its predecessors, systematically represses all forms of popular
organization and initiative, from trade unions to neighborhood improvement
associations, while most of El Salvador's ''autonomous'' state institutions are
administered by military officers.

Despite F.B.I. evidence linking the junta's security forces with the rape and
murder of four American missionaries, U.S. aid to the junta is increasing. This
debases American principles of human rights and civil justice.

The Reagan Administration's international campaign to discredit the opposition
to the Salvadoran junta denies the indigenous nature of the Salvadoran struggle
which has continued since the 1930's, when over 20,000 peasants were massacred
at the hands of a military dictatorship.

We hope that our fellow Americans who are not as close to the situation as we
are will reject attempts at creating an atmosphere of cold-war fear that can
only perpetuate the bloodshed in El Salvador and bring our own country to the
brink of another Vietnam disaster.
CARMELO ALVAREZ, CHARLES SCHNELL, PETER PHILLIPS, MARC EDELMAN, KENT W. ROWE,
San Jose, Costa Rica, Feb. 26, 1981

Mr. Alvarez is rector of the Latin American Biblical Seminary; Messrs.  Schnell
and Phillips are, respectively, environmental sciences chairman and a fisheries
biology professor at National University in Heredia; Mr. Edelman is a research
fellow at the University of Costa Rica's Institute of Social Research, and Mr.
Rowe is a health sciences professor at the Technological Institute of Costa
Rice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUANS TRAIN IN FLORIDA AS GUERILLAS

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 16


Former members of the Nicaraguan National Guard are training openly alongside
the Cuban exiles in camps in Florida, preparing, they say, for guerrilla attacks
on the Sandinists in Nicaragua.

At least one such attack, the exiles say, has already been carried out from a
base in Central America, and others are now in preparation.

Although the Cuban exile groups have a long history of such efforts - on April
17, it will be 20 years since the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion - the training
of Nicaraguan exiles is a new turn of events. At the same time, the Cuban groups
have intensified their efforts.

Both groups, saying that they have been heartened by President Reagan's hardline
anti-Communist position, voice hope that, at the least, the United States
Government will lend them moral support.

A separate Cuban group, Alpha 66, says it has carried out 30 sabotage missions
inside Cuba in the last six months, including an explosion last week that killed
six persons and knocked out the power in a hydroelectric plant in Regla, near
Havana. The Cuban Government has not confirmed the nature of that blast.

F.B.I. Arrests 7 From Group

Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which in January arrested
seven members of Alpha 66 on a boat loaded with machineguns, rifles and
explosives, said that they were continuing an investigation into possible
violations of the Federal Neutrality Act. The act forbids conspiracies to injure
or destroy the property of the government of a nation with which the United
States is not at war.

At the same time, sources at the Central Intelligence Agency say, there are
still those within the agency who would like to see it work more closely with
the exile groups, although there is as yet no specific proposal.

One of the most active training camps is called ''Cuba.'' Administered by Jorge
Gonzalez, who is called ''Bombillo'' -light bulb - it lies in the brush and
swamplands of Miami, just beyond new housing developments and a trash dump.
Yesterday two teen-agers with semiautomatic rifles and walkie-talkies were
guarding the front entrance.

Inside were about 60 men and a handful of women in camouflage uniforms. One
group was listening to a lecture on cleaning weapons, other groups were drilling
and two groups were on the firing range.  Mr. Gonzalez explained that most
members of the paramilitary group, including Jose Infiesta, a Vietnam veteran
who is the top officer, were in a camp in Central America on a mission.

A man, who said he could be called ''Frank'' or ''Ronald'' and was wearing a
Nicaraguan National Guard insignia on his beret, explained that all the
Nicaraguans in the camp were former members of the National Guard.

Training Camps in U.S.

The Nicaraguans, he said, have seven training camps, in the United States,
Honduras, El Salvador, Costa Rica and South American countries that he declined
to name. There are approximately 600 Nicaraguans training in the United States,
he said.

''We'll fight the Communists with the same means they use - weapons,'' he said.
''They don't use roses.'' He explained that the former guardsmen had managed to
get out of the country with their weapons and were also obtaining arms from
South American countries ''which have identified with us.''

When asked to name these countries, he said he could list only those who had
lent moral support: Chile, Uruguay, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.

''The hour of our return is approaching,'' he said, ''but we can't say when.''
Another Nicaraguan, wearing civilian clothes and identified as the commander,
refused to give his name but spoke at great length with some eloquence. The
former guardsmen, he said, do not intend to fight for the interests of the
Somoza family or the right wing.

Their purpose, he said, is to ''vindicate the rights of Nicaraguans who got rid
of a dictatorial regime to get a democratic, representative regime. For this, so
many fought and so many people died. And the people were deceived.''

The Nicaraguans are a new addition to the camp, which began 18 months ago,
according to Mr. Gonzalez, 48 years old, who said that he was in Cuba during the
failed Bay of Pigs invasion and subsequently escaped the country by taking
asylum in the Venezuelan Embassy.

There are other guerrilla training camps in Tampa and Okeechobee, Fla., Mr.
Gonzalez said, adding that one is called ''Libertad'' and another called
''Maximo Gomez,'' after the hero of the Cuban war of independence. There are
also camps in New Jersey and in Los Angeles, he said. He refused to give the
location of the camp in Central America but did say ''we've had some actions
against the Sandinist Government from that camp.''

'Don't Want to Break Law'

''We don't want to break the law,'' he said, referring to the Neutrality Act.
''When we understand we might do this, we go outside the country.''

Mr. Gonzalez said his group, mostly Cubans with a few Dominicans and Puerto
Ricans, has made sporadic attacks on Cuba in past years, explaining that it was
mostly a matter of keeping the rebellious spirit alive.

The exiles, he said, got a major lift from the manifestation of discontent among
the 10,800 who sought refuge in the Peruvian Embassy last April and from the
election of Ronald Reagan.

''We think that Reagan and the Cabinet are acting as others should have and did
not,'' he said. ''The others were weak before the enemy. These are putting
respect in Fidel Castro and our common enemy, Russia.''

Mr. Gonzalez said his would-be guerrillas have had no conversations with the
C.I.A. but would accept any help offered. ''The principal aid we've received,''
he said, ''has been the declarations of the President. It's not weapons we need,
but freedom of action.''

The wave of refugees from the Port of Mariel brought only a few recruits to the
camp in south Florida, Mr. Gonzalez said. Many of the refugees ''are nervous and
disoriented,'' he said.

Alpha 66, on the other hand, has actively recruited among the Mariel refugees
and is now housing about 50 refugees in a building near the organization's Miami
headquarters.

Infiltration and Sabotage

In June 1980, the group announced its Maximo Gomez plan to infiltrate Cuba and
commit acts of economic sabotage. Saboteurs, trained in explosives and armed to
fight any Cuban ships that might detect them, have been taken to Cuba in small
boats landed at night, and are expected to remain there.

For this purpose, said Andres Nazario Sargen, Secretary General of Alpha 66, the
Mariel refugees are ideal because ''they know Cuba, and they can survive without
being detected.''

Roberto Campos, who was one of those who sought asylum in the Peruvian Embassy
and left through Mariel, said he was a member of a group called ''Rosa Blanca,''
which, with Alpha 66 and the Group of 52, took responsibility for the last
week's blast at the hydroelectric plant, which killed six persons, including Mr.
Campos's brother.

Mr. Campos, 29, said he had served nine years in prison, starting at the age of
15, for committing acts of political sabotage.  He is now training with Alpha 66
and asserted: ''I'm committed to fighting. Not only in Cuba - we're ready to go
anywhere the United States sends us to destroy Communism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of soilders

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Footsteps In The Dark

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


Is he Prince David the Goliath slayer or Attila the Hun? The media buildup to
which he is being subjected leaves no middle ground for David Stockman to hold
at the moment. Subtleties, shadings of character, a striving for accuracy - such
stuff gets in the way and slows down the pace of the story, and rapid pacing and
swift characterization are everything in the media launching of a new
government, as they are in launching a new TV series.

After giving us an installment or two of the Reagan Administration, the forces
of ballyhoo have lit upon poor Stockman as one character in a confusingly huge
cast, like J.R. Ewing in ''Dallas,'' who can hold a big audience for the long
run. To project him front and center, however, they have had to deny him
character and reduce him to a caricature.

Later, as the plot thickens and the audience becomes absorbed in his fate, there
will be time to fill in interesting human ambiguities, round him out into
something fairly plausible and rouse our interest in questions less dim-witted
than whether he is Jack Armstrong redivivus or only a rat. For the present,
however, he is trapped in the unhappy position of surprise star in TV's newest
hit series, the only man in the show who can contend with its superstar, Happy
Daddy Reagan, for the headlines.

But of course government is not really a TV series. Not quite yet.  It may be
soon. The Presidential election has turned into a TV series and government could
conceivably go the same route, but it is still affected by events beyond script
writers' inventions, and people like Stockman can be brutally hurt when the show
suddenly turns into the real thing.

Stockman, as everyone in Christendom must now know, is a brilliant 34-year-old.
Herein lies the charm that makes him irresistible to the hacks of hype. Sure, if
he were a stodgy 54-year-old or a brilliant 64-year-old his role as the Potomac
slasher would command attention.  Attention, yes, but not the fascination that
can be stimulated when the slasher is a brilliant 34-year-old.

The story of youth struggling against fearful challenge has been a pulse pounder
since Perseus went after the golden fleece. That Perseus was brilliant seems
doubtful. There were no Washington newspaper columnists in his day, and no
Harvard either, for that matter.

In modern times, youth exposed to a trip through Cambridge before arriving on
the Federal payroll has customarily been pronounced brilliant by Washington
casting agents. Perhaps many of them have been, for whatever brilliance is
worth. Perhaps Stockman is, too. He spent some time at the Harvard Divinity
School, impressed Senator Moynihan, then a Harvard don, as an intelligent
fellow, and was doomed from the moment of his appointment to be ''the brilliant
34-year-old.''

The cliche of brilliant youth at the levers of power, always irresistible to
media hype artists, has fresh entertainment value in Stockman's case. He is not
merely a brilliant 34-year-old; he is a brilliant 34-year-old conservative.

At their best, conservatives in the past were supposed to be long in the tooth,
solid, judicious, weighty. Certainly not brilliant.  Brilliance glistens
gaudily. Conservatism glowed dully like old gold in the dimly lit libraries of
manor houses. At their worst, conservatives were old fogeys. There were some
young conservatives, of course, but they were unbrilliant young fogeys.

With Stockman, an exciting new character was ready to be thrust on camera: the
brilliant 34-year-old conservative.  Swathed in this cliche, a smart young man
in Stockman's job might justifiably lie awake nights worrying about more than
the budget. Are there soft footsteps in the night? Is he being set up by the
media, guided toward some bloody ambush being prepared down there in the
darkness six months, twelve months, two or three years ahead?

Whom the media would destroy they first make young and brilliant.  The rule is
not absolute. The destruction of greatness is such excellent show biz that the
aged and powerful are also required to do occasional duty.

The youthful brilliant classes, however, make particularly entertaining
spectacles of ruination for the political audience, most of which is neither
young nor brilliant but vaguely suspicious that brilliance is not the same thing
as wisdom, and easily amused at seeing whippersnappers get their comeuppance.

Media people lack the cunning to set up these long-run entertainments through
calculation. They do it intuitively, out of instinct for building melodrama.
Projecting a brilliant young man on camera early in the show lays the groundwork
for future high-rating shows if he fails to live up to their caricature of him.

The ruins of the past are littered with such young men as Stockman. Perhaps he
will escape the destiny of the Kennedy cadre, whose brilliance faded in Vietnam,
and of the famous Haldeman and Ehrlichman, whose glitter made them easy to spot
at the Watergate.  Maybe he will even turn out to be Jack Armstrong. Whatever
the outcome, he will age very swiftly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK CALLS PACT WITH POL POT UNLIKELY

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 18


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former chief of state, said today that his
talks last week with Khieu Samphan, the Prime Minister of the ousted Communist
regime, had convinced him that there was no hope of forging an alliance against
the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Prince Sihanouk, who was interviewed by telephone in his palace in exile in
Pyongyang, North Korea, on the 11th anniversary of his overthrow, said the
former Communist regime, which is supported by China, had rejected any guarantee
of security for the non-Communists whose support they are seeking.

''They say they have given up Communism, but they are not sincere,'' the former
king said.  Referring to them by a French designation meaning ''Red
Cambodians,'' Prince Sihanouk said: ''The Khmers Rouges do not want to give the
slightest guarantee of security to the population that they will not again begin
their massacres. They do not even want to change the label. They still want to
call Cambodia 'Democratic Kampuchea.' They do not want to return to the old
flag, the old national anthem.''

Sihanoiuk Had Asked for Changes

Before the meeting in Pyongyang, Prince Sihanouk demanded, as a token of
sincerity, that the ousted Communists, who are still led by Pol Pot, the former
Prime Minister, undo the changes in style and nomenclature that symbolized their
regime, which uprooted most people and all traditions in its rule from 1975
until the Vietnamese drove them from Cambodia in 1979 and installed the present
Communist Government of President Heng Samrin.

The prince's comments in the 45-minute telephone interview contradicted Mr.
Khieu Samphan's affirmation on his return here that a measure of agreement for a
common front had been reached.

At the root of the dispute, Prince Sihanouk said, lay the intention of the
ousted Cambodian Communists and China to continue to fight until the Vietnamese
have been driven from Cambodia. In the prince's view, the solution must be
political, because Cambodians are too traumatized by years of suffering to
continue such a war and because the forces that could be mustered would be
inadequate to win.

China and the Pol Pot forces, the prince said, are prepared to negotiate only
when the Vietnamese have left Cambodia.  ''Then there would be nothing left to
negotiate about,'' he said.  His intention, Prince Sihanouk continued, is to
array sufficient force against Vietnam to bring it to negotiations.  ''But China
and the Khmers Rouges, Khieu Samphan repeated, want to make war until they
win,'' the prince said. ''War, war, to the end.  It is madness.''

A Choice: Vietnam or Pol Pot

With the Pol Pot movement insisting on dominance in a coalition, Prince Sihanouk
said, Cambodians will prefer ''a Vietnamese protectorate'' to the risk of a
return to Pol Pot ''genocide.''

''Many people enjoy family life again, are no longer slaves at forced labor and
observe Buddhism,'' the prince said. ''The Vietnamese have brought relative
peace.''

Prince Sihanouk said he had asked Mr. Khieu Samphan for an accounting for the
killings of three of the prince's children, grandchildren and other members of
his family as well as many of his associates. He said he was told that all had
been murdered by the Vietnamese.

''I know what the Vietnamese are like,'' Prince Sihanouk said.  ''They are hard,
but they would not do such a thing. Those people were murdered by the Khmers
Rouges.''

Despite his misgivings, the prince said, he will continue talks with the Pol Pot
regime when he returns to Peking on April 20. He will do so, he said, in the
hope that China will, in return, provide arms for a small force on the
Thai-Cambodian border that professes loyalty to the prince.

Seeking Help From the U.S.

Such arms will do no good against the overpowering force of Vietnam, the prince
said with his customary candor, ''but my partisans demand it.''

''I am too realistic to believe in it,'' he added. ''It is a very bitter, sad
irony.'' With equal lack of illusion, the prince said, he authorized In Tam, a
former non-Communist Prime Minister, now a refugee in the United States, to seek
contact with the Reagan Administration to request help. Mr. In Tam played the
principal role in maneuvering the parliamentary resolution that overthrew Prince
Sihanouk in 1970.

Prince Sihanouk, who is a guest of Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader, said he
found his stay in Pyongyang ''very pleasant,'' despite the contrast between his
own mercurial character and North Korea's rigid Communism.

''My friend Kim Il Sung gives me the right of extraterritoriality,'' Prince
Sihanouk said with his characteristic self-mocking, high-pitched giggle. ''My
palace is on a lake, and I can ride in a motorboat. I go for walks in my big
park. The personnel waits on me marvelously well; the cuisine is good. And I
even have American films, imported especially from Japan and Hong Kong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prince Sihanouk

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY SPENDING: DEBATE IS GROWING

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 18


President Reagan's plan to sharply increase military spending has heartened the
defense industry, which is now looking forward to more lucrative arms contracts.

But there is a dispute emerging about whether the higher Federal outlays will
significantly add to inflationary pressures in the United States. Some critics
of the Administration's military spending plans contend that the inflationary
effects on the economy could rival those brought on by the Vietnam buildup.

Administration economists ridicule any comparison with the Vietnam experience,
saying that the Vietnam expenditures were made in a much shorter time period
than the relatively gradual five-year buildup proposed by the Administration.
They add that their plan to cut other expenses should negate these inflationary
pressures.

Discrimination Alleged

Another concern of the critics, most recently voiced by a coalition of ''frost
belt'' members of Congress, is that the shifting pattern of Federal spending
will discriminate against the economically hardpressed states of the Northeast
and the Middle West.

''We're losing much more than we're gaining,'' said Wallace Beirmann, chief
economist for the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs. ''We
don't have many defense contractors and only a few military bases. I would much
rather see the dollars poured into some kind of manufacturing activity.''

According to studies done by Employment Research Associates in Lansing, Mich.,
26 states with a total of 60 percent of the population suffer a net job loss
when Government resources are shifted to defense spending. The biggest losers,
the studies find, are Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania. The largest
gainers are Texas, California, Virginia, Hawaii and Georgia.

Job Benefits Called Limited

Moreover, critics of the rise in military spending assert, the employment
benefits of the defense outlays will be limited largely to scarce highly skilled
technicians and professionals, and will not make much of a dent in the rate of
unemployment.

In support of the Administration position that the rise in military spending
will not add to inflationary pressures, Murray L.  Weidenbaum, the chairman of
the Council of Economic Advisers, who wrote his doctoral dissertation at
Princeton University on the impact of defense outlays, argues that ''we have a
moderate monetary policy.''

Recalling a meeting during the Vietnam period between President Lyndon B.
Johnson and William McChesney Martin, at the time the chairman of the Federal
Reserve Board, Mr. Weidenbaum said that ''L.B.J. called Bill Martin to the ranch
and chewed him out about following a sensible monetary policy; the situation was
much different then.'' Many economists believe that budget deficits are most
inflationary when they are accompanied by a quickly expanding supply of money.

''The Johnson Administration was justly criticized for increasing defense
spending without raising taxes; they're trying to do the same thing,'' said Otto
Eckstein, president of Data Resources, in discussing the Reagan plans. Doubting
that social programs will be cut as extensively as planned, Mr. Eckstein
asserted that the military buildup was reminiscent of the Vietnam era, and
added: ''Prudent analysts would have to conclude that it's a very risky
strategy.''

While the Adminstration disputes arguments that inflation will accelerate
because of higher arms spending, there are already indications that some product
prices are on the rise. For the last few months, the nation's purchasing
managers have reported that supplies of aluminum, electric motors, castings and
other defenserelated materials have been growing perceptibly tighter, while
their prices have been rising more sharply than other industrial materials.

Trend Viewed with Alarm

Many economists and Democratic politicians view this trend with alarm, citing it
as evidence that large increases in the defense budget will increase
inflationary pressures in the industrial sector. Military appropriations of
$1,460 billion between 1982 and 1986, as envisioned by the Administration, could
overheat the sensitive markets for industrial materials and skilled labor and
could nullify the deflationary impact of the controversial budget cuts, the
critics warn.

Most economists agree that defense and other Government outlays generally tend
to be more inflationary than private spending because tax outlays do not produce
consumable goods but, instead, create more income to chase the same amount of
goods.

According to Data Resources, the Administration's five-year plan would increase
the defense budget share of the gross national product to 6.3 percent from 4.8
percent. The 1.5 percentage point rise is only slightly less than the 1.8
percentage point rise during the Vietnam buildup, the economic consulting
concern says. According to statistics issued by the Office of Management and
Budget, the figures are different when indirect defense costs are included.

Called Inherently Inflationary

But Congressional Democrats say that defense spending practices, regardless of
the direction of the money supply, are inherently inflationary, largely because
of abuses and mismanagement.

''The Pentagon can't spend what's been appropriated for them already,'' said
Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, a Queens Democrat who is the chairman of the
defense subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee. He contended that
the Defense Department had more than $25 billion in appropriations that have not
been translated into contracts and another $120 billion under contract that has
yet to be spent.

Mr. Addabbo added: ''It's dangerous to have all that money sitting around. The
contractors see it and you start to get cost overruns and new claims against it.
These are the games that have been played and that are still being played.''

Administration spokesmen say that the practice of parceling out the
appropriations over a period of years makes the planning of the contractors
easier and prevents too much money from going into the pipeline at one time.

Ending of Wasteful Ways Urged

Opponents of larger military outlays assert that money could be found for new
weapons by eliminating wasteful practices, such as flying jets from the West
Coast to the East to pick up cargo destined for Europe. Large savings could also
be made by demanding that manufacturers honor their guarantees, which is not
done much, they charge.

Mr. Addabbo, who said he had identified 46 areas of Pentagon waste, estimated
that only $4 billion of this year's $36 billion defense budget increase would be
spent this year because of limitations on shipbuilding and aeropsace capacity
and other potential bottlenecks.

A few shipyards closed in the 1970's because of a lack of orders and the
aerospace industry is enjoying good demand from the commerical airlines. And
many subcontractors, such as foundries and machine shops, closed down as a
result of pollution control requirements and several years of relatively lean
defense appropriations.

The delicate situation in the aerospace industry could be a sign of things to
come, critics say, if the Administration succeeds in its plan to spur business
investment. Plane manufacturers are enjoying good demand now but they expect a
boom when the new generation of commercial jets start rolling out in the next
few years. By that time billions of dollars of orders for military jets should
be in the procurement pipeline, setting off an inflationary scramble for
materials and skilled labor, the critics add.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of Defense Spending

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 370 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 1981 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'CUTTER AND BONE,' AN IVAN PASSER MYSTERY

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 581 words


IT'S about time that Ivan Passer, the gifted Czechoslovak director (''Intimate
Lighting'') who has been making films (among others, ''Born to Lose,'' later
retitled ''Born to Win'') in this country and Western Europe in recent years,
came up with the winning film he is certainly capable of making. As it is, he
seems to be bent on establishing his own genre -throwaway movies of mystery,
espionage and sometimes black comedy, movies full of occasionally remarkable
sequences that ultimately add up to zero.

That describes the newest Passer film, ''Cutter and Bone,'' a peculiarly
unfocused murder-mystery about some eccentric young Southern Californians who
live on booze, drugs and their wits. They also talk a lot of rather
high-faluting dialogue about Vietnam, violence and the corrupting rich, and
later become involved in an amateurish plot to clear one of their number who has
been wrongly accused of murder.

Jeff Bridges plays Bone, a good-hearted fellow who sleeps around with older
women to make a buck or two and finds himself the chief suspect in the brutal
murder of a high-school cheerleader. John Heard, wearing an eyepatch that almost
obscures his entire face, plus what is supposed to be an artificial leg, is
Cutter, Bone's best friend, a manic, possibly psychotic war veteran who devises
the scheme to clear Bone and, in the process, nearly destroys everyone around
him, including his wife (Lisa Eichhorn), a patient young woman who is the most
mysterious thing in the picture. She seems always to be wishing she were in
another movie, maybe one with a coherent screenplay.

This one was written by Jeffrey Alan Fiskin, based on a novel by Newton
Thornburg, and it's the sort of picture that never wants to concede what it's
about. It is, however, enchanted by the sound of its own dialogue, which is
vivid without being informative or even amusing on any level.

''Cutter and Bone'' opens today at the Paramount and other theaters. Vincent
Canby

Unfocused Mystery

CUTTER AND BONE, directed by Ivan Passer; screenplay by Jeffrey Alan Fiskin,
based on the novel by Newton Thornburg; director of photography, Jordan
Cronenweth; music by Jack Nitzsche; produced by Paul R. Gurian; released by
United Artists. At the Beekman, Paramount and Quad 1 theaters. Running time: 109
minutes. This film is rated R.

Richard Bone . . . . . Jeff Bridges
Alex Cutter . . . . . John Heard
Maureen Cutter . . . . . Lisa Eichhorn
Valerie Duran . . . . . Ann Dusenberry
J.J. Cord . . . . . Stephen Elliott
George Swanson . . . . . Arthur Rosenberg
Woman in the Hotel . . . . . Nina Van Pallandt
Mrs. Cord . . . . . Patricia Donahue
Susie Swanson . . . . . Geraldine Baron
Toyota Woman . . . . . Katherine Pass
Toyota Man . . . . . Frank McCarthy
Toyota Cop . . . . . George Planco Cord
Security Guard . . . . . Jay Fletcher
Mortician . . . . . George Dickerson
Concession Owner . . . . . Jack Murdock
Black No. 1 . . . . . Essex Smith
Black No. 2 . . . . . Rod Gist
Black No. 3 . . . . . Leonard Lightfoot
Young Girl . . . . . Julia Duffy
Young Man . . . . . Randy Shephard
Working Stiff . . . . . Roy Hollis
Garbage Man . . . . . Billy Drago
Garbage Truck Driver . . . . . Caesar Cordova
Police Captain . . . . . Jon Terry
Detective No. 1 . . . . . William Pelt
Detective No. 2 . . . . . Ron Marcroft
Stunt Coordinator . . . . . Bill Burton
Guards . . . . . Ted White, Tony Epper, Andy Epper, Chris Howell, H.P. Evetts
and Ron Burke
Stunt Persons . . . . . Rita Egleston, June Evetts, Hugh Hooker, Glynn Rubin and
Jay Salerno

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'ATTACK' ON A NUCLEAR PLANT NOW CALLED SURVIVAL LESSON

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: INVERNESS, Fla., March 20


This country town of 3,000 people in west-central Florida was swarming with
Federal agents and a small army of reporters today after 13 men wearing mottled
jungle fatigues and carrying exotic weapons were caught practicing hand-to-hand
combat two miles from a nearby nuclear power plant.

The men were not terrorists or mercenaries, as the county sheriff had feared, or
members of a secret United States Government force, as he began to think at one
point. They turned out to be two instructors and 11 students participating in a
course in military-style survival techniques.

Franklin Joseph Camper, the 34-year-old veteran of Special Forces duty in
Vietnam who had organized the two-week course and charged the students $350
each, said that he had chosen the area because of its rough terrain, ''similar
to El Salvador''

''This is combat mercenary training, he said. ''It's extrememly difficult,
rigid, and highly disciplined.'' He also said that the replicas of weapons used
in the course were a ''nice, well-rounded, international mix, so a fellow could
go anywhere in the world and be prepared to use anything he was given.''

Used an Old Map

He said that he had been guided by a 1954 topographical map, and had been
unaware that the Florida Power and Light Company had built a nuclear power plant
there in recent years or that he had been maneuvering on parts of the
13,000-acre Hollinswood cattle and timber ranch.

The students had come from as far away as Oregon, Michigan, Mexico and Canada.
One was a tax accountant, another a college professor.  One was a horse trainer
and one a construction worker.

''We're not mercenaries,'' said Mr. Camper. ''We're not commandos.'' Sheriff
Charles S. Dean said that he did not know what they were.  But, he said, ''They
were trespassing and I arrested them.'' The men spent Thursday night in the
Citrus County jail, and after a day of interrogation by sheriff's officers and
agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms, they were were arraigned on trespassing charges and released on
bond of $1,050 each.

They found that all the rooms in the one motel in Inverness had been rented to
reporters.  Robert Lisenby of North Carolina, 30, a licensed gun dealer, who was
wearing a T-shirt reading ''Cadre Merc School.'' He said today that he and Mr.
Camper had run two ads in Soldier of Fortune magazine for a school in survival,
combat weapons and demolition. They had taught before but had never before
advertised, he said. ''We don't have this kind of trouble overseas,'' he said.

Russell Franklin Rogers of Orlando, a construction worker, said, '' I just do
this for the adventure of it.'' He continued, ''Mr. Camper has trained
mercenaries since 1969, but this was not to train to be a mercenary unit.'' He
originally planned to take only the survival portion of the course.

Dixie M. Hollins, the 33-year-old president of his family's Hollinswood Ranch,
discovered the uniformed men near a water hole on his property early Wednesday
evening.

Rancher Hears Shots

He had just climbed off his tractor and was doing some work around his barn when
heard several bursts of gunfire. He went to investigate and found the men
shooting into a dirt bank. Mr. Camper stepped forward.

Each demanded the other's identification, Mr. Hollins said, and then they
shouted at each other, ''What the hell are you doing here?''

Then, Mr. Hollins said, Mr. Camper, who identified himself as an Army
lieutenant, said that he was on a secret operation from Fort Benning, Ga.,
adding that ''the Secret Service would be in touch with me.''

''I told him I didn't care who he was with, I wanted him off my property,''''
Mr. Hollins said. Finally, according to Mr. Hollins, Mr. Camper said that he was
lost, adding, ''We're are leaving and we're sorry.''

Wednesday evening and early Thursday, Mr. Hollins and the sheriff tried to check
the Fort Benning story. By midday Thursday, the Army was saying that it knew
nothing about Mr. Camper and the others.

It rained Wednesday night, and a friend of Mr. Hollins reported finding a lot of
boot prints. They called the sheriff out to the ranch to track the intruders.

Tells of 'Whooping and Hollering'

Mr. Hollins recalled that two and a half hours later, ''I heard some whooping
and hollering'' about 400 yards from the Cross Florida Barge Canal.

The sheriff, Mr. Hollins, two friends and several deputies, armed with pistols
and shotguns, surrounded the uniformed men.  Sheriff Dean pulled up in his
patrol car and said over the loudspeaker: ''We've got you surrounded. You've got
one minute to come out.''

Mr. Camper came forward looking into Sheriff Dean's double-barreled 16-gauge
shotgun. The sheriff said he handcuffed himself and Mr.  Camper together and
went in for the others.

''I told this fellow,'' the sheriff recalled, '' 'You've got a country sheriff
here. I might be a little excited, a little bit scared. You tell your men you
don't want any of them to move fast and to stack their weapons.' ''

Mr. Rogers said that he ''couldn't have asked for any better treatment,'' from
the sheriff. ''The only thing I don't appreciate,'' he said, ''is all the
publicity we got. It was blown all out of proportion.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Joseph Franklin Camper Map of Inverness Photo
of Lieut. Jerry Hytry with seized weapons

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE WITHDRAWS SUPPORT OF LONG ISLANDER TO BE V.A. HEAD

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


The Reagan Administration has decided not to nominate John Behan, a Vietnam War
amputee from Long Island, to head the Veterans Administration, a White House
official said today.

The decision to withdraw the nomination of Mr. Behan, the official said,
resulted from protests by politically active veterans' groups and their allies
in Congress who asserted that Mr. Behan, a New York State Assemblyman, lacked
the managerial skill and power to fight for veterans' programs.

Reached at his home in Montauk, L.I., Mr. Behan said that he had not been
notified of the decision by the White House and expressed disappointment.

Mr. Behan said it was his understanding that the most forceful opposition to his
appointment had come from the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

Mr. Behan and three Congressional aides who asked not to be identified said that
his chief opponent was Cooper T. Holt, executive director of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars. Mr. Holt did not respond to a telephoned request for comment.

Other Names Proposed

When the White House disclosed plans last month to name Mr. Behan, the V.F.W.
leadership recommended a candidate, William Ayres, a former Congressman from
Ohio, the White House and Congressional sources said.

Mr. Ayres was also opposed, one of the Congressional aides said, and two more
candidates were proposed and supported by other members of Congress. ''Those
four people sort of killed each other off,'' the aide said.

The Administration decided against nominating Mr. Behan and the three
challengers and instead began interviewing new candidates this week.

Mr. Behan said he would be available to the Veterans Administration ''to try to
help the Vietnam era veteran and work with the new administrator, whoever he
is.''

An Achiever in Athletics

Mr. Behan, who is 36 years old, won varsity letters in three sports when he
attended East Hampton, L.I., High School. He joined the Marine Corps after he
graduated in 1963.

In 1966, while on patrol in Vietnam, Mr. Behan was wounded and both legs were
amputated above the knee.  Mr. Behan was a member of the United States
Wheelchair Team at the Pan-American Games in Lima, Peru, in 1972 and at the
Wheelchair Olympics in Toronto in 1976.

He has won gold medals in the discus, shot-put and javelin events and he holds
the world record for the javelin event among wheelchair athletes.

As a member of the New York Assembly, Mr. Behan organized the Vietnam Veterans
Caucus in the Legislature to draw attention to the needs of veterans of that
conflict, particularly those exposed to the toxic herbicide Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
NEWS SUMMARY;
SATURDAY, MARCH 21, 1981

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


International
A nationwide strike alert in Poland was ordered by the Solidarity union in
response to a police attack on union activists in Bydgoszcz, in north-central
Poland. Meanwhile two-hour strikes were held in four northern industrial
regions. Solidarity announced suspension of all talks with Government officials
and told all union chapters, representing 10 million workers, to be ready to
strike by Monday. (Page 1, Column 6.)
Food assistance to Mozambique was suspended by the Administration in retaliation
for the expulsion of United States Embassy personnel there two weeks ago on
charges that they were working for the Central Intelligence Agency. It
emphasized the Administration's determination to be firm with Cuba and the
countries that solicit its assistance.  The State Department said the expulsion
was instigated by Cuban intelligence agents. (1:5-6.)
Meetings with Arab leaders and Israeli officials have been approved by Prime
Minister Menachem Begin, Shimon Peres, the Labor Party's candidate for Prime
Minister, said, following reports over Israeli radio and television that he had
flown to Morocco for a meeting with King Hassan II, and that he had spoken in
London with a brother of King Hussein of Jordan. (3:5-6.)
Ontario's Premier was re-elected despite the criticism by opposition parties of
William Davis's conservative government. His Progressive Conservative Party will
occupy 70 of the legislature's 125 seats, an increase of 12. The Liberals again
won 34 seats, and the socialist New Democratic Party won 21 seats, a decrease of
12. (3:1.)
Energy
Exxon abandoned an electronic control it had developed for electric motors and
had introduced two years ago as an energy saver, and had invoked as
justification for its controversial $1.2 billion acquistion of the Reliance
Electric Company. Exxon said that it would be too costly to apply the energy
saver to industry and that an alternative was being developed. (1:4-5.)
National
The Reagan ''kitchen cabinet'' was removed from the space it occupied in the
Executive Office Building near the White House on the order of Edwin Meese 3d,
the President's counselor, who said that the private, informal group of
Presidential advisers could not legally occupy Government property. The removal
was seen as another move by the President's aides to lessen the influence of his
wealthy California friends on the Administration's appointments and policies.
(1:1-2.)
North Carolina politicians have rallied to protect the state's tobacco growers
from possible Administration budget cuts. Foremost among them is Senator Jesse
Helms who repeatedly stressed in a speech at the annual meeting in Raleigh of
the Tobacco Associates, a lobby, that ''there is no tobacco subsidy,'' and the
audience repeated it each time the Senator asked it to. The Senator was
emphasizing the industry's position that that the hundreds of millions of
dollars in Federal loans to tobacco producers over the years are, in fact,
market regulators that just about pay their way. (1:-2-4.)
13 men dressed in jungle fatigues and practicing hand-to-hand combat were
arrested on a cattle and timber ranch in Inverness in westcentral Florida on
trespass charges. The group of 11 men and two instructors was organized by
Joseph F. Camper, a veteran of Special Forces duty in Vietnam, who charged the
students $350 each. Federal agents and reporters swarmed into the town when
rumors spread that the men were mercenaries or terrorists. (8:1-2.)
Metropolitan
A larger increase in transit fares than the 10-to-15-cent rise being planned for
New York City's buses and subways on July 1 might be necessary because two oil
companies refuse to pay New York's 2 percent gross receipts tax, state officials
said. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, already facing a $150 million
deficit next year, may lose an additional $100 million this year because of the
loss of the tax revenues. Mobil and Shell refused to make their first estimated
pay on the ground that the tax was ''unconstitutional and confiscatory.'' (1:3.)

Jean S. Harris was sentenced in White Plains to a minimum 15 years to life for
the murder of Dr. Herman Tarnower, her longtime companion.  (1:2-4.)
Indictments against 10 physicians formerly employed at Rikers Island were
dismissed by Justice Walter M. Schackman of the State Supreme Court in the
Bronx. The doctors had been dismissed by the city for allegedly falsifying tie
records. (25:6.)
A New Jersey doctor was charged with plotting to have his wife killed and
rewarding the killer with a stolen Jaguar sports car, according to a grand jury
indictment. The 40-count indictment said that Dr. Steven A. Chomsky, who
directed the emergency rooms of two North Jersey hospitals, also was the target
of a murder in a double cross planned by three of his co-defendants. The
co-defendants were also accused of selling stolen cars and weapons from a
gasoline station on Route 4 in Fort Lee, an operation in which the doctor
allegedly had invested. (26:-4-6.)
Defendants in 61 of 192 gun cases prosecuted in New York City under the state's
seven-month-old gun-control law received less than the so-called mandatory
sentences of one year in jail, a report released by the city showed, and Mayor
Koch accused the judges of sapping the law's strength, and asked the Legislature
to severely restrict the judges' discretion in such cases. (27:2-4.)

Business Digest, Page 29

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

INDEX;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


Japanese aide's U.S. visit expected to focus on auto exports 1
Bonn trades prisoners with East Berlin, including spy 2
Turkish regime abolishes two holidays, stirring complaints 3
Around the World 5
Students at a South African university shout down minister 6
Mexicans learn to avoid private bodyguards, or else 6

Government/Politics
Reagan vows to return power to states and communities 9
White House drops John Behan as choice to head the V.A.  10
Industry groups seek changes in Clean Air Act 24
Long Island vote to test beverage-container deposit issue 25
Koch fails to sway Reagan on mass transit cuts 27

Energy
Foundations help nonprofit agencies cope with energy costs 26

General
Around the Nation 8
Once-thriving Michigan town falls on hard times 8
Spring is here, so why doesn't your heart go dancing?  25
The Region 26
Friends of Dr. Tarnower give about $200,000 in his memory 26
The City 27
Tramway shut down for 3 hours by electrical problems 27
New York City fireman is held as cocaine dealer 28

Industry/Labor
Firemen in Milwaukee resume strike after panel rejects pact 8
President of United Mine Workers sees record strike 10

Health/Science
Health officials discount nuclear accident in infant deaths 7
False signal is focus of inquiry on space center mishap 16
International meeting of doctors decries perils of nuclear war 16
City transferring 25 patients from struck hospital 27

Arts/Entertainment
"Tar Baby" by Toni Morrison reviewed 10
Three of opera's best voices in concert 11
Small movie companies confronting hurdles 11
Merce Cunningham troupe at City Center 12
Hakan Hagegard sings lieder at 92d Street Y 13
CBS-TV adds news programming and halve "Captain Kangaroo" 48
Montserrat Caballe and Jose Carreras in recital at the Met 48

Style
Consumer Saturday: U.S. Agency distributes pamphlets by million 15
The rising cost of a shoeshine 15
De Gustibus: Fresh can mean not quite 15

Obituaries
Irving Jaffee, Olympic speed-skating champion in 1928, '32 28

Sports
Indiana and St. Joseph's gain Mideast final 17
Wichita State advances, 66-65; L.S.U. routs Arkansas 17
Ainge's clutch play is talk of N.C.A.A. tournament 17
Knicks win, clinch home-court edge for playoffs 17
Islanders beat Resch and Rockies, 5-3 17
Jury finds for Kush in civil suit 17
Jaeckel defies wind and leads by a stroke in T.P.C. golf 18
George Vecsey on a Yankee hater's diary 19
Blackman of Kansas State a clutch player from Brooklyn 19
Purdue and Tulsa gain in N.I.T.  19
Yankee days dwindling down for Elliott Maddox 20
Nets defeat Hawks as Robinson scores 29 points 21

Features/Notes
Going Out Guide 12
Saturday News Quiz 14
Notes on People 21
Man in the News: George L. Clark Jr., N.Y.'s new G.O.P. chief 27

News Analysis
Martin Tolchin on Democratic tactics in budget process 9

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

New strategy of Right to Lifers Role of the State Comptroller Unmet needs of the
homeless Letters 22
Russell Baker: determining when life truly begins 23
James D. Atwater: World War II in Europe 23
Bruce Lawlor: the war in Vietnam 23
Dan Bauer: the war in Korea 23
A. Craig Copetas: life in the City of the Dead 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Holds Local Elections; Ousted Regime Denounces Them

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 21


Cambodians voted today in municipal elections in preparation for the country's
first general election since Vietnamese forces installed the Heng Samrin
Government in January 1979.

The Vietnam News Agency reported a heavy turnout in 1,300 villages and city
wards and said that successful candidates had won 80 to 90 percent of the vote.

The ousted regime said the election was Hanoi's way of ending a power struggle
among its handpicked Cambodian leaders.  A commentary on the clandestine Voice
of Democratic Cambodia Radio, monitored here, said that Vietnam had already
chosen Cambodia's next government and that the election was intended to mislead
world opinion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOVELIST IS FIANCE OF CAROLINE PARKER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 63, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 175 words


Mr. and Mrs. Gerald S. Parker of Old Greenwich, Conn., have made known the
engagement of their daughter, Caroline Scott Parker, to Vincent Dyckman Andrus
Jr. of Cody, Wyo., and Governor's Harbour, Eleuthera, the Bahamas. He is the son
of Mrs. Frederick C. Tanner of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr. Andrus, who
was curator of the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

A May wedding is planned.  The future bride graduated from Choate Rosemary Hall
and Wellesley College. Her father is a vice president of the Guardian Life
Insurance Company.

Mr. Andrus, a writer, whose novel, ''Days When the House Was Too Small,'' was
published in 1974 by Charles Scribner's Sons, attended the Brunswick School in
Greenwich and graduated from St. Paul's School in Concord, N.H., and from Yale.
He served with the Army in Vietnam. His stepfather is president of F.C. Tanner &
Company, employee benefit plan consultants in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONCE AGAIN, POWER PENDULUM SWINGS TOWARD THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Richard E. Neustadt, the celebrated professorial chronicler of executive power,
wrote in 1960 that, although the Founding Fathers were said to have created a
government of ''separated powers,'' the constitutional convention did nothing of
the sort.

''Rather,'' Mr. Neustadt observed, ''it created a government of separated
institutions 'sharing' powers.'' Though a useful scholastic distinction, at
issue politically, then as now, is which branch of government gets the bigger
share.

Despite a few fluctuations, the direction of the Presidential power curve since
the end of World War I has been upward. But what Arthur Schlesinger Jr. dubbed
the Imperial Presidency collapsed precipitously in the 1970's in the wake of the
Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal.

Congress's enactment of the War Powers Act and the forced resignation of
President Nixon presaged a fierce and prolonged assault on White House authority
over foreign and domestic policy.  Under the Carter Administration, however, the
political pendulum began to swing back again.

By last week, in the third month of the Reagan Administration, there were strong
indications that a new balance of power between the legislature and the
executive was being struck. The Republicandominated Senate Budget Committee,
with a swiftness seldom seen on Capitol Hill, not only followed President
Reagan's call for fiscal restraint but unanimously adopted a package of Federal
budget cuts totaling $36.4 billion for fiscal 1982, more than $2 billion beyond
Mr. Reagan's recommendation.

And in another assertion of executive prerogative, Mr. Reagan reversed a
campaign pledge to support legislative vetoes, a device increasingly popular in
Congress in recent years, and instructed his Attorney General to argue before
the Supreme Court that such vetoes are unconstitutional if they intrude upon the
President's power to manage the executive branch.

The reassertion of Presidential power, as well as the outlines of the inevitable
debate with Congress, could be seen most clearly last week in foreign policy,
however. Under Secretary of State James L.  Buckley unveiled before a House
foreign affairs subcommittee proposals designed, Mr. Buckley contended, to
provide the Administration with greater ''flexibility'' in the conduct of
foreign policy.

The package is a legislative potpourri that includes a repeal, in effect, of
Congressional restrictions on military or nuclear aid to Argentina, Angola and
Pakistan, creation of a military aid contingency fund for foreign crises, a $350
million revolving weapons fund to speed delivery of arms to foreign buyers, and
less restrictive reporting requirements on the shipments of arms and military
advisers overseas.

Predictably, the package received mixed reviews on Capitol Hill.  One of the
first blasts came from Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a liberal Democrat from
Brooklyn and a staunch defender of the socalled Clark amendment, which prohibits
military or covert assistance to Angola. Mr. Solarz, who predicted a ''battle
royal'' over repeal of the aid restriction, fired a broadside at the entire
package.

''It represents a frontal assault on the whole fabric of Congressionally adopted
restraints on foreign policy prerogatives of the executive,'' Mr. Solarz
complained. ''While there may well be a need for greater flexibility,'' he
continued, ''it is neither necessary nor wise to repeal virtually all of the
restrictions adopted in response to specific abuses of the past and designed to
prevent future abuses and unwise policies.''

Even moderate Democrats, such as Representative Clement J. Zablocki of
Wisconsin, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, warned Mr.  Buckley that
the Administration was ''asking for a little too much.'' Mr. Zablocki concluded:
''I don't think Congress will abdicate its rightful authority and
responsibilities.''

Displeasure with some of the Administration's recent initiatives was also
apparent in the Senate. Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas,
for example, questioned the timing of the move to repeal the Clark amendment,
fearing that it could adversely affect efforts to negotiate an end to the
conflict in South-West Africa and alienate friendly black African countries.

Senator John Glenn, a moderate Democrat from Ohio, vowed to oppose the
Administration's request to ease restrictions on nuclear fuel exports and
military aid to Pakistan and other nations until the Administration had
developed a nuclear nonproliferation policy. ''I support aid to Pakistan,'' Mr.
Glenn said, ''but I'm also against nuclear proliferation. And most of all, I
favor a rule of law, not of exceptions and exigencies of the moment.''

Similar concerns were aired about the Administration's dispatch of 54 military
advisers and emergency military assistance to El Salvador, without formal
consultation with Congress under the War Powers Act or other arguably applicable
laws.

The Administration's argument that the laws did not apply in the case of El
Salvador brought charges from Senator Thomas F. Eagleton, the Missouri Democrat
who helped draft the War Powers Act in 1971, that Congress was being ''snookered
by the hair-splitting interpretations of the executive branch.'' This was not,
he argued in a speech on the Senate floor, a ''lawyer's quibble.'' Only with
full reporting and full consultation, he argued, could Congress act as a check
against ''foreign policy adventurism.''

Freshman Republican Senator Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire, like Mr.
Eagleton, said that he was not opposed in principle to aiding the Duarte
Government in El Salvador, but noted that ''consultation by increment does not
satisfy my notion of what constitutes legitimate advise and consent.''

Despite such expressions of concern, however, Congressional analysts believe
that President Reagan is likely to secure many of the legislative changes he is
seeking. ''Given our record so far,'' complained Democratic Senator Paul E.
Tsongas, of Massachusetts, ''this is not a Senate the White House will have to
worry about.''

At the same time, most legislators and analysts do not believe that a return to
the Imperial Presidency is likely or even possible. ''We don't have the votes to
block anything now,'' Senator Tsongas also observed. ''But pendulums swing both
ways.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Presidential and Senatorial seals

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A RADICAL BY INSTINCT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words


AT THE BARRICADES Forty Years on the Cutting Edge of History.  By Wilfred
Burchett.  Introduction by Harrison E. Salisbury.  328 pp. New York: Times
Books. $15.

By THOMAS POWERS

ON September 2, 1945, a battalion of journalists, 600 strong, trooped to the
battleship ''Missouri'' in Tokyo Bay to watch the formal ceremony of Japanese
surrender that marked the end of World War II. This was a big story. The
Australian reporter Wilfred Burchett, on assignment for the London Daily
Express, was also in Japan that day, but he was heading in the opposite
direction.  Carrying an umbrella to mark himself as a civilian, Mr. Burchett was
the only Westerner on a crowded, slow-moving train bound for Hiroshima. The trip
took 20 hours.

Mr. Burchett saw a great deal in Hiroshima, all of it vividly described in this
memoir of his 40-year career as a journalist and all of it unpleasant, but
nothing more so than the overcrowded wards of the city's only surviving
hospital. ''Stretched out on filthy mats on the floor of the first ward I
entered were a dozen or so people in various stages of physical disintegration.
...'' The doctors did not know what was killing them. These patients had not
been wounded, but they were wasting away. ''I was trained in the United
States,'' one of the doctors told Mr. Burchett. ''I believed in Western
civilization. I'm a Christian. But how can Christians do what you have done
here? Send, at least, some of your scientists who know what it is so that we can
stop this terrible sickness.''

Sheer good luck got the story past the censors. General Douglas MacArthur was
furious and unsuccessfully tried to expel Mr. Burchett from Japan. At a press
conference during that period in Tokyo, Mr.  Burchett listened with mounting
anger as an American scientist explained why there could be no ''residual
radiation'' in Hiroshima.  Finally Mr. Burchett got to his feet, described what
he had seen - patients dying weeks after the blast with no sign of a wound -and
demanded an explanation. ''I'm afraid you've fallen victim to Japanese
propaganda,'' said the scientist. Thereupon the briefing ended.

Mr. Burchett has always been firmly out of step. As a young man he twice tried
to join the Communist party. Both times he was rejected.  But he was an
instinctive radical, schooled by hard times during the depression years in
Australia. He found Marx and Lenin tough going, but he responded with an almost
childlike directness whenever he saw something that smacked of injustice. His
World War II experiences in China, Burma and India gave him an abiding dislike
of colonialism. A postwar tour in Berlin convinced him that responsibility for
the Cold War wasn't Russia's alone. (He stops just short of thinking it wasn't
Russia's at all.) He blames the West - and in particular the United States - for
the failures and delays at the Korean War armistice talks at Panmunjom and at
the Indochina peace talks held in Geneva in 1954. He rather enjoyed five austere
years as a correspondent in Moscow, and his sympathy was with the Vietnam-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas Powers is working on a book about strategic weapons.
ese - that is, the North Vietnamese and their allies in the South - from the
very beginning of the American war there in 1961. As early as November 1963, Mr.
Burchett infiltrated South Vietnam with the National Liberation Front, made his
way to the outskirts of Saigon on foot and by bicycle, watched bombers taking
off from Tan Son Nhut airbase and got so thoroughly stuck in an NLF tunnel that
his Vietnamese escorts had to tug from in front, push from behind and finally
destroy a tunnel wall in order to get him free. In short, Mr. Burchett did not
merely report from the other side; he was on it.

This is not a book to be read in an argumentative mood. Mr.  Burchett is a man
of quick sympathies, not of polemics. His uncommon honesty - he is honest most
of the time, if not quite all of the time - gives his memoirs a degree of
intellectual tension. He goes out of his way to mention a trip to Prague in the
spring of 1946, for example, when he spent a splendid evening,
enlivened by copious plum brandy, with a group of left-wing friends.  Later, he
confesses, most of them were unjustly shot as ''spies'' and ''traitors.'' He is
harshly critical of Mao Zedong's Great Cultural Revolution, denounces China's
betrayal of Vietnam in the latter stages of the war and can find no excuse
whatever for Peking's support of the unspeakably brutal Pol Pot regime in
Cambodia. But he is silent about Vietnam's equally heartless expulsion of the
primarily Chinese ''boat people'' - a policy that forced countless thousands of
men, women and children out to sea in frail craft to die. In my view such
omissions are a failing, not a felony; it is what Mr. Burchett has put into his
book that matters, not what he has left out.

The title of Mr. Burchett's autobiography, ''At the Barricades,'' is something
of a misnomer. The only barricade he saw, from either side, was in Paris in
1968. The great theme of Mr. Burchett's life has not
been revolution but the global struggle of East and West. The history of this
great conflict, still unresolved, has been largely recorded only by our side.
Official accounts from the other side have been sparse and all but unreadable.
The American defeat in Vietnam, in particular, has been written about in minute
detail, while the story of Hanoi's victory is still untold. Over the years Mr.
Burchett has talked at length with a great many people on the other side - Ho
Chi Minh, Zhou Enlai, Fidel Castro, Vo Nguyen Giap - and he has devoted his
life, often under conditions of peril and hardship, to understanding their point
of view. I wish I could report that he had the sensibility of a George Orwell,
or even wrote as well, but it appears we are to be given only one such man a
century. Mr. Burchett considers himself a reporter, and he behaves like one.
What he has to say can be found nowhere else. His book is a unique and valuable
contribution to the history of our time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPY STORIES

BYLINE: By ALAN CHEUSE; Alan Cheuse is the author of ''Candace & Other
Stories.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words


THE EMPIRE BLUES By Taylor Branch.  408 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $14.95.

SPECTRUM By David Wise.  370 pp. New York: The Viking Press. $13.95.

BRAVO ROMEO.  By Ralph Peters.  226 pp. New York: Richard Marek Publishers.
$11.95.

''Peacetime spy organizations usually develop their reputations when an empire's
going downhill,'' argues Henry Woodruff, an earnest ex-State Department boy
wonder who appears in Taylor Branch's lengthy but appealing first novel, ''The
Empire Blues.'' ''That's what happened with the British,'' Woodruff goes on to
say. ''And now that we're getting screwed up, the C.I.A.'s getting important
just like the British spies did. ... They are the devils or the saviors, and who
really knows? They are royalty.''

Mr. Branch's protagonist, David Howell, a charming and somewhat naive political
journalist who serves as Woodruff's confidant and sometime roommate, is
interested in the C.I.A. (and the F.B.I.) only because he's got a possible
magazine story cooking about their shenanigans down in Miami's Little Havana.
Howell's story begins in the District of Columbia during ''a time of transition,
with slippery coalitions and forgettable ideas,'' which is to say, not so long
ago. Howell presides over an entertaining and mercurial group of mostly
junior-level idea and power brokers that includes rival newspaper reporters, the
head of a national women's organization, the editors of a Washington magazine
(for which Howell writes) and several others.

Although members of this circle often switch partners in love and marriage and
shift intellectual positions, Howell emerges as the only one among them who
seriously attempts to change his life. Before long, he's jetting back and forth
between the nation's capital and southern Florida, where it's difficult without
a scorecard to tell the double and triple agents from the true believers, and
where cocaine at the dinner table flows as freely as salt. As Howell discovers
the relationship of the intelligent elite to the covert world of intelligence,
he establishes links between the members of his salon of privileged young
Washingtonians and his fanatical new friends such as Carlos Marana (a
professional assassin), Pepe Lopez (an anti-Castro guerrilla who also sells
insurance) and Manolo Valdez, known as ''mad dog''; he also inadvertently paves
the way for the purposeless murder with which Mr. Branch's trenchant comic
scenario is capped.

The mood of this novel is ultimately Garpish, with the optimism and innocence in
the face of dark forces which that implies. ''The Empire Blues'' depicts
peacetime spies and intellectuals at war with the status quo in a slow-cadenced
but admirable debut.

*

For years, journalist David Wise has wanted us to recognize that the undercover
emperors of the C.I.A. scarcely ever wear clothes.  Having written several
nonfiction studies of the C.I.A. (among them ''The American Police State'' and,
with Thomas B. Ross, ''The Espionage Establishment''), Mr. Wise has now turned
to the novel to continue his surveillance of the American ''intelligence
community.''

Despite its dramatic opening (in which C.I.A. agents masquerading as Mafiosi
arrange the theft of huge amounts of uranium-235 from a Pennsylvania processing
plant and pass most of it along to the Israelis), ''Spectrum'' is so crammed
with information about its author's favorite obsession that it takes a while for
the novel to pick up momentum. Everything you'll ever want to know about The
Company is included. Mr. Wise depicts the Agency's offices and research and
development laboratories in Langley, Va.; he describes the methods used to route
its worldwide electronic traffic, its manipulation of other Government agencies,
its construction of new identities for old assassins, and even reveals such
little budget items as airfare for transporting Manhattan call girls to Amman
and back for King Hussein.

The plot of ''Spectrum'' hinges on a rather unlikely situation. It seems that
C.I.A. head Townsend Black, who masterminded the uranium heist, in conjunction
with a few of his cronies has put the spy organization in a position to apply
nuclear blackmail to any U.S.  President who might turn soft on Communism or the
intelligence agency. But conscience-ridden London station chief Rob Travers,
along with a U.S. Senator who heads a subcommittee on ''intelligence,'' is
determined to reveal to the American public that Black has kept enough of the
enriched mineral to make the Agency a nuclear power.  Using his copious
knowledge of the C.I.A., Mr. Wise attempts to manipulate the reader into
accepting this rather improbable state of affairs. But while Rob Travers's
transformation from dedicated C.I.A. agent to informer is believable (he has
''learned to walk in the rain'' with his English girlfriend and now wants to
help rid the Agency of rotten apples), it's another thing to accept, without any
more evidence than some talk on Black's part about service to a ''higher
morality,'' the idea that the head of the C.I.A. will readily fire nuclear
missiles at the White House.

If Mr. Wise's intention was to create an extremely well-researched melodrama at
the level of a Frederick Forsyth production, then he should be pleased -but I
suspect that he intended more.

Ralph Peters, in his first book, ''Bravo Romeo,''puts what Graham Greene calls
''the human factor'' back into spy fiction. The protagonist of ''Bravo Romeo''
is Jack Thorne, a United States Army major doing undercover work in Europe - a
feeling man's spy who is a Vietnam veteran haunted by memories of the war and
the need to write poetry about it. He is the author of ''the Nam poems, those
first jagged lines written when it all started going uncontrollably to bits, and
then the strict verses, from the discipline of pain and hospitals - those lean
lines - and later the full blooms gathered from his sorrowful, divided,
brilliant homeland in the closing days of the war.'' The poet in Thorne lends a
distinct if sometimes oblique perspective to an otherwise conventional
narrative. The plot carries him from Greece to Germany to investigate the
bombing of an American PX. What he discovers is a cover-up in which a young
left-wing female medical student, after being molested by a right-wing police
officer, has been accused of the bombing and made the object of a nationwide
dragnet; later Thorne finds that the plot has international implications and
becomes involved in foiling the terrorists' more elaborate scheme.

It's difficult not to conclude from the little that we see of Thorne's poetry
that he's a better marksman and spy than artist. But the sensibility of this
esthetic undercover man makes him an arresting character. He is an appealing
rogue who, in his own words, has ''chowed down at the cosmic scum-trough'' and
still manages to retain his concern about innocent girls getting framed by the
state.  ''Bravo Romeo'' is worth reading, as much for the characterization of
Thorne as for its plot and action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Speaking Personally;
WHEN A PICTURE IS WORTH MORE THAN A THOUSAND WORDS

BYLINE: By DAN JACKSON; Dan Jackson lives in Toms River.

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 31,; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


DAN, my 5-year-old son, often does things that remind me of myself at that age.
Yesterday, I watched him play in the backyard with our neighbor's deaf son.

They were digging holes in the sandy dirt beneath a cluster of pine trees. Dan
makes roads that lead to the castles that Tommy builds. To complement this newly
constructed world of theirs, they invent their own version of sign language as
imaginatively and naturally as children do everywhere when confronted by a
wordless silence.

This amuses and saddens me, for it brings back memories of my own best friend,
Dennis. His deafness and our attempts to communicate bound us in a way in which
some students and teachers are bound when they finally reach that special,
almost Socratic relationship. Who's teaching and who's taught then matters less
than the beauty and clarity of a shared perception.

As I write, I have beside me a dozen photographs of Dennis and me at different
ages. The oldest, circa 1952, shows us smiling as preschoolers. It reminds me of
those antiquated, frozen proofs that became so wonderfully animated during
epiphanies in ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.''

This photograph holds us for a moment as we stand outside our apartment building
in the Bronx. Our sisters are sitting on the stoop behind us, holding packs of
baseball cards and blowing bubbles with the gum. We're squinting in what seems
like bright morning sunshine.

Same height. Same clothes. Same ridiculous grin. It looks like we're waiting to
go on a trip. If the scene could come to life, as the memory does in my mind,
then Alice would push Marie, who would cut her knee and cry all during the ride
to the shopping center.

The matching 4-by-5-inch photograph that concludes this flashback was taken on
the afternoon of the same day. This time, we're picnicking with our families.

In this picture, everyone is smiling as if it were the last day of school. We
are all in bathing suits, sitting on a crowded blanket and looking stuffed,
content and tired.

Marie's knee is bandaged. Our mothers, fathers and siblings are with us, except
for my brother, who joined the Marines at the outbreak of the Korean War.

The next images are framed a few years later. One has us proudly wearing our
first Little League uniforms in a pose that we copied from a Yankee yearbook
photograph of Yogi Berra and Whitey Ford.

It was taken at the end of a good season for us (11-3-2). I pitched and Dennis
caught. We used signs to set up pickoff plays, confuse the batters and insult
the umpires.

Another view captures us outside the fun house at Palisades Park.  We're getting
older. Maybe 10, maybe 11. It was about this time that we stopped signing
altogether. This was done to force a much-needed exercise on Dennis's voice, a
procedure that embarrassed or frightened certain people.

And it was at about this age that Dennis was transferred from St.  Joseph's
School for the Deaf into our parish's regular elementary classes as a
mainstreaming experiment. He fell back one year, and everyone else gained
immeasurably.

Dennis's cheerfulness, his athletic ability and his stubborn determination to
excel provided an example that was unmatched by any heroic biography that his
classmates might have read. He was admired in a neighborhood where admiration
was hard won and where no one was pitied.

The picture of us as street toughs is a fake. Half the punks in the leather
jackets turned out to be teachers, doctors or businessmen.

Dennis is the one with the ever-present stickball bat. He no longer wears the
hearing aids that are so conspicuous in the earlier photographs and which
triggered a half-hour fist fight that I had one night with another kid. He had
mocked Dennis for the way the hearing aids looked.

There are no photographic memories of Dennis and me for the next few years,
perhaps because we went to different high schools.  His speech got better and
better. He played varsity baseball, batted .333 and was elected to the Student
Council. I entered the seminary, and we didn't stay in touch as often.

Vietnam forced us further apart. My new-found pacifism hurt our friendship. We
didn't even speak the night we met at the wake of a former teammate, who was
killed at Khe Sanh. I tried once to teach Dennis what I thought I had learned
about war, but we ended up fighting.

By 1970, our early adulthood was ready to be portrayed in those glossy, formal
photographs taken by professionals. They show us in the rehearsed poses of young
people during ceremonious rites of passage.

Here's Dennis on the front page of an album with the rest of our wedding party.
Tuxedoed. Handsome. Nervous. We are as phony looking as the papier-mache
figurines atop the wedding cake. Everyone looks thirsty. Everyone looks out of
place.

Unfortunately, I don't have any pictures of us when, a few years later, I was
dressed for his wedding.  And there are lots of memories that haven't been
captured so neatly. For example, no one took our picture when we walked around
one night after seeing ''The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter,'' Carson McCullers's
heartbreaking story of deafness and friendship and suicide. And no one taped our
conversations, or got pictures of the pain, when we wept together after the
death of my first child or at the burial of a friend who was killed in an
automobile accident.

We have no triumphant candids of the wild anniversary stickball game that was
played in the rain, a game that emptied our old schoolyard and left just four
30-year-old suburbanites swinging from the heels while trying not only to roof a
Spalding over the top of a tenement but also to taste once more the sweet flavor
that belongs to the only real freedom that any of us can ever know.

I don't suppose that a camera can hold such feelings any better than a sentence.
Some things are forever like that: intangible as the winds, elusive as dreams.

But this last picture is a consolation. It's a remnant of the trip that my son
and I made last summer to visit Dennis in Washington, where he works for the
Government.

Using sign language, we asked a passerby to snap a shot of the three of us
standing beside the statue of Thomas Gallaudet. The statue is on the campus of
our nation's only college for deaf students.

I am smiling proudly. Dennis is hamming it up. He pretends to hold the diploma
that won't be awarded until this June.  Young Dan, whose own hearing is slightly
impaired, stands between us and pushes his hand confidently toward the camera.
He wants to bring this back home as a message to his friend, Tommy.

His fingers are shaped to abbreviate the words ''I love you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Television Week

BYLINE: By Eleanor Blau

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 22, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


Trio of Superstars

How many people will be watching when three opera superstars - Joan Sutherland,
Marilyn Horne and Luciano Pavarotti - appear together Monday at 8 P.M. at Avery
Fisher Hall?

Well, at least the number who would hear them in person if the singers repeated
their performance there every night for the next three years: some three
million. That is the whimsical calculation of John W. Mazzola, president of
Lincoln Center, who noted that of all the ''Live From Lincoln Center'' telecasts
by the Public Broadcasting Service - Monday's on Channel 13 will be the 32d -
''the smallest number of viewers we've reached was a little under three million.
Actually this concert will probably attract two or three times that number.''

The performance, which will feature the New York City Opera Orchestra under the
direction of Richard Bonynge, who is Miss Sutherland's husband, will be
televised live in the United States, Mexico and Canada, and the prospects of
reaching so many viewers is of course gratifying to the performers.

''When I sing on television, I feel I am giving a message to a multitude of
people who probably for the first time are seeing opera,'' said Mr. Pavarotti,
who by now has addressed uncounted multitudes - on talk shows, features or
commercials -since that first 1978 recital on ''Live from Lincoln Center,''
which was a springboard to his current prominence.

The 1978 concert inspired plans for three more live performances: a
Pavarotti-Sutherland concert - which took place early in 1979; a
Sutherland-Horne concert, which occurred in the fall of that year and finally,
now, all three together, singing opera solos, duets and trios - an event that
needed complicated arrangements among the farflung performers. Actually, in a
sort of preview to Monday's concert, the three artists offered the identical
program at Fisher Hall this past Friday, which marked their first appearance
together.  Channel 13 will rebroadcast Monday's event Saturday at 1 P.M.

Richard Thomas in Berlin

Richard Thomas, who will take over Christopher Reeve's role on Broadway Friday
as the disabled Vietnam veteran in ''Fifth of July,'' put down the crutches he
was learning to manipulate and reflected upon another role he will play two days
earlier - in a CBS movie called ''Berlin Tunnel 21,'' scheduled for Wednesday
from 8 to 11 P.M.

''They always get me in uniform,'' mused Mr. Thomas. ''I've been in the Civil
War ('The Red Badge of Courage'), the Vietnam war ('Cactus in the Snow') in
training at West Point ('The Silence') and World War I('All Quiet on the Western
Front'.)'' A notable exception, of course, was ''The Waltons,'' the television
series in which he was the focus of attention as John-Boy.

In ''Berlin Tunnel 21,'' the 29-year-old-actor plays an American Army lieutenant
stationed in Berlin in 1961 when the Berlin Wall is built, separating him from
his fiancee (played by Ute Christensen).  He and several other men decide to
build a tunnel to rescue loved ones from East Berlin. Also featured in the drama
are Horst Bucholz and Jose Ferrer. It was filmed on location by Igor Luther, the
cinematographer for Volker Schlondorff's movie ''The Tin Drum.''

Tall Tales

Billy the Kid has sometimes been portrayed as a glamorous character in movie
Westerns, but in fact, he shot most people in the back, and couldn't have been
such a great marksman because guns at the time weren't accurate at a distance of
more than 25 yards. Billy killed his first man at the age of 12 because the
fellow whistled at his mother, and did away with more than 20 others before he
himself was shot at the ripe age of 21.

Jesse James liked publicity so much he once left his own account of a robbery
for reporters to make sure they told it right. Bat Masterson became a
sportswriter in New York.

These are some of the tidbits of information reported in ''Legends of the West:
Truth & Tall Tales,'' a special to be shown Sunday from 7 to 8 P.M. on ABC.

Don Meredith, the host, is seen at the start arriving at a ghost town that,
presto, becomes populated circa 1870. Mr. Meredith chats about the West with
Jack Elam, who plays a sheriff. That's the structure of the presentation, which
includes film clips and photographs and Matthew Laborteaux of ''Little House on
the Prairie'' as guest star.

From A to Zzzzz

Getting to sleep is a serious problem for 60 million Americans, according to a
special program on Channel 5 Sunday at 8 P.M., but Tony Randall as host will
offer a fairly light-hearted framework for the program. That doesn't mean the
topic is treated frivolously, according to program spokesmen. Much of ''Sleep
from A to Zzzzz'' will consist of interviews that the program's producer and
writer, Pola Miller, conducted with sleep scientists in Chicago, Houston, Los
Angeles and New York. They will talk about various breakthroughs in sleep
research, and such topics as nightmares, drugs, sleep-inducing foods and
impotence.

There's a special rebroadcast, at 1:30 A.M., for insomniacs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN SPEAKING OUT ON EFFECTS OF DUTY IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By GEORGIA DULLEA

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words


In the spring of 1979, a siren sounded at a volunteer firehouse in West Islip,
L.I. Lynda Van Devanter, a guest in a nearby house, began to scream. The last
time she had heard that wailing noise she was an Army nurse in the central
highlands of South Vietnam. It was identical to the sound of the red-alert siren
that signaled rocket and mortar attacks over Pleiku.

''This is not Vietnam, this is Long Island,'' she told herself, over and over,
and yet she could not prevent herself from crawling combat-style out to the
living room to find out what had happened.

Miss Van Devanter had been back from Vietnam for eight years before her first
flashback. Until then she saw no connection between her war experiences and the
profound depression of her civilian life. She knew only that she was drinking
heavily and crying continually and had been unable to hold a job or form a close
relationship with a man.

Hid Vietnam Experience

''At one point I was on unemployment and food stamps and in therapy,'' Miss Van
Devanter recalled the other day. ''I never told my therapist I was in Vietnam.
That's how deeply I buried it.''

Mental health workers in the Veterans Administration's readjustment counseling
program for Vietnam veterans hear stories like this every day. The difference is
that women are now telling them. At a time when the Reagan Administration's
budget cutters are proposing that the program be scrapped, the women who served
in Vietnam are begining to ''come out of the closet,'' the counselors say, and
into the 91 storefront counseling centers around the country.

Of the estimated 193,000 women who served in the armed forces in the Vietnam
era, 7,465 of them were stationed in Vietnam, according to Defense Department
records. By far the largest number, 4,500, were members of the Army medical
corps. Typically, the women signing up at the veterans' counseling centers
nowadays are nurses.

Like the men who came for treatment when the first centers began operating in
1980, many of the women are said to be suffering from the disorder known as
delayed stress syndrome. They are experiencing the same feelings of depression,
anxiety, guilt and alienation, the same painful flashbacks.

For instance, a Texas nurse, Cissy Shellabarger, keeps reliving a scene in which
she is running toward a helicopter. The wounded are being brought off on
stretchers. A soldier's boot falls from one of the stretchers. She bends to pick
up the boot and finds a foot inside.

''I was in one of those 'M.A.S.H' hospitals and I know the kind of trauma these
nurses went through,'' said Shad Meshad, a former Army social work and
psychology officer, sitting at his desk in a Los Angeles V.A. hospital.

As a regional director of the counseling programs, Mr. Meshad has treated more
than 200 women who are Vietnam veterans. He dismisses the argument, advanced by
some, that their war stress was far less severe than that of men because they
did not see combat.

What they saw in those operating rooms was an unrelenting procession of ''the
bits and pieces of people,'' as he put it, arriving from distant battlefields.
What they felt, working 12-hour shifts in a kind of ''twilight zone'' removed
from the war, yet dealing with its effects, was a sense of unreality, of
helplessness and anger. Because they were women, he said, ''they could not go
out and shoot a gun or punch somebody in the nose or get drunk.''

'Were Made to Hold It In'

''A lot of them reacted real early,'' Mr. Meshad went on, ''but they were made
to hold it in, which is contrary to a woman's nature.  Women are usually pretty
much out front with their emotions. They weren't allowed this in Vietnam and
when they come home it was the same thing. Nobody wanted to hear their stories.
Until now, most of them have hidden the fact that they're vets.''

Why are they speaking out now, six years after the fall of Saigon?  Mr. Meshad
and other counselors give most of the credit to Miss Van Devanter.

Seven months ago, the 33-year-old former surgical nurse, who has a bachelor's
degree in psychology, went through the counseling program, a process known as
''walking through Vietnam.'' Since then she has visited scores of storefront
centers, training counselors there to deal with the special needs of women and
urging veterans in these communities, such as Martha Bell of Durham, N.C., and
Charlotte Capozoli Miller of Baltimore, to speak out.

But Miss Van Devanter has an even more ambitious mission: As head of the women's
project of the Vietnam Veterans of America, which is based in Washington and has
a membership of 6,000, she is trying to raise funds for a comprehensive study of
the issues unique to women who are veterans of Vietnam.

'Not a Popular Cause'

To date, she has received a $5,000 grant from the Playboy Foundation, and, she
said, ''I've been turned down by some of the best foundations in the country,
including the Ms. Foundation. We are just not a very popular cause.''

If the veterans of Vietnam are a ''forgotten minority,'' as they have been
called, the women who served as nurses there are the ''most forgotten'' in Miss
Van Devanter's view. She says the women complain that no women have been
included in studies on Agent Orange, the toxic herbicide that was used
extensively in the war as a defoliant, although some refuse to have children for
fear of birth defects. She said the women also complain that veterans' hospitals
are generally not equipped to treat their needs, for example, that the hospitals
have no obstetrical or gynecological clinics.

According to one study Miss Van Devanter cites, women have been slow to make use
of their G.I. Bill of Rights benefits because they were unaware they were
entitled to them.

In response, a Veterans Administration spokesman noted that, since only 2
percent of the country's 30 million veterans are women, it would be inefficient
for V.A. hospitals to maintain special clinics for them. When a woman requires
special services, he said, the hospital either refers her to a civilian hospital
or calls in a specialist.

Focus of Agent Orange Studies

The Agent Orange studies are being conducted on ''the population most likely to
have been exposed,'' the V.A. spokesman said, ''and it happens that they were
males.''

Still, Miss Van Devanter feels the V.A. ''lacks sensitivity'' to women's needs.
''When was the last time you saw an ad for the V.A. with a woman's face on it?''
she asked. ''There are none. And when the women came home from the war and tried
to join the veterans' groups they were told they couldn't be full-time members.
It was only a couple of years ago that the Supreme Court required the America
Legion and the V.F.W. to admit women as full-time members.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Charlotte Capozoli Miller Photo of Lynda Van
Devanter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. STUDY OF VETERANS TIES COMBAT STRAIN TO SEVERAL IMPAIRMENTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


Six years after the Vietnam War, the Government's principal study of the war's
effect on the lives of Vietnam combat veterans has concluded that they are
plagued by ''significantly more'' emotional, social, educational and job-related
problems than those who were not in battle.

The study, a $2 million, eight-year investigation conducted by a New York-based
research team for the Veterans Administration, confirmed the findings of earlier
inquiries suggesting that exposure to combat had a direct relationship to
current abuse of alcohol and drugs as well as to arrests, medical troubles and
stress-related emotional problems.

Veterans who are black or members of other minority groups were found to be
strikingly disadvantaged in postwar schooling, careers and earning power, and
with most veterans now in their mid-30's, the study concluded that most career
setbacks may be irrevocable.

Many Found to Be Strengthened

It also found, however, that many veterans had been strengthened by their
Vietnam experiences and were inclined to ''work through'' rather than suppress
difficult problems. A total of 2.8 million Americans are veterans of the war in
Vietnam, which began in the early 1960's and ended in April 1975, with the
capture of Saigon by Communist forces.

Conducted by the Center for Policy Research and the City University of New York,
the study recommended the extension of the G.I. Bill for veterans' educational
and training benefits and a range of programs to help veterans get jobs and cope
with medical and psychological problems.

The five volumes of the study are scheduled to be made public today and sent to
Congress. The study was begun in 1973 by a group of Vietnam veterans who
enlisted sociologists and psychologists and obtained private grants. Later, the
National Institute of Mental Health and the Veterans Administration assumed
sponsorship.

The study's conclusions were praised last night by Bob Muller, the executive
director of Vietnam Veterans of America, the nation's largest organization of
Vietnam veterans. ''It finally provides an absolutely clear mandate,'' he said.
''for programs to be developed to meet the continuing needs that Vietnam
veterans have that result directly from their military service.''

Mr. Muller, a longtime critic of the Veterans Administration's frequently stated
view that most Vietnam veterans had adjusted well to postwar life, said that on
the strength of the Government's own study, his organization would seek the
introduction of a new comprehensive bill with a package of $250 million in
veterans' benefits.

There was no immediate comment from the White House. A spokesman for the
Veterans Administration, would say only that the study's conclusions would be
compared with those of several other inquiries commissioned over the years.
''Unlike Mr. Muller, we have to wait until we see the study, and study it,''
said Stratton Appleman, a press officer for the Veterans Administration.

The Reagan Administration, as part of its package of budget-cutting proposals,
has sought to end a variety of veterans programs, including $12 million for 90
nationwide outreach centers where Vietnam veterans may obtain psychological
counseling and other help.  The centers were virtually the only feature to
survive Congressional action on a major veterans' bill in 1979.

Based in 1,340 Interviews

The study, the most comprehensive Government inquiry of its kind in the postwar
years, was based on interviews in 10 cities with 1,340 men. For maximum
statistical efficiency, half of those interviewed were veterans and half were
nonveterans. About half of the veterans had served in Vietnam.

Among other things, the study found the following:

- While 70 percent of the veterans went back to school after leaving military
service, only 20 percent of those who had served in Vietnam completed work for
college degrees and only 7 percent of the black veterans completed college.

- White-collar jobs were found by only 50 percent of the Vietnam veterans, while
54 percent of the veterans from the same era and 69 percent of the nonveterans
had found white-collar jobs.

- Unemployment was found to affect mainly black veterans. Black Vietnam veterans
had more than three times as much unemployment as white Vietnam veterans.
Moreover, black Vietnam veterans were found to have twice as much unemployment
as black veterans who did not serve in Vietnam.

- A total of 24 percent of the Vietnam veterans who had been involved in heavy
combat were later arrested for criminal offenses, while 10 percent of those with
light combat experience were later arrested. A total of 17 percent of other
veterans from the Vietnam-era were later arrested and 14 percent of the
nonveterans.

- The degree of alcoholism, drug abuse, medical and psychological problems
attributable to Vietnam combat was found to be ''statistically significant.''

''A decade after the peak years of the war,'' the study's authors declared,
''those who actually served in Vietnam are plagued by significantly more
problems than their peers.''

''Given that the average Vietnam veteran is now in his mid-30's,'' they added,
''it may well be that the damage to these men's civilian careers has been done
and much of it may be irrevocable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERALS MUST TAKE COURAGE AND FIGHT

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


To the Editor:

Many well-meaning commentators have discussed the liberal dilemma since last
November's election. All liberals have to do is to stop being Republicans and to
start being liberals again.

Lyndon Johnson was great - until he became a hawk. The Great Society was not
sabotaged by failure but by Vietnam. As long as liberals accept anti-Communism
as a central tenet of American policy rather than improving the conditions of
life for the people of the United States, they are doomed to utter futility.

Now that we are back to guns-and-butter economic arguments, liberals will have
to make a choice. Those who choose guns in a zerosum society will have sold out
their basic constituency.  The current sanctity of the military budget is
possible only with liberal acquiescence.

The problem with most liberals is that they are so terrified of being called
pinko that they have to get into uniform and salute the Pentagon to prove their
loy-alty. There were Jews in the concentration camps who imitated the SS. It did
not save them from the gas chamber. Only the courage to face things as they are
and fight for what is right will save the liberal cause.

Our problems are neither caused by Communism nor solved by anti-Communism. We
are in no condition to worry about external threats when the home front is a
total mess. The liberal prescription begins there.
JULES SIEGEL, New York, March 12, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, MARCH 23, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


Talks were suspended in Warsaw between the union leader Lech Walesa and Deputy
Prime Minister Mieczyslaw Rakowski without any resolution of the crisis caused
by a police attack on union members last week.  The official press agency said
the talks would resume on Wednesday.  Mr. Walesa said that the top leaders of
the union, known as Solidarity, would meet today to decide whether to call a
national protest strike. (Page A1, Column 4.)
Western influence in Saudi Arabia and its impact on Islamic traditions is
worrying the Saudis. The Western encroachment began with Saudi Arabia's
industrial development made possible by its huge oil revenues and the help of
foreign laborers and technicians. The Saudi boom has attracted 2.5 million
foreigners, almost half of the total native population of 5.5 million. (A1:3-5.)

Spain took new antiterrorist measures following the assassinations of two
colonels in northern Spain. There were indications that the Basque separatist
organization E.T.A. was trying to provoke the military into attempting another
coup. (A3:-4-6.)
National
Gains in the fight against inflation will be apparent late this year, Paul A.
Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, predicted.  It will then become
progressively easier to cut the inflation rate further, he said in a television
interview. Commenting on the Reagan economic program, he said it was probably
too much to expect that the Administration could meet its target of holding the
rise of consumer prices to 8.3 percent next year following the 11.1 percent it
has forecast for this year. ''If I think of a basic inflation rate of about 10
percent, I think 3 percent down would a highly optimistic projection,'' he said.
(A1:6.)
Resumption of the coal contract talks was near, the president of the United Mine
Workers, Sam Church, said, and he summoned the union's bargaining council to
Washington. Officials of the union have said that a strike by its 160,000
members was inevitable when their contract expires Friday morning. ''Hopefully,
we'll be at the table in the next 24 hours, Mr. Church said in a television
interview.  (A1:5.)
Vietnam combat veterans need help, according to the Government's principal study
of the war impact, which says that these veterans have ''significantly more''
emotional, social educational and jobrelated problems than people who were not
in battle. The $2 million, eight-year investigation for the Veterans
Administration confirmed earlier studies that suggested that participation in
the war had a direct relationship to alcoholism, drug use and stress-related
cases. (A1:1.)
American female veterans of Vietnam, mostly members of the Army medical corps,
are, like the American soldiers who served there, in need of delayed-stress
therapy, which may be cut off by President Reagan's budget cuts. Since 1980, 91
storefront counseling centers have been established under the Veterans
Administration's readjustment counseling program. The female veterans seeking
aid from them, like the former soldiers who came for treatment when the centers
first opened, are haunted by the war and have the same feelings of depression,
anxiety, guilt and alienation. (A1:2-3.)
Dwelling units increased in the United States at a rate more than double the
population growth from 1970 to 1980, reflecting a significant decline in
occupants per household, according to Census Bureau reports. There was a net
gain of almost 20 million housing units in the decade, a rise of 28.5 percent,
while the population increase was 11.4 percent, going to 226.5 million from
203.3 million. (A1:6.)
O. John Rogge died in a Manhattan hospital at the age of 77. He was a former
assistant United States attorney general who won indictments that broke up the
Huey Long machine in Louisiana. As a champion of civil rights, he also fought
the spread of Nazi influence in the United States. (B14:-4-5.)
Metropolitan
A fight over Bela Bartok's estate is near a climax in Manhattan Surrogate's
Court. The composer's son Peter, who has been representing himself in the case,
is seeking $1.3 milion in ''legal fees and expenses.'' Bela Bartok, whose 100th
birthday is being observed this week, died in Manhattan 35 years ago, leaving an
estate of less of $10,000. Today royalties from his compositions average
$100,000 a year. Peter and Bartok's wife are among the beneficiaries. The
litigation began when Peter charged that the estate was improperly administered.
(A1:1-3.)
A stamp increase became effective. The 15-cent first-class stamp now costs 18
cents. Parcel post rates were up 13 percent, and the 10-cent postcard now costs
12 cents. The General Post Office in Manhattan offered ''combination specials.''
Among them were five 18-cent stamps for 90 cents, or, for 20 cents, one 18-cent
stamp and two 1-cent stamps. The purple ''B'' stamps - interim 18-cent stamps -
cost $4.32 for a package of 24. The 18-cent Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell
commemorative stamp was also available. (B1:5-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ADM. JOHN S. MCCAINJR. IS DEAD; EX-COMMANDER OF PACIFIC FORCES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 301 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 23


Adm. John S. McCain Jr., a former commander in chief of Pacific forces in the
Vietnam War and a World War II hero, died yesterday of a heart attack while on a
military aircraft returning from Europe. He was 70 years old.

Admiral McCain, son of Adm. John S. McCain Sr., was raised and educated in
Washington. He graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1931. After a
two-year tour on the battleship Oklahoma, which was later sunk at Pearl Harbor,
he attended submarine school in New London, Conn.

In World War II, Admiral McCain commanded three different submarines. He was
awarded the Silver Star and the Bronze Star for heroism.

On Cruiser in Korean War

After the Korean War, in which he served as second in command of the heavy
cruiser St. Paul, he became chief of Congressional liaison for the Navy. He was
promoted to the rank of rear admiral in 1959 and became chief of information for
the Navy.

Admiral McCain went on to become an amphibious specialist and was named
commander of the Atlantic Amphibious Training Command. As vice admiral, he
commanded the Navy's Atlantic amphibious forces. He was a military
representative to the United Nations from 1965 to 1967.

He was appointed commander of Naval forces in Europe in 1967, and he was awarded
the Distinquished Service Medal for his command of American landing forces in
the crisis in the Dominican Republican that same year. In 1968 he was promoted
to commander in chief of Pacific forces. After he retired in 1972, Admiral
McCain moved to Washington.

He is survived by his wife, Roberta McCain of Washington; his sons, Capt. John
S. McCain 3d of Washington and Joe McCain of Bethesda, Md., and a daughter, Mrs.
Henry Morgan of Houston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Adm. John S. McCain Jr.

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE PANEL, 8-7, VOTES $5 MILLION IN EXTRA MILITARY AID TO EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


A House appropriations subcommittee voted 8 to 7 today to approve the Reagan
Administration's request for $5 million in military aid to El Salvador.

The vote came after an hour and a half of frequently emotional and partisan
debate in which Representative Jamie L. Whitten, Democrat of Mississippi and the
chairman of the full committee, and Representative Silvio O. Conte, Republican
of Massachusetts, argued that to disapprove the Administration's request would
undermine a new President and might be misinterpreted by other countries.

''To fail to support the President will send a wrong signal to Cuba and the
Soviet Union,'' said Mr. Conte, the ranking minority member.  Mr. Conte warned,
however, that he would not support additional requests for military aid to El
Salvador until the killers of three American nuns and a lay worker have been
caught and punished and the Salvadoran Government ''no longer permits its
security forces to kill innocent civilians.''

Archbishop's Murder Marked

In El Salvador, leftist guerrillas observed a 24-hour cease-fire to mark the
first anniversary of the slaying of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero. (Page A3.)

The Administration waged an intensive last-minute campaign to win support for
its request to redirect $5 million in military aid El Salvador in this fiscal
year. The request was part of President Reagan's previous announcement that he
planned to spend an additional $25 million in military aid, $20 million of which
has already been authorized by Congress. The Senate Appropriations Committee
approved the $5 million request last week. No further Congressional action is
now required.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., anxious about the House subcommittee
vote, telephoned several subcommittee members, including Mr. Conte, last night
and this morning to seek their support.

''I didn't make up my mind until I was on my way over to the committee,'' said
Mr. Conte, who added that his constituents were overwhelmingly opposed to the
military aid. ''But this is the first foreign policy issue that the
Administration has had out of the box.''

The State Department, in part to allay Congressional charges that the
Administration was overemphasizing the military aspect of the conflict in El
Salvador, also announced today, as expected, that it would seek an additional
$63.5 million in economic aid for that nation this year.

The increase would bring the total economic assistance provided by the United
States this year to $126.5 million, which is almost double what President Carter
had sought and is triple the amount of military aid.

The subcommittee, which met as the State Department was announcing the economic
aid package, rejected a proposal to delay action on the request and another
largely symbolic proposal to bar the use of any of the $5 million for military
training in El Salvador.

Comparison to Vietnam

The vote came after Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland and
chairman of the subcommittee, urged his colleagues to defeat the resolution,
comparing the United States involvement in El Salvador to its entanglement in
Vietnam.

''We're voting on a Gulf of Tonkin resolution to legitimize United States
intervention,'' Mr. Long charged. ''I think we ought to know the seriousness of
what we're going to do.''

Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of New York, disagreed with the analogy,
defending the military request as ''prudent and responsible.''

Democrats challenged the ''domino theory'' articulated by Secretary of State
Haig in recent hearings. Representative Matthew F. McHugh, Democrat of New York,
said it was ''nonsense'' to define the struggle in El Salvador as a
''confrontation between East and West, or the Soviet Union and the United
States.''

Mr. Whitten and Representative Charles Wilson of Texas were the only Democrats
to join with the subcommittee's six Republicans, thus giving President Reagan
his narrow victory.

''It's awfully hard to beat the President,'' Mr. Long said as he emerged from
the committee room.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Salvadorans praying

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROTESTS ON SALVADOR ARE STAGED ACROSS U.S.

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


Demonstrations, hunger strikes and candle-light vigils across the country
yesterday protested the increasing United States military involvment in El
Salvador.

The United States recently sent 54 military advisers to El Salvador, and
military aid has been increased to $25 million. Many of yesterday's protesters
drew parallels with the early United States involvement in Vietnam.

''What we're hearing now is the language of the Vietnam War - rural
pacification, wiping out a village in order to eliminate guerrillas,'' Barbara
Ehrenreich, a writer on feminist issues, told a crowd of several hundred
students at an outdoor rally at Columbia University. She said she last apeared
at a Columbia protest rally in May 1968.

'Made a Difference'

''What we did in 1968 and 1970 made a difference,'' said Sally Guttmacher, a
Columbia professor. She urged the students to ''read about El Salvador, organize
teach-ins, and work with the community.''

In an informal roundup, professors and students from universities around the
country said yesterday that the protests against American involvement in El
Salvador appeared to be the beginning of a movement and not what several called
the ''isolated, short-lived'' campus protests on such issues as American
investment in South Africa and nuclear power.

''It's surprising,'' said Chadwick Alger, a political science professor at Ohio
State University who is a member of the facultystaff committee on El Salvador,
by telephone from Columbus yesterday. ''This has not been a period of great
activism. But the events in El Salvador are pulling people out of their
lethargy.''

Protest activities began Sunday at Ohio State with an ecumenical service,
daylong workshops and a fast. Yesterday there was a noon rally at the Ohio state
capitol that was attended by 350 people, half of them students, organizers said.


Committee Organizes Protests

Most of yesterday's demonstrations were coordinated by the Committee in
Solidarity With the People of El Salvador. The committee grew out of
church-organized conferences in Los Angeles and Washington last October. The
committee has its national headquarters in Washington, and its funds come from
private donations.

A spokesman for the committee said that there were chapters in ''more than 100
cities'' and that new chapters were opened last week in Baton Rouge, La.;
Missoula, Mont., and Honolulu.

Yesterday's demonstrations were organized to mark the first anniversary of the
assassination of the Archbishop Oscar A. Romero of San Salvador. The Archbishop
was an outspoken critic of the Salvadoran Government who had, in a letter to
President Carter, urged the United States not to send military aid to El
Salvador.

Some protest activities began last Saturday. More than 3,000 people participated
in a march in Boston. In New York, a workshop at the New School for Social
Research was attended by more than 1,500 people, organizers said.

Yesterday in Ann Arbor, Mich., a group of 500 marched from the University of
Michigan campus to the Federal Building. They also prepared to hold a memorial
service to write letters to leaders in Washington, then carry them to the post
office in a candle-light procession.

Beth Kaimowitz, a junior at the University of Michigan who helped organize the
protest, said the demonstrators were ''only about half students.''

''Many were my mother's age,'' Miss Kaimowitz said, adding that in 1965, when
she was 4 years old, she ''marched'' in Washington on her father's shoulders to
protest United States involvment in Vietnam.

In Chicago, 13 persons from the Chicago Religious Task Force on El Salvador
occupied the offices of Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois. Among
their demands were that the United States withdraw of all advisers and stop
military aid.

Yesterday afternoon in Manhattan a crowd estimated at 250 to 300 marched from
the Argentine Embassy to the Army and Marine Corps recruiting station at 42d
Street and Broadway. Walter Spencer, an organizer of the march, said the
Argentine Embassy had been chosen as the starting point ''because the Argentine
Government trains the second largest number of El Salvador's security forces.''

An elderly woman who declined to give her name said she had been on her way to
the Museum of Modern Art ''when I ran into this and they told me that it was a
protest against U.S. intervention in El Salvador, so I joined.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LOBSTER AND VANILLA AND OTHER RECIPES;
Homards Rotis a la Sauce Vanille (Roast lobsters with vanilla sauce)

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2680 words


5 tablespoons butter 2 tablespoons finely chopped shallots 1/4 cup dry white
wine 2 2-inch lengths plus one 1-inch length of vanilla bean 1/2 cup fish broth
(see recipe) 1 cup heavy cream Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 4 live
lobsters, 1 1/2 pounds each 1 pound spinach 1 large bunch watercress.

1. Preheat the oven to 525 degrees.  2. Put one tablespoon of the butter in a
saucepan and add the shallots. Cook briefly, stirring. Add the wine and the two
2-inch lengths of vanilla bean. Cook down, stirring, until the wine is almost
evaporated. Add the fish broth and cook down over high heat, stirring, until
reduced by half.

3. Add the cream and cook the mixture about two minutes, to about one cup. Split
the remaining piece of vanilla bean and add it.  4. Strain the sauce through a
fine sieve, pressing with the back of a wooden spoon or rubber spatula to
extract most of the juices from the solids. Discard the solids.

5. Return the sauce to a saucepan. Add salt and pepper and bring to the boil.
Remove from the heat and swirl in two tablespoons of butter.

6. Place the live lobsters close together in a casserole and place in the oven.
Bake 15 minutes.  7. Meanwhile, pick over the spinach to remove and discard any
tough stems or blemished leaves. Pick over the watercress to remove the leaves.
Discard the stems.

8. Heat the remaining two tablespoons of butter in a skillet and add the spinach
and watercress. Cook, stirring, until wilted.  9. Split the hot lobsters
lengthwise down the center. They will not be fully cooked at this point. Arrange
the halves split side up on a baking dish and return to the oven for about one
and one-half minutes.

10. Crack the claws and arrange them in another baking dish. Bake about two
minutes.  11. Remove the meat from the lobster tails. Spoon the spinach into the
center of a serving dish. Arrange the lobster tail meat over the spinach.
Arrange the cracked claws around in a symmetrical pattern.  Garnish, if desired,
with one lobster carcass split in half. Spoon some of the sauce over the lobster
tails and serve the rest on the side.

Yield: 4 to 8 servings.

Fumet de Poisson (Fish stock)

1 1/2 pounds meaty fish bones, preferably with head and tail on but with gills
removed 1/2 cup dry white wine 3 cups water 1/2 cup chopped onion 2 sprigs
parsley 1/2 cup chopped celery 1/2 bay leaf 1/4 teaspoon dried thyme 3
peppercorns Salt to taste 1/4 cup chopped green part of leeks, optional.

1. Combine all the ingredients in a large saucepan. Bring to the boil and simmer
20 minutes. Strain and discard the solids.  Yield: About 3 1/2 cups.  Note:
Leftover stock can be frozen.

Huitres Chaudes aux Blancs de Poireaux (Hot oysters with leeks)

18 oysters in the shell 2 leeks 4 tablespoons butter Salt and freshly ground
pepper to taste 2 teaspoons water 1/4 cup finely chopped shallots 1/4 cup red
wine vinegar 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons white wine.

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees.  2. Open the oysters, reserving their liquid
and half of the shells. Set the shells aside. Put the oysters and their liquid
in a saucepan.  3. Place the oyster shells on a baking dish and bake in the oven
10 minutes.  4. Cut off the ends of the leeks. Cut off and save for another use
the green part of the leeks. Cut the white part of the leeks crosswise into
two-inch lengths. Cut the leeks in half and then into quarters. Cut the lengths
of leeks into the finest possible julienne shreds. There should be about three
cups loosely packed.

5. Heat one tablespoon of the butter in a heavy saucepan. Add the leeks and salt
and pepper. Stir and add the water. Continue cooking and stirring about five
minutes or until the leeks are wilted and lose their raw taste. Set aside.

6. To make a beurre blanc, heat one tablespoon of butter in a saucepan and add
the shallots. Cook, stirring often, about one minute. Add the vinegar and cook
down totally. Add half a cup of the wine. Cook down, stirring often, until the
wine is almost but not totally evaporated.

7. Over low heat, beat in the remaining butter piece by piece and remove from
the heat. Stir in the leeks.  8. Heat the oysters and their liquor with the
remaining two tablespoons of wine. Cook briefly until the edges of the oysters
curl. Carefully transfer the oysters to a small platter. Cook the liquid down
over high heat to two tablepoons. Add this to the leek and butter sauce. Add the
oysters. Heat gently without boiling.

9. Spoon equal portions of the oyster mixture into the oyster shells. Use one
oyster per shell. Arrange them on a baking dish.  10. Place the oysters in the
oven and bake 30 seconds and serve.  Yield: 3 to 6 servings.

Salade de Homard aux Mangues et au Basilic (Lobster salad with mangoes and
basil)

2 poached lobsters, about 1 1/2 pounds each (see recipe) 1 two-inch length of
raw carrot, trimmed and scraped 1/2 fresh, ripe, unblemished mango 3 cups
loosely packed red leaf lettuce, cut or broken into large bite-size pieces 4
cups loosely packed curly chicory, cut or pulled into large bite-size pieces 4
cups loosely packed field lettuce, also known as corn salad 1/2 cup sauce salade
(see recipe) 1/2 cup cubed, skinless, cooked roast duck (see note) 1 teaspoon
finely chopped orange peel, white pith discarded 1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh
basil, if available.

1. Preheat the oven to 500 degrees.  2. Cook the lobsters and carefully remove
all the meat from the tail and claws. Cut the large pieces of meat into
bite-size pieces.  Set aside.

3. Cut the carrot into the thinnest possible lengthwise slices.  Drop the slices
into boiling water and cook one minute. Drain well.  Put the slices in a small,
heavy skillet.

4. Cut the mango into thin slices. Cut the slices into thin strips. There should
be about one-third cup. Set aside.  5. Put the leaf lettuce, chicory and field
lettuce in a large heavy ceramic bowl. Add all but three tablespoons of the
sauce salade.  Toss. Put the bowl in the oven and leave the door open. Let stand
one and one-half minutes.

6. Meanwhile, blend the lobster meat in a heavy saucepan with two tablespoons of
sauce salade. Put this in the oven and let stand two minutes with the oven door
open.

7. Add the remaining one tablespoon of sauce salade to the carrot slices. Heat
briefly until warm.  8. Arrange equal portions of the tossed salad leaves on
each of four warm serving plates. Arrange the pieces of lobster symmetrically
around the salad greens. Garnish the top of each serving with slices of carrot
and mango strips. Scatter the duck pieces over all. Dot the top of each serving
with one-quarter teaspoon of chopped orange peel and one-quarter teaspoon
chopped fresh basil.

Yield: 4 servings.  Note: Although roast duck can be used in this recipe, the
duck meat is actually cooked to order by Mr. Senderens. Use the legs and thighs
of a raw duck. Or you may use skinless, boneless pork. Cleanse them of all bone
and skin. Cut the meat into half-inch cubes or slightly smaller. Heat two
tablespoons of butter in a small skillet and add the duck meat. Add salt and
pepper. Cook, stirring often, so that the pieces cook evenly, about three to
four minutes.

Sauce Salade (Salad sauce)

2 tablespoons red wine vinegar Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 3
tablespoons olive oil 3 tablespoons peanut, vegetable or corn oil.

. Combine the vinegar, salt and pepper in a bowl and gradually beat in the oil
with a wire whisk.  Yield: About 1/2 cup.

Homards Poches (Poached lobsters)

4 quarts water 1/2 cup white vinegar 1/2 bay leaf 2 teaspoons peppercorns Salt
to taste 2 live lobsters, about 1 1/2 pounds each.

1. Combine the water, vinegar, bay leaf, peppercorns, salt and lobsters in a
kettle large enough to hold the lobsters comfortably.  Cover closely.

2. Bring to the boil over high heat. At the boiling point, let cook two minutes.
Drain immediately.  3. Cut the lobster crosswise in half at the point where the
tail meets the body.  Yield: 2 lobsters.

Pigeon aux Endives Confites (Squab with endive)

16 firm, unblemished endives, about 3 pounds 4 tablespoons butter Salt and
freshly ground pepper to taste 1/4 cup sugar 4 fresh cleaned squabs, about 1
pound each 1/2 cup water.

1. Trim off the ends of the endives and separate the leaves.  2. Bring enough
water to the boil to cover the endive leaves when they are added. Add the
endives and cover. Cook exactly four minutes and drain well.

3. Heat the butter in a large, heavy skillet and when it is very hot add the
endive. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and sugar. Cook over high heat, stirring and
shaking the skillet so that the endive cooks evenly all over. The liquid will
start to evaporate and the vegetable will become amber colored. Cook about 20
minutes or until the endives are caramel colored all over. Do not burn. Drain in
a colander.

4. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 525 degrees.  5. Cut off the wing tips and the
second wing joints of each squab.  Set these pieces aside.  6. Heat a heavy
skillet large enough to hold the squabs in one layer without crowding.  7. Add
the squabs and brown them on all sides, turning them often so that they brown
evenly. Add the wing tips and second wing joints.  Place in the oven and reduce
the oven heat to 425 degrees. Bake 15 minutes. The squabs will be slightly
undercooked. Transfer the squabs to a warm platter. Pour off the fat from the
skillet. Set the skillet aside.

8. Spoon equal portions of the endives on each of four hot plates.  9. Carefully
carve away the breast and leg meat from each side of the carcasses. Save the
carcasses. Arrange two squab halves on each bed of endive.

10. Chop the carcasses into small pieces with a heavy cleaver. Add these pieces
to the skillet and cook over moderately high heat until well browned. Add the
water and cook down to about one-quarter cup.  Pour the liquid over the squabs
and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Crepes de Riz (Chicken packages)

3/4 pound skinless, boneless chicken breast 1 cup peeled, cored, finely diced
apple 1/2 cup finely chopped onion 3 tablespoons butter 2 tablespoons curry
powder 1 tablespoon tomato paste Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste 3
rounds of rice paper (see note).

1. Put the chicken on a flat surface and cut it into very small cubes.  2. Add
the apple and onion and, using a very sharp, heavy knife, chop the mixture into
a fine mass.  3. Heat the butter in a heavy skillet and add the chicken mixture,
stirring to blend. Add the curry powder,tomato paste, salt and pepper, stirring
to blend well. Continue cooking, stirring contantly to prevent sticking on the
bottom. Cook five minutes and remove from the heat.

4. Turn the mixture out onto a flat platter and smooth it over. Let cool.  5.
Line a flat surface with a damp, thoroughly wrung-out clean cloth. Place one
round of rice paper on this. Cover with another damp cloth. Stack the remaining
pieces of rice paper and towels on top, ending with a damp cloth. Let stand
until rice paper rounds are softened.

6. Cut each round of rice paper into eight pie-shaped wedges of more or less
equal size.  7. Spoon about two teaspoons of the chicken mixture onto each
pieshaped wedge, placing it away from the point of each piece. Wrap the filling
neatly to enclose.

8. Brush the bottom of a skillet lightly with butter and add the filled
packages. Cook about 30 seconds on one side and turn. Cook about 30 seconds on
the second side and serve.

Yield: About 24 packages.  Note: Rice paper is widely used in the cooking of
Thailand and Vietnam. It can be purchased in many Oriental supermarkets and
groceries in Chinatown. The brand used recently in my kitchen was Erawan from
Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS MAIL HEAVY ON EL SALVADOR ISSUE

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


Key members of House and Senate foreign policy committees have been receiving
hundreds of letters a week opposing the Reagan Administration's decision to send
military aid to El Salvador and expressing concern that the United States might
become entangled there in a Vietnam-like war.

The mail, coupled with new public opinion polls, is beginning to have an impact
on Congressional opinion, according to legislators.  In a series of interviews,
several members of Congress said that the growing public skeptisism about the
direction of the Administration's policy on El Salvador accounted in part for
the closeness of a vote yesterday on shifting $5 million in funds for military
aid to the Salvadoran Government. The Administration's request was approved, 8
to 7, by a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee.

''I've never gotten so much reaction on any other issue,'' said Representative
Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, the subcommitttee chairman. ''People
literally stop me on the street and tell me that they support my efforts to stop
this involvement.''

Many in Poll Fear New Vietnam

''I've also gotten about 600 letters recently, and they're running 20 to 30 to 1
against military aid and advisers for El Salvador,'' said Representative Silvio
O. Conte, Republican of Massachusetts, who is the ranking minority member of the
House Appropriations Committee.

Similar concern was expressed in a Gallup poll released today.  According to the
poll, based on a random survey of 1,363 individuals interviewed on March 14 and
15, some two-thirds of the ''informed'' Americans surveyed feared that the
situation in El Salvador could develop into ''another Vietnam.''

By ''informed,'' the Gallup organization meant the 63 percent of those surveyed
who said they knew about the struggle in El Salvador and knew which side the
United States was supporting. That total included 19 percent who said that it
was ''very likely'' that the United States would become more deeply involved
over time and 21 percent who called deeper involvement ''fairly likely.'' Some
21 percent regarded such involvement as ''not very likely'' or ''not at all
likely.''

Of the 63 percent who knew of the struggle, 29 percent said that the United
States should stay out of El Salvador altogether and 28 percent recommended some
form of assistance. But of those supporting assistance, only 2 percent said that
they favored sending American troops to aid El Salvador.

Percy Getting 300 Letters a Week

In general, House members seem to have received more mail on El Salvador than
senators. However, aides to Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois and
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said that he has received
about 300 letters a week, three-quarters of them opposed to military aid.

In the House, chairmen of the relevant foreign policy and appropriations panels
reported being inundated with mail and expressions of concern from constituents.

Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of the House
Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Latin America, said that El Salvador was the
''heaviest issue around'' and that ''100 percent'' of his letters were against
the Administration's policy.  ''I feel certain that some form of conditions or
restrictions will be placed by the Foreign Affairs Committee on the military aid
package for El Salvador next fiscal year,'' Mr. Barnes said.

Representatives Stephen J. Solarz and Jonathan B. Bingham, Democrats of New
York, and Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, are now
circulating an amendment that would make military aid conditional on a
Presidential certification that the Salvadoran Government is making economic,
social, and political progress. They expect to offer their proposals next week.

Democrats Prepare an Alternative

''There are concerns here that, on one hand, the Administration has mishandled
El Salvador,'' Mr. Solarz said, ''but, on the other hand, that it is still
politically unwise to oppose President Reagan this early on this issue. We hope
our amendment will be acceptable to those who fear looking indifferent to
Soviet- and Cuban-sponsored insurgency in our hemisphere.''

Whether the Democrats will be able to agree to an alternative on El Salvador,
however, remains to be seen, for the party is deeply split on the issue. This,
too, is reflected in mail and constituent response.

''It would be great if we could find a Democratic consensus on El Salvador
somewhere between a gringo war and a Marxist takeover there,'' said
Representative Bill Alexander, Democrat of Arkansas, ''but I think we've only
got about a 50 percent chance of putting such an option together, and I'm an
optimist.''

Concerns about undermining President Reagan and his foreign policy led two key
Democrats - Representatives Jamie L. Whitten of Mississippi, chairman of the
House Appropriations Committee, and Charles Wilson of Texas - to vote in favor
of the $5 million in military aid for El Salvador.

''It's extremely dangerous to send a wrong signal to the world,'' warned House
Majority Leader Jim Wright of Texas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOW GOES UP 19.09, NOW AT 8-YEAR HIGH

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


The Dow Jones industrial average surged 19.09 points in a stunning late rally
yesterday to finish at 1,015.22, its highest level in more than eight years. The
stock market's most widely followed indicator thus established a foothold well
above the 1,000 level, a barrier that has often proved formidable.

The market, overcoming some early hesitation, moved broadly higher in active
trading, with advancing issues outpacing declines by slightly more than a 2-to-1
ratio. Over all, turnover on the Big Board fell to 56.3 million shares from
Tuesday's 66.4 million.

Yesterday's closing level was the highest since Jan. 23, 1973, when the market
finished at 1,018.66. The index's record was 1,051.70, reached two weeks prior
to that. Both of the earlier peaks were sparked by post-election enthusiasm
following President Nixon's reelection and the announcement of peace talks in
Vietnam.

Analysts have said in recent weeks that if the Dow could convincingly push
through its 1981 high of 1,004.69 on Jan. 6, the market might take off on a
prolonged rally. Investors appear to be responding to that hope.

''The market did not sell off significantly following Tuesday's close below
1,000,'' said William M. LeFevre of Purcell, Graham & Company. ''This encouraged
investors to take a longer-term bullish view. As a result, this triggered short
covering, as well as new commitments in large capitalization, institutional-type
stocks.''

Oil and Takeover Stocks Strong

Investor faith was also bolstered by continued strong performances in oil
issues, heavy trading in companies actively involved in takeover bids and
speculation over possible future acquisitions or mergers.

Standout performers, in a market displaying broad strength, ranged from oil,
chemical and paper, to such key blue chip issues as recently flagging I.B.M.,
which gained a healthy 1 7/8 to 64 1/8.

''The speculative game is working at the moment, so everyone wants to play it; a
lot of hot money is involved, looking for excitement, instant gratification and
short-term capital gains,'' said Michael Metz, a vice president at Oppenheimer &
Company. He added that ''the rash of takeovers has tended to dramatize the
undervaluation of a lot of basic industrial stocks, and because of this takeover
phase, a lot of people are watching to see where lightning will strike next.''

Amax, which lost 2 points on Tuesday after declaring that Standard Oil of
California's $4 billion bid for its stock was inadequate, vaulted 6 1/4, to 61
1/4. Kennecott, another takeover target, was ahead 1 1/2, to 55 1/4. Socal
climbed 1 7/8, to 42 1/4.

NLT Corporation, which has been the subject of recurring takeover rumors over
the past year, led the active list, climbing 3 1/4, to 32 3/4. Harnisch@feger, a
maker of industrial machinery, gained a hefty 3 3/8 to 21 1/4. Both companies
said separately that they knew of no explanation for the activity in their
stocks.

Oil issues dominated the most active list, with Standard Oil (Indiana) bounding
2 5/8 points, to 74 3/8; Atlantic Richfield rising 1, to 53 1/2, and Phillips
Petroleum edging up 3/4, to 48 3/4.

Elsewhere among oil stocks, Exxon gained 1 point, to 71 3/4, and Gulf was up
1/8, to 37 1/4. Conoco posted a gain of 2 1/2, to 56 1/2. The company announced
an oil discovery in Indonesia. Standard Oil (Ohio) slipped a point to 52 3/8.

Gas Discoveries

Apache Corporation was up 1 3/4, to 23 1/2. It announced gas discoveries in
South Dakota. Texas International gained 2 3/4, to 43, after signing a contract
for the sale of gas from a new field in West Virginia to the Columbia Gas
System. Columbia Gas was up 5/8, to 36 3/4.

Engelhard Minerals jumped 3 1/8 to 53. The company said it might spin off most
or all of its industrial operations to its shareholders.

The OKC Corp., a 6 1/8 loser Tuesday, continued on its downward tilt, off 2 3/8,
to 127 1/2. The company, which is in the process of liquidating, received
unfavorable comment in Barron's, the financial weekly.

The American Stock Exchange shared in yesterday's broad recovery as its market
value index rose 5.96 points, to 362.03. The average price per share was up 32
cents. Among Amex listings, Chrystal Oil rose 3, to 30 3/8. The company agreed
to a private placement of a large block of its common shares. Key
Pharmaceuticals gained 2 5/8, to 29 5/8, after declaring a 3-for-2 stock split.

In the over-the-counter market, Biotech Research Laboratories, rose 1 1/2 points
to 10 bid. The stock went public on Monday at 6 1/4. The Nasdaq compos@ite index
was up 1.61, to 209.61.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart of the Market Profile Chart of Rallies and
Declines of the Dow Jones

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG SAYS FUROR OVER BUSH'S ROLE SHOULD NOW END

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., breaking a 48-hour public silence,
said today that he wanted to put aside the issue of Vice President Bush's
appointment to the Administration's crisis management team and ''get on with the
substance and the formulation of American foreign policy.'' Appearing before a
Senate Appropriations subcommittee, Mr. Haig appeared

Excerpts from remarks, page A12.
to be seeking to appear nonchalant about the episode that has dominated talk in
Washington since Mr. Bush's appointment Tuesday and led to reports that Mr. Haig
was considering resignation over the seeming affront to his standing.

''I think enough has been said on this subject,'' Mr. Haig said to questions
from the senators about the issue, ''I think our problem is to get on with the
business of this country, for which the American people put Mr. Reagan in the
White House.''

All on Committee Show Up

The Secretary was testifying on the Administration's security assistance
requests for the next fiscal year, but his otherwise routine appearance became a
major news event because of the latest developments. The small room was jammed
with reporters, television lights and cameras. Every senator on the subcommittee
was present.

After the hearing Mr. Haig seemed jovial as he bantered with reporters. He said
articles in the press about the decline in his power reminded him of the
telegram sent by Mark Twain after the writer saw his obituary in print: ''The
reports of my death are greatly exaggerated.''

When he was asked if that meant he did not intend to resign, he replied, ''Well,
somebody said I looked 'Bushed' this morning, but I'm not sure.''

Called Upset and Concerned

Mr. Haig's aides had earlier described him as upset and concerned about the
appointment of Mr. Bush to head the crisis team, and Mr.  Haig publicly raised
questions about the decision when he testified before a House Foreign Affairs
subcommittee on Tuesday. Later that day the White House seemed to rebuke Mr.
Haig by going ahead with the Bush announcement.

Since then there has apparently been an effort to mollify him.  President Reagan
said yesterday that Mr. Haig remained his ''primary adviser on foreign affairs''
and Mr. Bush himself said he foresaw no problems in cooperating with Mr. Haig.

Mr. Haig said to reporters today that he had had ''lengthy discussions'' with
Mr. Reagan and ''we are of one mind on this subject.''

''Foreign policy is first and foremost the question of substance,'' he said.
''Now, from time to time, questions of form have an impact on that,'' he said.
''The question of form has been decided. The problem is to get on with the
subject of substance and that is what I intend to do.''

Several senators sought to discover the actual extent of the control Mr. Bush
would have over the running of foreign affairs.  Senator Daniel K. Inouye of
Hawaii, the ranking Democrat on the subcommittee, asked, for instance, if the
situation in El Salvador was ''a crisis.''

''Not in the broadest sense of the word,'' Mr. Haig said, adding that the
situation in El Salvador, as well as in such places as Poland, Afghanistan and
Chad, was ''tense'' rather than critical.

Concern Expressed on Poland

''These must be dealt with day to day by the apparatus that has been
constitutionally put in place to deal with them,'' Mr. Haig said. This
afternoon, for example, after a session of the National Security Council, which
is headed by the President, the White House issued a statement expressing
concern about Poland.

Mr. Haig was later asked by Mr. Inouye to define ''the existence of a crisis.''
He replied: ''I think a solution that requires the President's attention that is
of a very, very urgent and highly, highly important significance to the peace
and tranquility of our nation, might be termed a crisis.''

When Mr. Inouye asked if this meant the President would determine when there was
a crisis, Mr. Haig agreed, but added that ''I will be bringing him, if it is a
foreign policy issue, the information upon which he would make that judgment.''

Need for Closer Consultation

Mr. Haig said he would be having ''regular meetings'' with Mr.  Reagan, and one
aide said that as part of the discussions in recent days Mr. Haig and Mr. Reagan
agreed on the need for closer consultations, perhaps about two private sessions
a week.

Mr. Haig did not endorse the appointment of Mr. Bush to the crisis management
post or otherwise characterize the group. Earlier he indicated that he believed
the Secretary of State should be in charge of handling foreign policy crises.

He found, in the questions from the committee, considerable concern about an
expanding American role in El Salvador and about the Administration's plans to
sell enhanced equipment to Saudi Arabia for the 62 F-15's it has ordered from
the United States.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, sought to find out if the United
States would use direct military force against Cuba if the Cubans continued to
supply arms to the leftists in El Salvador, as the United States has charged.

Mr. Haig, who had said that the United States would go to the ''source'' of the
trouble and not repeat the experience of Vietnam, when the United States found
itself bogged down, replied that ''we're considering the full range of American
assets that can and should appropriately be applied to the problems.''

When Senator Leahy asked if that included military force, Mr. Haig refused a
direct answer, insisting that he did not want to go ''saber-rattling,'' but at
the same time did not want to rule anything out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alexander M. Haig Jr.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS BUILDUP: ALLIES HESITANT;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


Wending his way from committee to committee across Capitol Hill and through
television interviews and news conferences, Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger has sounded a constant alarm about ''aggressive Soviet activity
around the world'' as he has sought to justify the Reagan Administration's
proposals for higher military spending.

At the same time, Mr. Weinberger has renewed the contention that the United
States could not, and would not, bear by itself the burden for the common
defense of the non-Communist industrial nations. ''It is essential,'' he has
said repeatedly, ''that we develop a more rational 'division of labor,' under
which our NATO allies and Japan will be asked to join us in contributing more to
the common defense.''

Critical to the Administration's plan is the attitude of West Germany and the
Japan, an irony not lost on those who lived through World War II. The United
States, which once planned to reduce Germany and Japan to pastoral nations, now
wants them to assume a responsibility second only to America's for the
collective security of the non-Communist industrialized world.

The position of the West German and Japanese Governments, as expressed by
Defense Minister Hans Apel and Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ito during visits here
this week, is to agree with the Reagan Administration's assessment that there
has been a massive expansion of Soviet military power.

Bonn's 'Sober' Policy

But Mr. Apel and Mr. Ito were much less alarmist than President Reagan, Mr.
Weinberger and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  Mr. Apel told several
reporters over lunch yesterday that West Germany's policy ''tries to be sober.''
He said that Germans would not forget the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan,
but they would also not forget that the Soviet Union has economic problems.

Such an attitude has led West Germany and Japan to view the need for a Western
arms buildup with less urgency than the United States.  Instead, West Germany is
putting emphasis on negotiations for arms control, and Japan is emphasizing
economic aid. With those policies, West Germany and Japan are implicitly arguing
that their planned increases in military spending are sufficient and that
detente has been useful. Mr. Apel, for instance, asserted that detente has
prevented the Soviet Union from striking into Poland.

Those policies reflect pacifist attitudes in the West German and Japanese
public. Mr. Apel would not comment on a speech last weekend in which Richard V.
Allen, the President's national security adviser, suggested that pacifist
sentiments in Western Europe hindered progress on collective security. But he
said that many educators, religious leaders and young people in West Germany
were pacifists. A spokesman for Mr. Ito indicated pacifism was also a force in
Japan.

Americans Held Similar Views

Such attitudes in West Germany and Japan appear to be similar to those of many
Americans just after the war in Vietnam. Then a quiet debate started among
America's Soviet affairs specialists over the extent and intent of a continuing
Soviet expansion of military power.

That debate acquired a new character two years ago, when the Joint Chiefs of
Staff deliberately shifted attention from the proposed second nuclear arms
treaty to the Soviet arms buildup.

Mr. Apel told his luncheon guests that he wanted to see such a debate in West
Germany because many political leaders there were deeply worried about Soviet
military power but the younger generation could not see the danger. A spokesman
for Mr. Ito pointed to ''the concern of Japan and other countries that an
increased Soviet military presence is a threat to Asian stability.'' But many
younger Japanese, he conceded, did not yet share that view, despite the
beginnings of a defense debate there.

Although the attitudes of the postwar generations in West Germany and Japan
appear to be similar, they arose for opposite reasons.

'The Lesson of History'

Mr. Apel said that West Germany's ''younger generation has never learned the
lessons of history.'' He said that the postwar generation knew little about
Hitler and World War II. The postwar generation in Japan, on the other hand, is
keenly aware of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but is largely
ignorant of Japan's conduct of the war and events leading up to the bombing of
Pearl Harbor.

Contrary to a widely held belief that lack of familiarity with war lessens
resistance to it, the postwar generations in West Germany and Japan appear to be
restraining their leaders from increasing military strength.

Those attitudes, which governed much of what Mr. Apel and Mr. Ito had to say
here this week, are expected to influence much of what Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
and Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki will say when they come to Washington in May.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Keeping Us Honest

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 26


The purported State Department ''dissent paper'' on El Salvador, which was
masquerading as an official document, highlighted some peculiar aspects of the
way controversial information is being treated.

A number of people had seen it, smelled something fishy and decided to ignore it
before I stubbed my toe during a recent visit to Washington. It was only after I
commented on the paper in print, because it came to me in apparent good faith
from someone I have long known and found reliable and responsible in the past,
that I was able to learn more about what was involved.

First, I must say I still don't know the name of the author or authors. But I
have learned from ranking officials of the Carter Administration and others now
in Government that the writers obviously had access to official papers,
occasionally with fairly high classification. The information presented was
based on these official papers. The fraud was the pretense that the dissent had
been circulated through official channels with names attached, and deleted only
when the report was leaked.

There is now an official mechanism for people in Government to present arguments
against an established policy they consider misguided. This is healthy, one of
the lessons drawn from the traumas of Vietnam and Watergate.

But why then would dissenters claim false official status for their report?
Presumably, it was because they feared for their jobs if they used proper
channels, or supposed (wrongly as far as I'm concerned) that the information
would be brushed aside without the claim. This is unhealthy.

The problem is compounded now by charges from inside and outside Government that
Communists have seduced the American news media.  Secretary of State Haig has
said that ''Communist countries are orchestrating an intensive disinformation
campaign to cover their intervention while discrediting the Salvadoran
Government and American support for that Government.'' The Washington Post's
Stephen Rosenfeld challenged him on the implication, amplified by some
commentators and novelists, that U.S. editors and correspondents have become
hopeless dupes of the Soviet K.G.B.

That, according to Rosenfeld, provoked a State Department reply that Haig
considers the American press corps ''the best in the world'' and doesn't think
the K.G.B. has ''any influence at all over any journalist or over any sector of
the American press.''

Fine. We do make mistakes, and the more we can rely on our own Government to be
direct and truthful with its information, the better chance we have of avoiding
them.

But there is a background of suspicion and innuendo building up in these charges
of ''disinformation,'' an old intelligence term meaning deliberately misleading
the public. It may be just the political game, but it serves to weaken the
cohesion of American opinion and in the long run can only revive that old
credibility gap that undid Presidents Johnson and Nixon.

What was it, then, when Jeane Kirkpatrick, now chief U.S. delegate to the United
Nations, said last December that the four American missionaries killed in El
Salvador ''were not just nuns ... they were political activists on behalf of the
Frente,'' the guerrilla movement? She has not offered any evidence. Of course,
she wasn't in Government then, and now that she speaks for the U.S. we can hope
that she will do so with more care and precision.

Two of the missionaries were Maryknoll nuns. Donald MacInnes, a spokesman for
Maryknoll, said the order forbade people it sends abroad to engage in politics.
But Reed Irvine, who edits a publication called Accuracy in Media, said in his
Jan. 1 issue that the order was ''well-known for championing 'liberation
theology,' '' and he suggests that Maryknoll has Marxist ties.

Mr. Irvine sent me the issue because it also tells about the fake dissent
document on Salvador. I wish I had seen it earlier. The publication, devoted to
exposing what it considers Communist influence in the American press, hardly
inspires confidence in its own accuracy and precision, however, when it speaks
of the ''extraordinary assistance the American media are giving to the Communist
effort to destabilize countries in Latin America that are friendly to the United
States.''

He goes further. Attacking my colleague Anthony Lewis for making the same
mistake I did with the supposed dissent paper, he quotes a Czech intelligence
defector as saying Communist ''black propaganda ... puts American journalists
into the position of being the unaware messengers of the Big Lie.'' But in this
case, Mr. Irvine continues, the forgery was ''too obvious to permit the
conclusion that the journalists who publicized it were simply 'unaware
messengers.' ''

Both sides in this ideological battle using and abusing the press do harm to the
real American interest of an enlightened opinion. I say yes, please keep us
honest, but by dealing with us honestly.  Otherwise, the big losers in this dark
game will be the American public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR: WHO'S WHO, AND WHAT;
by Bennett Poor

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 780 words


The tragedy of El Salvador is not as complicated as we are led to believe.

We are constantly bombarded by a panoply of words that are difficult for the
public in the United States to apply to its own history: oligarchy, junta,
military Government, downtrodden peasants, Communist guerrillas.

In forming opinions, it is paramount that the thinking citizen understand the
emotional content of these terms, and the realities.  In El Salvador, the
oligarchy - that is, the landed aristocracy - is not a clandestine group of
Simon Legrees who are seeking to undermine every advance in human rights since
the signing of the Magna Carta. Rather, it is a class of educated, hard-working,
taxpaying ranchers and businessmen who, either by effort or by inheritance, have
had to assume the responsibility of the preservation of capital and the economic
stability required to survive during dozens of changes of government in this
century.

The military, so frequently depicted as brutal sycophants of the wealthy,
represents not only the sole force standing between order and anarchy but also
the only continuous channel of social advancement available to the lower
classes. The military can take them from rural poverty to urban or national
socio-economic equality. Because of its peasant origins, the military should be
recognized for its dedication to the Government, especially through the drastic
changes in direction of the national leadership in the last 18 months.

The vast majority of the peasant guerrillas, whether philosophically Marxist or
just plain frustrated with the social structure, is guided by a passion for
change but does not propose an alternate governmental structure.

The peasant guerrillas are not, as some superpatriots in the United States would
have us think, a band of anarchist cut-throats blindly following an alien
ideology to a lemming's end. Certainly they, as well as the military defenders
of the Government, are equally dead after a spray of machine-gun bullets.
Martyrdom and sacrifice have not been assigned any color in the political
spectrum.

Were there no outside influences or lures of glory, the intrinsically Salvadoran
struggle would be just that -Salvadoran. It would be another of the countless
tragic wars of conservation or liberation (depending on one's point of view)
that have recurred in Latin America, with nothing more than legal residency in
palm-framed stucco mansions hanging in the balance. That this is not the case
involves us all.

Ten thousand unarmed and untrained young men and women from all parts of El
Salvador did not become an effective revolutionary force without help. Their
training, advanced weapons, and modern communications equipment certainly did
not come from the Salvadoran Army, which obviously has provided no assistance
even though its ethnic composition is similar to that of the insurgent forces.

The only political force in the region with the motive and the wherewithal to
sponsor the Salvadoran revolution is Cuba.  Surely Guatemala and Honduras have
no desire to see a well-armed Marxist regime next to their common and
unpatrollable borders.  Nicaragua, for geographic and self-serving reasons, is
obviously the supply officer for the ''boot camp'' of Salvadoran trainees next
door. Despite Cuban and Nicaraguan protests of innocence, both countries suffer
from the classic problem that results from a successful armed insurrection:
After the revolution, how do you control the revolutionaries?

President Reagan's decision to support the Government of El Salvador is,
perforce, the correct one when the alternative is considered.

To abandon the gentle, warm, industrious Salvadoran people, who in 1822 asked
statehood in this country, to the vagaries of a Marxist Government founded and
financed by kidnappings, extortion, and murder would be inexplicable to our
children as well as theirs.

To compare the United States' stance in El Salvador to its involvement in
Vietnam is no more germane than to compare it to the arrival of personnel and
equipment in support of moral right in Little Rock, Ark., in 1957.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bennett Poor, a United States citizen, represented El Salvador as vice consul in
this country from 1966 to 1976. He serves several major corporations as a
specialist in Central American affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMING THE AFGHANS: U.S. WOULD FACE BIG OBSTACLES;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 841 words


President Reagan's hint that the United States might begin to supply arms to the
Afghan rebels raises two basic questions: How would the arms be delivered, and
to whom?

The arms, if the rebels could obtain them, would help them against the expansion
and rearmament of the Soviet helicopter formations. But even if Pakistan, the
obvious base for an arms delivery program, was willing to allow weapons to pass
its frontiers - which could invite Russian retaliation - the difficulties would
be serious.

In the last four months the Soviet forces have ''seeded'' the mountain tracks
leading into Afghanistan with small antipersonnel mines camouflaged to be
indistinguishable from lumps of earth or small rocks.

10 Guerrilla Groups in Afghanistan

All the main roads into Afghanistan are guarded by roadblocks, and the entire
frontier area is swept daily by fighter bombers and helicopter gunships.

Who would receive the arms? Ten guerrilla groups are operating throughout
Afghanistan. Some are nationalists, others are ethnic and regional. A third
group is composed of small fundamentalist Moslem parties. Efforts to establish a
united front have failed so far, and analysts have reported frequent clashes
between members of various insurgent groups.

The analysts believe that the Soviet high command feels it must maintain the
present level of 85,000 troops in the country. An analyst with long experience
in Afghanistan said that despite the fact that nowhere is there any major
fighting and despite the insurgents' lack of arms, the rebels ''are doing enough
to keep the Russians in a perpetual state of alert.''

The Afghan insurgency, as seen by Western analysts, follows the classic pattern
of guerrilla conflicts: raids on outposts, sentries and roadblocks; harassment
of supply columns, and death for Afghans who collaborate with the Russians.

Fighting Is Intermittent

The fighting ebbs in one region only to flare in another. In January and
February it intensified in the northern and central provinces of Fariab,
Samangan, Bamian, Parwan and Kapisa and, unexpectedly for the Russians, in
Helmand and Farah in the southwest.

Kunar Province, northeast of Kabul, the Afghan capital, has been the scene of
intermittent fighting since the Russsians intervened in late December 1979. The
fighting there in the first 10 weeks of this year was heavy by present standards
in Afghanistan.

Almost continuous fighting has been reported in Charikar and Jabal us-Siraj,
north of Kabul. Villagers in the region have been warned to stop giving shelter
to insurgents or risk the destruction of their villages by air attack.

The road from Kandahar to Kabul was controlled by the insurgents for a time.
They reportedly held a large part of @Fariab Province and a valley south of
Mazar-i-Sharif until the Russians diverted helicopter and infantry forces to the
area to drive the insurgents into the hills.

Incidents in Kabul

Kabul, though the site of Soviet headquarters in Afghanistan, is not free of
incidents, despite a curfew, frequent patrols by Government forces and security
checks on all vehicles. In some cases insurgents have broken into and looted
shops owned by Hindu and Sikh merchants in the Jadi Nadir Pushtun market area.

The Government of President Babrak Karmal has been unsuccessful in its intensive
efforts to recruit for the Afghan Army, which is now less than half its
pre-intervention strength of 80,000. The Government has also failed to halt
desertion. Many of the insurgents' officers are defectors from the regular army,
and, despite Soviet watchfulness, the defection of entire squads is still
common.

Analysts caution against equating the rebels' situation in Afghanistan now with
that of the Communist insurgents in Vietnam a decade ago. They emphasize that
the Afghan insurgents are not united politically, that there is no central
military command or general staff and that, most important, there is virtually
no movement of modern weapons into the country from a foreign source. All these
conditions existed in Vietnam, the analysts point out.

The insurgents still lack two types of weapons that would enable them to cope
with Soviet helicopters and armored vehicles: antitank and antiaircraft guided
missiles.

Russians Seek to Expand Role

The Russians, meanwhile, are engaged in a major effort to expand their influence
on Afghanistan's economy and society.  Three technical schools staffed by
Russian instructors have been established. Technical training and driving
education have been offered to 850 Afghan youths. The Soviet Union has agreed to
provide experts on agriculture, health, transportation, scientific development
and cultural affairs. A five-year agreement on the exchange of goods between the
two countries is under negotiation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of firearms

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WHY SHOULDN'T CALIFORNIA HAVE A CANNES FESTIVAL?

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 27


Thirty-four independent American movie companies threw down a gauntlet to the
Cannes Film Festival this week as the first American Film Market opened here.

There are no topless starlets, no glittering prizes, not even a Mediterranean
Sea, but the heart of the Cannes Festival - the buying and selling of movies -
has been duplicated on three floors of a hotel in Westwood. Nearly 1,100 foreign
buyers representing 585 companies from 55 countries have come to view, finger
and haggle over the merchandise - some 150 American movies valued at $450
million.

Unlike major studios that have their own distribution outlets in most foreign
countries, independent production companies sell their films abroad territory by
territory. The American Film Marketing Association was formed after the Cannes
Festival last year by a group of companies angry at what they regarded as the
poor service, disorganization, and excessive costs of doing business at Cannes.


Independents More Important

Why was the American Film Market formed now rather than 5 or 10 years ago?
''Timing'' is the answer given by the association's executive director, B.H.
(Buddy) Goldberg. ''The independent producers have become more important in the
last few years,'' he said, ''partly because they're making bigger and more
important films, like 'Tribute' and 'Blow-Out,' Brian De Palma's new movie
starring John Travolta.'' According to Mr. Goldberg, a series of sales meetings
held by Lorimar at a Southern California resort in 1977 and again in 1979 showed
that foreign distributors would be willing to come to Hollywood to look at
films. In addition, the favorable currency exchange makes their trip ''a
bargain.''

The films on sale at the market include Lorimar's ''The Postman Always Rings
Twice,'' starring Jack Nicholson, and CBS Film's ''Back Roads,'' starring Sally
Field. They also include Miracle Films' ''Insatiable,'' a pornographic movie
starring Marilyn Chambers, and many horror films, including Carolco's ''First
Blood'' and ''Incubus''; Avco Embassy's ''Fear No Evil'' and ''The Howling'';
Manson International's ''Scream for Vengeance,'' and ''Dawn of the Mummy,'' from
Goldfarb Distributors.

Alex Massis of Isram Films, who is selling 13 pictures, including ''Loose
Shoes,'' a comedy starring Bill Murray from the Mel Brooks Company, and ''Night
Flowers'' about two Vietnam veterans who pillage, rape and murder, was jubilant
yesterday. ''I've made more agreements in the first two and a half days here
than I did in the first five days at Cannes last year,'' he said. ''I can tell
you Cannes lost my business. It looks like we'll sell all the pictures here.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Massis will still go to Cannes in May, as will almost all the
sponsors of the American Film Market. But they say they will not spend as much
there. ''I'll go to Cannes for the revenge,'' Mr. Massis said. ''I shan't take
prints, shan't take cassettes and won't do any advertising. At Cannes, we are
abused by the organizers. There is no carpet in your room, no air-conditioning,
a door that doesn't close, a telephone that doesn't work. And no security, so
there is a parade of 500 people going back and forth stealing all your press
books.''

The Buses Run on Time

Both buyers and sellers are praising the American Film Market's organization,
with its on-time shuttle buses to screenings at 12 Westwood theaters, and its
tight security. However, in a babble of languages in the hotel's halls, buyers
seemed to agree that the prices being asked for films were high. Some said they
were inclined to wait for Cannes to see if the prices would come down.

Mounting the 10-day market has cost about $1 million, with 38 companies paying
$2,500 each to join the association and 34 of them paying an additional $12,500
or $22,500, depending on the size of the company, to exhibit. Organizers have
attempted to avoid the lavish competitiveness of Cannes by having all suites
determined by a draw and by insisting that no company can invite more than 25
people to any event unless it invites the entire market. There will be several
big market-sponsored parties that take advantage of the fact that Hollywood is
where movie stars live.

When the market was being planned last year, the organizers anticipated a
maximum of 200 foreign companies and 600 people.  Gesturing toward the chaos in
the halls, Mr. Goldberg said, ''This is beyond our wildest dreams.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jack Nicholson

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE STUDY ASSAILS HERBICIDE ACTIONS

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


An unpublished staff report of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations accuses the Veterans Administration, the Department of Defense,
the Dow Chemical Company and a panel set up by President Carter of failures in
dealing with the controversy over the defoliant Agent Orange.

A spokesman for the subcommittee said that the report had been prepared by the
staff that existed before last November's election and that, without new
hearings, it could not be released now by the subcommittee, which has eight new
members. The report was written after the election.

Agent Orange was the code name for a defoliant sprayed by the Air Force on
Vietnamese jungles and farmland to reduce hiding places and food for the enemy.
It was a mixture of two herbicides, 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D. Both herbicides have been
suspected of causing health problems, although nothing conclusive has been
proved.

Complaints From Veterans

In 1978, Vietnam veterans, most of them former soldiers or marines, began to
complain of symptoms that they suspected were a delayed reaction to their
exposure to Agent Orange.

In the last few years, hundreds of Agent Orange lawsuits have been filed, many
of them by men, or the families of men, whose claims had been denied by the
Veterans Administration. The agency has contended that medical awards cannot be
made unless claimants demonstrate beyond doubt they were harmed by the
substance.

According to the subcommittee report, the Veterans Administration relied on
''inaccurate and incomplete information'' when it denied Agent Orange claims.
Veterans who sought advice from Veterans Administration facilities were
''greeted with V.A. personnel who, in many cases, did not even know what Agent
Orange was'' and ''were often hostile,'' the report says.

The Veterans Administration is accused of denying the claims of veterans ''while
declining to specify what level of scientific certainty will be required to
establish the connection between Agent Orange exposure and ill health effects.''


Biggest Issue in 15 Years

A spokesman for the agency said, ''We have not seen a copy of the report and are
not in a position to comment on it.'' The spokesman added that the Agent Orange
issue had ''brought forth more research energy and staff attention than any
other issue'' that the agency had confronted in the last 15 years.

As for the Department of Defense, the report says that in the late 1960's, after
Agent Orange had been used for several years, the department ''refused in the
face of new, verified scientific data, to acknowledge that there could be a
problem with Agent Orange,'' that it ''took no precautions to prevent exposure
of servicemen,'' and that it permitted spraying of Agent Orange in Vietnam in an
amount ''14 times greater than that applied domestically.''

The report also accuses the department of continuing to use Agent Orange widely
''despite a White House directive to phase out defoliant operations.''

'Thought It Was Safe'

A Pentagon spokesman said he had not seen the report but conceded that the
report was probably accurate in saying that the military had taken no
precautions to prevent the exposure of servicemen to Agent Orange.

''We thought it was safe,'' he said, ''and we still take the position that it
has not yet been proven that Agent Orange had a deleterious effect, although we
certainly admit that there are suspicions.''

The spokesman said it would be very difficult for the department to say now who
was aware of what scientific findings when the spraying program began. However,
he said he was unaware of any directive from the White House regarding the
elimination of defoliant operations that had been ignored.

The report accuses the Dow Chemical Company, which was one of the makers of
Agent Orange, of failing to ''notify the Department of Defense of its awareness
of the toxicity of Agent Orange or of an outbreak of illness at one of its
plants in 1964.''

Skin Problem in Michigan

A spokesman for Dow said the company had not yet seen the report but confirmed
that in 1964 there was an outbreak of chloracne, a skin problem, at a plant in
Midland, Mich., after workers were exposed to high dioxin levels in waste oil.

The spokesman said that neither the Department of Defense nor the Department of
Agriculture had been notified because the company did not begin to make Agent
Orange for the Federal Government until late in 1965 and because the chloracne
incident was not regarded by the company as being particularly serious. He said
the company had notified the Michigan Department of Public Health and the
University of Michigan.

The spokesman added that the company continued to believe that the herbicides
used in Agent Orange were safe.  Finally, the report criticizes the Interagency
Work Group set up by President Carter in late 1979 to facilitate a solution to
the Agent Orange problem. The report says that the group largely failed to
achieve any of its objectives.

A spokesman for the group, which still exists, said he did not know about the
report and declined to comment on its substantive points.

The report recommends that the Veterans Administration stop denying Agent Orange
claims, an action the report calls ''unsupportable.'' The report urges that such
decisions be held in abeyance until more is known about what is making the
veteran claimants sick.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'LIGHT' UNIT TRAINING FOR NEW ARMY ROLE

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 27, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: FORT LEWIS, Wash.


As the landing craft crept toward the narrow beach the ''guerrilla forces''
strung out along the railroad line began shouting revolutionary slogans.

The craft reached the shore and a company of the Third Battalion, 39th Infantry,
scrambled out. The guerrilla line opened fire. The attackers replied. Smoke
bombs obscured the beach. Grenades and machine-gun and rifle fire drove the sea
birds across the bay.

The landing - the firing was all blank ammunition - was a small part of the
intensive training of the Ninth Infantry Division, which has been selected by
the Army to be developed into a light division designed for the Rapid Deployment
Force. The objective is to develop, through innovation and technology, a force
combining the combat ability of an armored or mechanized division with the
ability to be airlifted easily to an area of crisis.

This is a tall order. But men of all ranks in the division appear to have
accepted the challenge, with little complaining and a lot of hard work.

''Where else could you go camping three nights a week?'' asked Pfc. Daniel Joly
of Detroit.

New Tactic for Artillery

Private Joly's battery of 105-millimeter howitzers was engaged in an artillery
raid, a procedure developed in the last days of the Vietnam War and now refined.

In the exercise, the battery's howitzers fired several rounds into Fort Lewis's
impact area and were then picked up by Chinook helicopters and transferred to
another fire base.

It is an operation calling for split-second timing. Through the open hatch of
the Chinook the gun with its pallet of ammunition looms larger as the helicopter
sinks close to the earth. An artilleryman throws a large ''doughnut'' over a
hook suspended from the body of the copter. The Chinook takes off, flying only
yards above the towering pines that make this section of the exercise area a
facsimile of West Germany's forest land.

Through the open hatch a passenger can see the gun and the ammunition package
swing as the helicopter speeds to a new position.  Gently the gun is deposited
on the ground. The crew wrestles it into position where it can be towed by a
jeep. In five minutes the howitzer is ready to fire.

One of the Army's Largest Posts

Fort Lewis is one of the Army's largest posts. With its subinstallations it
spreads over 353,000 acres providing a variety of terrain. The Yakima firing
center is said by Israeli officers to be very like Sinai.

Experts on simulation have built a village called Regensburg to provide training
for combat in urban areas. From a helicopter Regensburg looks like a typical
German village and although most of the buildings are made of plywood the
similarity on the ground is strong.

The buildings are named: a gas station, a schoolhouse, the local government
building. Every day units of the division ''fight'' their way through the
village, using grappling hooks to scale the walls, worming their way across the
mud, while other units fight back from inside the buildings.

The artillery ''raid'' is only one of the military techniques being perfected
here. Others will follow as new weapons reach the division.  Maj. Mark Hamilton,
an enthusiastic artillery officer, declared that the gunners were on the verge
of the greatest improvement in artillery since Napoleon put his guns wheel to
wheel.

Radar to Speed Counterfire

The employment of antimortar and antiartillery radar, he explained, will provide
information to the Army's new Tacfire system. This in turn will transmit
information to the battle control system, which will immediately send the data
to the guns.

''We'll have a round in the air before the first mortar round lands,'' he said.
Due this year is a new 155-millimeter gun that will give the artillery another
advantage. It will outrange the Soviet 122- and 152-millimeter artillery pieces
and would thus be able, in combat, to fire at the Russians from positions
outside the range of the Soviet guns.

This range, plus the tactical flexibility inherent in the use of helicopters to
lift guns from one area of the battlefield to another, is expected to provide
some balance to the present Soviet quantitative advantage in artillery.

In the forest a company of the Third Battalion of the 60th Infantry was digging
in to meet an expected attack, preparing weapons pits along a track just inside
the edge of the forest.

Tree Roots and Rocks

It was hard going. There were tree roots to be cut and rocks to be dug out. The
company had arrived the night before, but by 2 P.M. the soldiers were covering
their pits with logs, brought from the base to save the forest's trees, and were
being led out into the fields beyond to see if they could discern their
camouflaged positions.

Because the division, in time of crisis, could expect to be thrown into a third
world situation where transport would be scarce, there is great emphasis on
marching. One battalion marched 115 miles back to the base after an exercise.
Several, after three days of field training, expected marches of 15 to 20 miles
before they would reach their barracks.

The division has its problems. Capt. Tom Ranito's company was 25 men shy of its
full complement and it was covering a front of roughly 150 yards. As a whole the
turnover in the division is too high to permit inculcating the sense of unit
pride that its commander, Maj.  Gen. Howard Stone, and his staff believe
necessary. The personnel of the division is changed completely every 14 or 15
months.

The chief weakness in personnel is the shortage of experienced middle-grade
noncommissioned officers.  'You have to pick out a good man and promote him even
if he doesn't get the added money for some time,' said Capt. Charles Cardinal,
commander of A Company of the Third Battalion, 47th Infantry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BERNARD HOLLOWOOD; EDITOR WHO PUT BITE INTO HUMOR OF PUNCH

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


Bernard A. Hollowood, who served for 11 years as editor of the British humor
magazine Punch, until 1968, died in Guildford, England yesterday, his family
announced. He was 70 years old.

Under Mr. Hollowood, Punch, which had been known mainly as a humor magazine,
expanded its horizons to include political and social commentary.

As part of Mr. Hollowood's quiet revolution, Punch printed an editorial in 1965
attacking the growing United States involvement in the Vietnam War. It also
called for a global food plan to rid Africa and India of famine and printed an
essay on the state of the British worker.

Mr. Hollowood, who first contributed to Punch in 1942 and later became its ninth
editor, said the changes he made represented a return to the magazine's
''reformist, radical'' origins. ''Nobody on earth can read exclusively funny
articles without getting weary,'' he once remarked.

He studied at London University and was lecturer in economics at the School of
Commerce, Stoke-on-Trent, and Loughborough College, but a zest for news and
commentary was to absorb him.

He began in broadcasting in 1939, worked for The Economist in 1944-45 and was
editor of Pottery and Glass from 1944 to 1950.  A cartoonist of note, Mr.
Hollowood remained a contributor to The Times of London and The Sunday
Telegraph.  Forever probing below the surface of English life and customs, Mr.
Hollowood could be both witty and acerbic in his assessment of British
character. He wrote:

''We are an odd lot, a people cradled in the past to such an extent that we
enjoy the mystical titular rule of the monarchy, and all the ceremony and
trappings that go with it, and still look with awe upon the faces of nitwits
labeled with cherished surnames and titles - and at the same time we are a
people who subscribe passionately to the tenets of democracy.''

Mr. Hollowood often adopted unpopular positions, calling in 1965 for expansion
of contacts with Communist China. In 1962 he wrote in support of Britain's
joining the Common Market, describing such a step as necessary to do away with
''stupid and dangerous nationalism.''

He is survived by his wife, Marjorie, a son and two daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bernard Hollowood

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV View;
CABLE OPERATORS INCREASINGLY LOOK TO THEATER

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1539 words


Stage plays of the caliber of John Osborne's ''Look Back in Anger'' or Jack
Heifner's ''Vanities'' are not unknown to television.  WNET/Channel 13's
''Theater in America'' series, which was absorbed into the ''Great
Performances'' format, has offered viewers productions ranging from David
Storey's ''Home'' to Eugene O'Neill's ''Mourning Becomes Electra.'' Even the
commercial networks occasionally, very occasionally, have taken a prestige dip
with, for example, Katharine Hepburn in Tennessee Williams's ''The Glass
Menagerie'' and Laurence Olivier in ''The Merchant of Venice.''

What is new, however, is that the marketplace has been invaded by cable
television, more specifically pay cable, which needs the kind of products that
will induce subscibers to mail in extra dollars on a regular basis. As a result,
there is intensified competition for quality theatrical productions that lend
themselves to television.  After all, there are only so many theatrical-release
movies to go around. And as ABC and CBS, as well as public television, begin
trying to develop their own shares in the potentially lucrative paytelevision
business, the scramble for ''software'' has become increasingly hectic.

One obvious consequence has been a rapid escalation in prices.  Certain programs
that were available to buyers for a few hundred dollars just a couple of years
ago are now selling for many thousands of dollars. At the recent New York
convention of the National Association of Television Program Executives, one
French television delegation was reported to have sold out its entire stock of
programs to cable representatives at prices ranging up to $50,000 an hour.
Concert and dance performances were especially in demand because they would not
require expensive subtitling.

Another consequence is the growing concern over the future of public television.
These theater, music and dance presentations were once the almost exclusive
province of the public system. What will replace them as the always financially
strapped stations are forced to bid against generally well-heeled cable empires?
There really isn't that much of outstanding quality to spare in any of the arts.
And how are you going to keep them enthralled with modest regional opera after
they've seen Pavarotti at the Met?

New productions, of course, are always expensive, even when they don't have to
be put together entirely from scratch. Showtime's version of ''Look Back in
Anger'' began Off Broadway at the Roundabout Theater. For television, the cast,
headed by Malcolm McDowell as Jimmy Porter, remained the same, reducing normal
rehearsal requirements. Only a new director was added. Lindsay Anderson, who has
collaborated with Mr. McDowell on some films, took charge of the studio
production, which was performed without an audience. The set consisted only of
Porter's cramped, suffocating flat, the disorderly platform for his fulminations
against the British establishment.

Yet, as produced by Chuck Braverman and Donald Boyd, ''Look Back in Anger'' cost
roughly $300,000. The producers own the syndication rights for presentations in
this country and abroad. Showtime, a joint pay-cable venture of Viacom
International and Teleprompter Corp., is entitled to run the two-hour production
five additional times after its premiere on Feb. 24. Yet, despite the number of
showings, these plays represent relatively expensive programming for the
developing cable industry.

And what did paying viewers get for their money? I'm afraid the earnest effort
added up to something of a disappointment. On a very basic level, the play does
not hold up all that well. Jimmy Porter was a fascinating angry young man in the
late l950's, when the play created an international stir with the bitter
recognition that there are no good brave causes left. Today, unfortunately,
Jimmy seems a bit long-winded and, especially in relation to women, overbearing.

Making matters worse, this television production was oddly muted.  Mr. McDowell
and the rest of the cast tended to talk in whispers, conveying the curious
impression that they didn't want to disturb the next-door neighbors. Perhaps Mr.
Anderson wanted to give Jimmy's male chauvinism a softer edge for contemporary
audiences. But he and Mr.  McDowell succeeded only in making the character
disconcertingly dull. At one point, Jimmy sarcastically pleads, ''Let's pretend
we're human beings and are actually alive.'' In this regard, except for isolated
moments, the production failed him.

Home Box Office, a subsidiary of Time Inc., has taken a different and, at least
in this instance, more successful tack with ''Vanities,'' one of Off Broadway's
long-running hits. Produced for HBO by Television Amusements, Inc., this
presentation was taped before an audience at the Westwood Playhouse in Los
Angeles. In its first such legitimate-stage undertaking, HBO wanted to retain
the ''feel'' of experiencing a play in a theater. The cameras stay tightly
within the borders of the sets, but the presence of the audience is always felt
through its reactions. As this is a very funny play, there is a good deal of
laughter.

The three acts of ''Vanities'' cover 11 years in the lives of three Texas women.
We meet them in 1963 as high school cheerleaders, squealing over boyfriends and
their prospects for continuing to be popular in college. Joanne revels in being
ordinary. Kathy concocts a game plan for everything in her life. Mary is already
restless, sexually and every other way.

In Act Two, they are preparing to graduate from college. Sitting in their
sorority house, they can still squeal but with a little less conviction.
Ordinary Joanne is planning her wedding reception around the color lime green.
Kathy has been jolted by the defection of her old boyfriend. Mary is ready to
flee to Rome. They talk of winding up in the same Junior League together. They
don't like to dwell on the subject of the growing protests against the war in
Vietnam.

Finally, they are seen meeting at Kathy's garden apartment in Manhattan in June
1974. Kathy has given up teaching and is being kept by some man. Mary owns a
gallery specializing in erotic art.  Joanne keeps singing the praises of her
husband, children and Connecticut home, but, before she leaves, it is evident
that she has a drinking problem. Complicating matters even further, Mary is
having an affair with Joanne's husband.

Mr. Heifner's play takes a clever idea and turns it into a remarkably touching
exercise. It gets us to laugh both at and with the three women, while always
retaining an element of sympathetic understanding. There's little or no room for
being patronizing toward them when they come to the realization that ''we didn't
learn a damn thing except how to be popular.'' They can justifiably ask, in
astonishment, ''Were we lucky to be so stupid or were we just plain stupid?''

Making this production very much a pleasant surprise is the casting. The flavor
is strongly West Coast. The militantly ordinary Joanne is played by Meredith
Baxter Birney, from the television series ''Bridget Loves Birney'' and
''Family.'' Shelley Hack, veteran of ''Charlie's Angels'' and commercials for
Charley perfume, portrays the rebellious Mary. And Annette O'Toole, who
established a solid acting career with the film ''Smile,'' is the increasingly
questioning Kathy. Directed by Norman Twain, the three actresses create an
impressive and effective chamber ensemble. It would seem that this type of
pay-television venture could provide an invaluable outlet for television
performers to stretch their talents beyond the tight little formulas of weekly
series. In New York City, the remaining presentations of ''Vanities'' can be
seen on Manhattan Cable's HBO Channel H this Tuesday and Saturday.

The figures as to whether the cost of these theatrical productions is justified
by the audience ratings are still being compiled and studied by the cable
companies. For the moment, though, executives seem ready to keep moving ahead.
HBO is negotiating for other ''packages,'' one of them reportedly being a
production of ''Butterflies Are Free.'' Showtime, which got off to an early
start, has already scheduled such attractions as ''The Gin Game,'' with Hume
Cronyn and Jessica Tandy, ''The American Dance Machine,'' with Gwen Verdon,
''The Odd Couple,'' with Charles Nelson Reilly, and ''Hughie,'' with Jason
Robards Jr.The problem, of course, is that, given the insatiable appetite of the
''new technology'' for software, the entire repertory of possible dramatic
offerings could be depleted in a year or two. Perhaps cable television would
then be forced to become a patron of writers capable of producing original works
of quality. That could be the more important revolution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE JOB OUTLOOK IN SCIENCE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 18, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 394 words


While capital spending programs are useful indicators of future trends, those
seeking to monitor American industry's drive for more capital-intensive,
efficient and productive technology may also want to focus on a monthly index
that tries to gauge demand for technical workers.

Deutsch, Shea & Evans Inc., a New York recruitment advertising agency, has long
published a High Technology Recruitment Index based on advertising data provided
by more than 40 newspapers and technical journals representing key industrial
and scientific United States markets. The firm takes the number of
advertisements placed each month by companies looking for engineers and
scientists in fields from electronics and energy-related industries to
chemicals, and compiles an index using 1961 as the base period.

If the index is accurate, companies were investing capital in qualified
technicians long before efforts to retool existing plant began in earnest.
Between 1976 and 1979 the index gained each year, an unprecedented development
in its 20-year history. However, demand for technical personnel declined
somewhat in 1980.

In spite of the dip, Frank Coss, executive vice president at Deutsch, Shea &
Evans, is not yet prepared to predict that the downward trend will continue.
''Historically, the index has always moved toward the norm of 100 with each
change in administration,'' he said, ''however, since President Reagan intends
to raise defense spending, a traditional stimulus to technical demand is likely
to be rekindled.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Coss does not expect 1981 to be the year when the index
reaches the pinnacle achieved in 1966, when the Vietnam War and a booming
economy pushed it up to 158. However, he would not be surprised to see the peak
surpassed by 1985. ''Relatively new industries like genetic engineering,
computers and telecommunications are not likely to see their horizons shrink
during the 1980's,'' he said, ''and with industries like automobiles and steel
moving away from a labor-intensive orientation and toward a more
capitalintensive technological production base, I can't see many reasons why
long-term demand for professional technicians should weaken.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart of recruiting engineers

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Salvador Aid Grows;
So Does Opposition

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


Mail opposing more United States arms for El Salvador was piled high on his desk
last week when Representative Silvio O. Conte, Republican of Massachusetts,
voted for $5 million more in military aid. The request, for this fiscal year,
passed a House appropriations subcommittee by an 8-to-7 vote; under
Congressional rules, no higher approval is required.

Explaining why he had gone against the wishes of his constituents, Mr. Conte
said he felt obliged to support the President because, ''This is the first
foreign policy issue that the Administration has had out of the box.''

Many Americans wish Washington would slam the lid, however. On college campuses
and in cities throughout the country, demonstrators last week protested
President Reagan's decision to send 54 military advisers and $25 million in arms
to a regime whose war against leftist guerrillas has been blemished by its own
terrorism. A Gallup poll found that two out of three Americans who knew about
the war feared it would become ''another Vietnam.'' White House mail was running
10-to-1 against Administration policy.

Mr. Conte, the ranking Republican on the House Appropriations Committee, said he
would not approve further military aid until the Salvadoran Government caught
and punished the murderers of four American missionaries and ''no longer
permitted its security forces to kill innocent civilians.''

The junta's guerrilla opponents protested in their own way, bombarding the
United States Embassy with submachine guns and rocketpropelled grenades. The
fourth such attack in three weeks, it caused extensive damage but no casualties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ALONG WITH ARMS AID COME MILITARY ASVISERS

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Memories in the capital started doing backflips and other tricks earlier this
month when President Reagan spoke frankly and freely in an interview about the
roles of United States military training teams in El Salvador and ''more than
30'' other countries.

Although Mr. Reagan was very precise in stating that the United States soldiers
in Central America and elsewhere were posted abroad strictly to train and not to
participate in combat, the television interviewer's interrogatory usage of the
term ''military advisers'' instantly recalled the tragedy of armed American
involvement in Indochina. The recollection was strengthened by the disclosure
March 13 that 15 of the 62 American military men who will have served in El
Salvador by the end of this fiscal year (54 are there now) are from the Army's
Special Forces - the Green Berets.

Actually, the President had briefed himself as carefully as possible on the
subject of American military missions in foreign fields, sending Pentagon
officials scurrying through piles of computer printouts to determine the number,
size and location of the training teams. At the time the Special Forces/El
Salvador disclosure was made, the Defense Department was able to identify
military training teams totaling 39 men on missions in five other countries:
Honduras, Liberia, Morocco, Thailand and Yemen.

The ''more than 30'' military groups referred to by Mr. Reagan appear to be the
32 ''mobile training teams'' in a list released last week by the Pentagon as
having gone or being about to go to 32 different countries, along with
''technical assistance field teams'' and ''technical assistance teams''
scheduled to work in those and 21 other countries - for a total of 53 - during
the 1981 fiscal year.  The way the Pentagon adds, it becomes a matter of 323
teams with a total of 1,667 men from all four services. For the most part these
teams are associated with transfers of American equipment purchased commercially
or received as grant assistance. Egypt, for instance, which has acquired large
quantities of American weapons in recent years, will have played host to 35
different American teams with a total of 323 instructors this year. Saudi
Arabia, with its new F-15's and other equipment, is scheduled for 441 Americans
on training duty. The number of American instructors slated for Europe, 285, is
less than one-third the number in the Middle East.

In Asia, where the American eagle swept the skies a dozen years ago on the
strength of a half-million so-called military advisers in Vietnam, the total for
this year is a mere 153, none of them designated for combat. Seven African
countries account for 135 Americans on various assistance missions; nine Latin
American and Caribbean nations (El Salvador included) are to have a total of
120.

This is up 10 or so from the 44 countries in which the Pentagon maintained
military assistance advisory groups in the summer of 1976 but down from the 34
designated later that year when an aide of President Ford described them as
something akin to the dodo bird.

Nor do they come anywhere near quality or quantity of Soviet military
''advisers'' currently operating in Asia (85,000 in Afghanistan), the Middle
East (2,000 or so in Southern Yemen and Syria), Africa (several thousand in
Ethiopia, Angola, Libya, Mozambique and Congo Brazzaville) and Cuba (2,000 or
more). The total around the world has increased from 11,000 to 20,000 in the
last four years. In the case of Afghanistan, at least, there are also Soviet
soldiers in combat under their own officers. They would be called
''mercenaries'' in another century (just as the Russians call the American
noncombatant advisers abroad ''mercenaries'' now.)
Foreigners a Permanent Feature

For that matter, foreign military advisers have always been a feature of
offensive and defensive warfare. They figured largely in the Revolutionary War
of the United States. The infantry general from France, Marie Joseph Paul Yves
Roch Gilbert du Motier Lafayette; the Polish officers, Tadeusz Andrzej
Bonawentura Kosciuszko and Kazimierz Pulaski, and the Prussian captain,
Frederick William Augustus Steuben: non-Americans of the time would have called
them mercenaries. Without them, in retrospect the success at arms of the
American Revolution would have been much more difficult, if not impossible.

For the Reagan Administration, the President and his aides have made abundantly
clear, the issue of the moment is not at all a matter of ''mercenaries'' -
theirs or ours -but of a determination to protect the United States national
interest and to assist friends.  In the case of Central America, as Mr. Reagan
put it, the issue is ''to make sure that we do not just sit passively by and let
this hemisphere be invaded by outside forces.''

On a global scale that message has been made clear in the new Administration's
request for $6.87 billion in security assistance, the budget euphemism for all
the military sales, grants, training and other programs envisaged for the 1982
fiscal year, which begins Oct.  1. Neither the Pentagon, the State Department
nor the White House has figured out how it wants to spend all that money - that
will be made more explicit as the budget wends its way through Congress in the
coming three months.

But the intent of the request, with its $900 million increase over the Carter
security assistance budget, is very plain. The funds could encompass more
military instructors, or even combat advisers, as in the case of El Salvador
Green Berets, so long held in official Army disdain.

If that is the case, and at this stage it is not possible to say, the lessons of
Indochina are still fresh enough to be relearned: The more you put into
counterinsurgency efforts, the less you get out.

The lesson was copiously documented earlier this year, albeit anonymously, by a
former American combat adviser in Vietnam who published a study of the debacle
of the United States Army in that war under the pseudonym Cincinnatus. He called
the work ''Self-Destruction.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of an Army adviser

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'CUT IT OUT, MR. ALLEN!'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


To the Editor:

Reagan's foreign policy unfolds. Richard V. Allen, the President's assistant for
national security affairs, decries ''outright pacifist sentiments'' in Western
European nations, as well as their hopes that ''arms control negotiations (might
substitute for) modernization efforts in (their) weapons systems'' (news story
March 22).

his is one suburban Boston minister (a U.S.M.C.R. veteran of
mortar-rifle-machine gun fire in the Korean War and subsequently a participant
in the happier movement against the Vietnam War) who says, ''Cut it out, Mr.
Allen! Be careful of your rhetoric. This could lead to nuclear war. Is the next
step going to be the systematic silencing of 'pacifists' in the U.S. who happen
to agree with some of those sentiments in Western Europe?'' (Rev.) DAVID VAN
DUSEN Weston, Mass., March 22, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A LAMENT FOR VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Doan Van Toai; Doan Van Toai is currently working on a book about
Vietnam called ''Neither Peace Nor Honor.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 64, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4051 words


When the Communists took over North Vietnam in 1954, a million refugees fled to
the South. I personally heard stories of their incredible suffering. But, along
with other South Vietnamese, I refused to believe them. A generation later, I
could not believe Solzhenitsyn's book ''The Gulag Archipelago,'' either. I
dismissed it as anti-Communist propaganda. But by 1979, I had published my own
book, ''The Vietnamese Gulag.'' Can those who have suffered the horror of
Communism ever convince those who have not experienced it?  From 1945, when I
was born in the village of Caivon in Vinh Long province, 100 miles south of
Saigon, until I left Vietnam in May 1978, I never enjoyed peace. My family's
house was burned three times in the war against the French. To escape the
fighting, my parents moved from one village to another throughout my youth. Like
the majority of Vietnamese patriots, they joined the resistance forces fighting
the French. As I grew up, I myself saw how the peasants were oppressed by the
local officials of the successive Saigon regimes, how they were victimized by
the French bombardments. I learned the history of my country's thousand-year
struggle against Chinese occupation and its century-long effort against Western
domination. With this background, my compatriots and I grew up with a hatred of
foreign intervention.

When the students at Saigon University elected me vice president of the Saigon
Student Union in 1969 and 1970, I participated in the different peace efforts,
leading student demonstrations against the Thieu regime and against American
involvement. I published a magazine called Self-Determination, and traveled in
January 1971 to California to give antiwar lectures at Berkeley and Stanford.
For my activities, I was arrested and jailed many times by the Thieu Government.

During that period, I believed that I was fulfilling my commitment to peace and
the independence of my country. I had faith, too, in the program of the National
Liberation Front (N.L.F.), which led the revolutionary resistance in South
Vietnam. I hated Saigon's rulers, men like Gen. Nguyen Van Thieu, Gen. Nguyen
Cao Ky, Gen. Dang Van Quang - former soldiers of the French colonial army. These
were the men whom the French had recruited in the 1940's to help destroy the
Vietnamese resistance. They had risen over the years to become leaders
themselves, but they commanded no respect from the people.  Because of their
lack of popular support, they were predisposed to rely on foreign forces.

As a student leader, I felt I had to pursue the aspiration of the Vietnamese
people for democracy, freedom and peace. Naively, I believed that the Hanoi
regime at least had the virtue of being Vietnamese, while the Americans were
foreign invaders like the French before them. Like others in the South
Vietnamese opposition movements, I believed that our Communist compatriots in
the North would be more amenable to compromise and easier to work with than the
Americans. Moreover, I was hypnotized by the personal sacrifices and devotion
the Communist leaders had demonstrated. Ton Duc Thang, former President of North
Vietnam, for example, had been imprisoned for 17 years in a French jail. I was
hypnotized also by the political programs advocated by the N.L.F., which
included a domestic policy of national reconciliation, without risk of reprisal,
and a foreign policy of nonalignment. Finally, I was influenced by progressive
movements throughout the world and by the most prestigious intellectuals in the
West. My impression was that during the 1960's and early 70's the leaders of the
American peace movement shared my convictions.

These convictions endured through the signing of the 1973 Paris peace accords
and the subsequent collapse of the South Vietnamese Government two years later.
When liberation was imminent, I was the one who told friends and relatives not
to flee. ''Why do you want to leave?'' I asked. ''Why are you afraid of the
Communists?'' I accepted the prospect of enduring hardships to rebuild my
country and I decided to stay in Vietnam and continue working as a branch
manager at a Saigon bank, where I had been for more than four years, writing
secret reports about the economic situation in South Vietnam for the N.L.F.
(After leaving the university, I had not been drafted by the South Vietnamese
Government because I was the only son in my family.  And I had not joined the
Vietcong because the N.L.F. felt I could serve a more useful role providing
financial reports from the bank.)

Several days after Saigon fell, the Provisional Revolutionary Government, formed
by the N.L.F., asked me to join the finance committee, a group of intellectuals
whose job it was to advise the Government on matters of economic policy. I
complied willingly, taking a pay cut of 90 percent. My first assignment was to
help draw up a plan for confiscating all the private property in South Vietnam.
Shocked, I proposed that we should expropriate only the property of those who
had cooperated with the former regime and those who had used the war to become
rich, and that we distribute it in some fashion to the poor and to the victims
of the war, Communist and non-Communist alike. My proposals, of course, were
rejected. I was naive enough to think that the local cadres were mistaken, that
they misunderstood the good intentions of the Communist Party leaders. I had
many fights with them, believing as I did Hanoi's previous statement that ''the
situation in the South is very special and different from that of North Vietnam.
'' A few months before the liberation of Saigon, Le Duan, the First Secretary of
the Communist Party, had said, ''The South needs its own policy.''

In the end, I could not obey the order to help arrange the confiscation of all
private property, a plan that was subsequently carried out. Such a scheme had
nothing to do with fulfilling the aspirations of the South Vietnamese, and it
went against my conscience. I decided to resign. But no one resigns in a
Communist regime. The implication of nonconformity is intolerable to Communists.
When I submitted my resignation, the chief of the finance committee warned me
that my action ''would only serve as propaganda to excite the people; here we
never do it that way.'' Several days later, while I was attending a concert at
the great National Theater (formerly the National Assembly Hall, which my fellow
students and I had occupied so many times under the Thieu regime), I was
arrested.  No charges were made, no reasons were given.  After the fall of
Saigon, many progressive intellectuals and former antiwar-movement leaders
believed that the new Vietnamese regime would bring internal democracy and
freedom from foreign domination. They believed that the new regime would pursue
the best interests of the people, honoring its promise to carry out a policy of
national reconciliation without fear of reprisal. Far from adhering to their
promises, the Vietnamese rulers have arrested hundreds of thousands of
individuals - not only those who had cooperated with the Thieu regime but even
those who had not, including religious leaders and former members of the N.L.F.

Vietnam today is a country without any law other than the arbitrary directives
of those in power. There is no civil code.  Individuals are imprisoned without
charges and without trial. Once in jail, prisoners are taught that their
behavior, attitude and ''good will'' are the key factors in determining when
they may be released -whatever crimes they may have committed. As a consequence,
prisoners often obey the guards blindly, hoping for an early release. In fact,
they never know when they may be released - or when their sentences may be
extended.  How many political prisoners are there in Vietnam today? And how many
of them have died in prisons during the first six years of Communist rule?
Nobody can know the exact numbers. The United States Department of State has
said there are from 150,000 to 200,000 prisoners; Vietnamese refugees estimate
about one mil lion. Hoang Huu Quynh, an intellectu-al, a graduate of Moscow
University, who served as a director of a technical school in Ho Chi Minh City
(formerly Saigon), recently defected to France during his Governmentsponsored
tour of European countries. He told the French press: ''There are at least
700,000 prisoners in Vietnam today.'' Another witness, Nguyen Cong Hoan, a
former member of the reunified National Assembly, which was elected in 1976, who
escaped by boat in 1978, said that he himself knew ''about 300 cases of
executions'' in his own province of Phu Yen. In 1977, officials in Hanoi
insisted that only 50,000 people, who posed the greatest threat to national
security, had been arrested. But Prime Minister Pham Van Dong said, in the
French magazine Paris Match, on Sept. 22, 1978, ''In over three years, I
released more than one million prisoners from the camps.'' One wonders how it is
possible to release more than a million after having arrested only 50,000.

When I was arrested, I was thrown into a three-foot-by-six-foot cell with my
left hand chained to my right foot and my right hand chained to my left foot. My
food was rice mixed with sand. When I complained about the sand, the guards
explained that sand is added to the rice to remind prisoners of their crimes. I
discovered that pouring water in the rice bowl would make the sand separate from
the rice and sink to the bottom. But the water ration was only one liter a day
for drinking and bathing, and I had to husband it carefully.

After two months in solitary confinement, I was transferred to a collective
cell, a room 15 feet wide and 25 feet long, where at different times anywhere
from 40 to 100 prisoners were crushed together. Here we had to take turns lying
down to sleep, and most of the younger, stronger prisoners slept sitting up. In
the sweltering heat, we also took turns snatching a few breaths of fresh air in
front of the narrow opening that was the cell's only window. Every day I watched
my friends die at my feet.

In March 1976, when a group of Western reporters visited my prison, the
Communist officials moved out all the prisoners and substituted North Vietnamese
soldiers. In front of the prisons, one sees no barbed wire, no watchtowers, only
a few policemen and a large sign above the entrance that proclaims Ho Chi Minh's
best-known slogan: ''Nothing Is More Precious Than Liberty and Independence.''
Only those detained inside and those who guard them know what kind of place is
hidden behind that sign. And every prisoner knows that if he is suspected of
planning to escape, his fellow inmates and relatives at home will be punished
rather than he himself.

We will never know precisely the number of dead prisoners, but we do know about
the deaths of many well-known prisoners who, in the past, never cooperated with
President Thieu or the Americans: for example, Thich Thien Minh, the strategist
of all the Buddhist peace movements in Saigon, an antiwar activist who was
sentenced to 10 years in jail by the Thieu regime, then released after an
outpouring of protest from Vietnamese and antiwar protesters around the world.
Thien Minh died in Ham Tan prison after six months of detention in 1979. Another
silent death was that of the lawyer Tran Van Tuyen, a leader of the opposition
bloc in the Saigon Assembly under President Thieu. This well-known activist died
in Communist hands in 1976, although as late as April 1977, Prime Minister Pham
Van Dong was telling French reporters that Tuyen was alive and well in a
re-education camp. One of the greatest losses has been that of the famous
Vietnamese philosopher Ho Huu Tuong. Tuong, a classmate of Jean-Paul Sartre's in
Paris in the 1930's, was perhaps the leading intellectual in South Vietnam. He
died in Ham Tan prison on June 26, 1980. These men were arrested, along with
many others among the most prominent and respected South Vietnamese, in order to
pre-empt any possible opposition to the Communists.

Some American supporters of Hanoi have ignored or rationalized these deaths, as
they have the countless other tragedies that have befallen Vietnam since 1975.
It is more than likely that they will continue to maintain their silence in
order to avoid the profound disillusionment that accepting the truth about
Vietnam means for them. Yet if liberty and democracy are worth struggling for in
the Philippines, in Chile, in South Korea or in South Africa, they are no less
worth defending in Communist countries like Vietnam. Everyone remembers the
numerous demonstrations protesting United States involvement in Vietnam and the
war crimes of the Thieu regime. But some of those people who were then so
passionately committed to democratic principles and human rights have developed
a strange indifference now that these same principles are under assault in
Communist Vietnam. For example, one antiwar activist, William Kunstler, refused
to sign a May 1979 open letter to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in which
many former antiwar activists, including Joan Baez, protested Hanoi's violations
of human rights. Kunstler said, ''I don't believe in criticizing socialist
governments publicly, even if there are human-rights violations,'' and, ''The
entire Baez campaign may be a C.I.A. plot.'' This statement reminds me of the
argument used by the Thieu regime to suppress opposition: ''The peace movements
and the opposition activists are all the Communists' lackeys.''

There are other illusions about the current regime in Vietnam about which people
should be disabused. Many people believed that Ho Chi Minh was primarily a
nationalist and that the Vietnamese Communists were and are independent of the
Soviet Union. I believed the same before they took over South Vietnam. But
portraits of Soviet leaders now adorn public buildings, schools and
administrative offices throughout ''independent Vietnam.'' In contrast, one
never saw pictures of American leaders even during the so-called puppet regime
of President Thieu. The degree of subordination the present Government feels
toward its Soviet patron is suggested by a famous poem by the well-known
Vietnamese poet To Huu, a member of the Politburo and president of the Communist
Party Committee of Culture.  Here we have an opportunity to listen to a
high-ranking Vietnamese weep on the occasion of Stalin's death: Oh, Stalin! Oh,
Stalin!  The love I bear my father, my mother, my wife, myself It's nothing
beside the love I bear you, Oh, Stalin! Oh, Stalin!  What remains of the earth
and of the sky!  Now that you are dead.

It may seem incredible that such a poem could have been written in Vietnam,
which is known for the strength of its family traditions and its feeling for
filial piety. Yet this poem occupied a prominent place in a major anthology of
contemporary Vietnamese poetry recently published in Hanoi.

Moreover, Le Duan, First Secretary of the Communist Party, said in his political
report to the reunified National Assembly in 1976: ''The Vietnamese revolution
is to fulfill the internationalist duty and the international obligation,'' and
to do so, in the words of the 1971 party platform, ''under the leadership of the
Soviet Union.'' The glorification of Soviet life is, in fact, a major goal of
Communist Vietnam's censorship policy.

Immediately after the fall of Saigon, the Government closed all bookshops and
theaters. All books published under the former regimes were confiscated or
burned. Cultural literature was not exempt, including translations of Jean-Paul
Sartre, Albert Camus and Dale Carnegie. Margaret Mitchell's ''Gone With the
Wind'' was on the list of decadent literature as well. The new regime replaced
such books with literature designed to indoctrinate children and adults with the
idea that the ''Soviet Union is a paradise of the socialist world.''

Another argument made at times by Western apologists has to do with freedom of
religion in Vietnam. One article in the new Constitution of Vietnam, adopted
this year, declares that ''the regime respects the liberty of the believers and
also the liberty of the nonbelievers.'' In regard to this article, Le Duan has
repeatedly proclaimed: ''Our present regime is a million times more democratic
than any other in the world.'' The reality, though, is suggested by an incident
involving the desecration of a Buddhist pagoda, in which a nude woman, on orders
from the Government, entered the pagoda during a worship service. When Thich Man
Giac, a prominent Buddhist leader, protested, the Government used the
opportunity to try to discredit the Buddhists as enemies of democracy
-specifically, of the freedom to disbelieve. Thich Man Giac, who had served as
liaison between the Buddhists and the Communist Government, escaped Vietnam by
boat in 1977 and is now living in Los Angeles.  All of those who supported the
N.L.F. in its struggle should be aware of how they were betrayed and deceived.
When Harrison Salisbury of The New York Times visited Hanoi in December 1966,
the leaders in Hanoi told him: ''The direction of the struggle in the South is
by the South and not by the North.'' Pham Van Dong, Prime Minister, said to
Salisbury: ''No one in the North had this stupid, criminal idea in mind'' that
the North wanted to annex the South.

Yet in a victory-day celebration speech made on May 19, 1975, Le Duan said,
''Our party is the unique and single leader that organized, controlled and
governed the entire struggle of the Vietnamese people from the first day of the
revolution.'' In his political report to the reunified National Assembly in
Hanoi on June 26, 1976, Le Duan said: ''The strategic task of the revolution in
our country in the new stage is to achieve the reunification of our homeland and
to take the whole country rapidly, vigorously and steadily to socialism, and
Communism.''

In 1976, the Provisional Revolutionary Government formed by the N.L.F. was
abolished, and South and North Vietnam were reunified under Commu-nist rule.
Today, among 17 members of the Politburo and 134 members of the Central
Committee of the Vietnamese Communist Party, not a single one is from the N.L.F.
(there are several members who had been North Vietnam Communist Party
representatives with the N.L.F.). Even Nguyen Huu Tho, former chairman of the
N.L.F., holds only the post of acting President of State, a ceremonial position
that involves greeting visitors and participating in festivals. But his position
will be abolished under the new Constitution.

Listen to Truong Nhu Tang, 57 years old, a founder of the N.L.F., former Justice
Minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government, more recently one of the
boat people. Tang escaped in November 1979 and is now living in Paris. He told
reporters of his experience in a news conference in Paris in June 1980. Twelve
years earlier, he said, when he had been jailed by the Thieu regime for his
Communist activities, his father came to visit. ''Why,'' he asked Tang, ''have
you abandoned everything - a good job, a rich family - to join the Communists?
Don't you know that the Communists will betray you and persecute you, and when
you finally understand, it will be too late to wake up?'' Tang, an intellectual,
answered his father: ''You would do better to keep quiet and accept the
sacrifice of one of your sons for democracy and our country's independence.
...''

After the Tet offensive in 1968, Tang was exchanged for three American colonels
who had been prisoners of war held by the Vietcong; then he vanished into the
jungle with the N.L.F. He had visited many Communist and third-world countries
on behalf of the N.L.F. during the war. Tang said in his news conference: ''I
was well aware that the N.L.F. was a Communist-dominated national united front
and I was naive enough to believe that Ho Chi Minh and his party would place
national interests above ideology and would place the interest of the Vietnamese
people above the party's. But the people and I were wrong.''

Truong Nhu Tang told of his own knowledge of the way Communist ruling circles
operate: ''The Communists are expert in the arts of seduction and will go to any
length to woo you over to their side, as long as they don't control the
Government. But once they are in power they suddenly become harsh, ungrateful,
cynical and brutal.'' Tang summarized current conditions in Vietnam: ''The
family is divided, society is divided, even the party is divided.''

Looking back now on the Vietnam war, I feel nothing but sorrow for my own
naivete in believing that the Communists were revolutionaries worthy of support.
In fact, they betrayed the Vietnamese people and deceived progressives
throughout the world. The responsibility for the tragedies that have engulfed my
compatriots is mine. And now I can only bear witness to this truth so that all
former supporters of the Vietcong may share their responsibility with me.

While I was in jail, Mai Chi Tho, a member of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party, addressed a selected group of political prisoners. He told us:
''Ho Chi Minh may have been an evil man; Nixon may have been a great man. The
Americans may have had the just cause; we may not have had the just cause. But
we won and the Americans were defeated because we convinced the people that Ho
Chi Minh is the great man, that Nixon is a murderer and the Americans are the
invaders.'' He concluded that ''the key factor is how to control people and
their opinions. Only Marxism-Leninism can do that. None of you ever see
resistance to the Communist regime, so don't think about it. Forget it. Between
you - the bright intellectuals - and me, I tell you the truth.''

And he did tell us the truth. Since 1978, the Vietnamese Communists have
occupied Laos, invaded Cambodia and attacked Thailand, while the Soviet Union
has invaded Afghanistan. In each of these depredations, the Communists have
portrayed themselves, incredibly, as liberators, saviors and bulwarks against
foreign aggression. And each time, world opinion has remained relatively
quiescent.

But in Vietnam, people often remark: ''Don't believe what the Communists say,
look instead at what they have done.'' One South Vietnamese Communist, Nguyen
Van Tang, who was detained 15 years by the French, eight years by Diem, six
years by Thieu, and who is still in jail today, this time in a Communist prison,
told me: ''In order to understand the Communists, one must first live under a
Communist regime.'' One rainy evening in Saigon's Le Van Duyet prison, he told
me: ''My dream now is not to be released; it is not to see my family. My dream
is that I could be back in a French prison 30 years ago.'' This is the one wish
of a 60-year-old man who has spent his entire adult life in and out of prison
fighting for the freedom and the independence of his country. At this moment, he
may already have died in his cell or have been executed by the new rulers.

The Vietnamese people wish to achieve the real revolution; they do not want
Communism. The measure of popular hatred for the Communists is that thousands of
Vietnamese have abandoned their historical attachment to the land. Under French
colonial domination, throughout the long war years, even during the catastrophic
famine of 1945 when two million starved to death, Vietnamese simply did not
willingly leave their homeland - the land of their ancestors' graves. The recent
outpouring of refugees is a direct result of the terror of the present regime.
Listen to another refugee, Nguyen Cong Hoan, former N.L.F. agent and member of
the new unified Assembly elected in 1976: ''This current regime is the most
inhuman and oppressive (Vietnam) has ever known.'' Hoan escaped by boat in 1977,
after abandoning his position in the Communist Assembly. ''The Assembly,'' he
declared, ''is a puppet, the members know only how to say yes, never how to say
no.''

Among the boat people who survived, including those who were raped by pirates
and those who suffered in the refugee camps, nobody regrets his escape from the
present regime. I am confident that the truth about Vietnam will eventually
emerge. It is already available to those who wish to know it. As Solzhenitsyn
has said, ''Truth weighs as heavy as the world.'' And Vietnam is a lesson in
truth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A.C.L.U. MOVES AGAINST DEATH PENALTY

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE EVANS

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 23, Column 3; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS HENRY SCHWARZCHILD, director of the capital


punishment project for the American Civil Liberties Union, had just returned
from two ''exhausting'' weeks in Indiana, where he had tried, unsuccessfully, to
stave off the March 9 execution of Steven Judy. It was then that he got a call
from a law student in Virginia, asking whether he was aware that an execution
was scheduled there two days later.

Mr. Schwarzchild was not. But shortly thereafter he left his Greenburgh home to
go to Richmond and the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit,
which granted a stay.

The Virginia inmate for whom execution was scheduled is one of 735 persons on
death rows in the United States. Nine are women and 46 percent are members of
minority groups, mostly black. All except one have been convicted of murder, the
exception being one convicted of the rape of a minor.

All were convicted and sentenced under state laws enacted after the Supreme
Court threw out capital punishment statutes in 1972. The laws were
unconstitutional, the court said, because thedecision to impose a death sentence
was entirely discretionary and because the resulting decisions on the basis of
race and class amounted to a violation of the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel
and unusual punishment.

''Your chances of getting the death penalty were freakish enough to be like
being hit by lightning out of the blue,'' said Mr.  Schwarzchild, who is to be
honored by the Westchester A.C.L.U. at a dinner April 12, at which the featured
speaker is to be Andrew Young, the former Chief Delegate to the United Nations.

In 1976, Mr. Schwarzchild said, the Court ruled on the laws enacted since 1972,
throwing out those that mandated a death sentence for certain crimes. The only
statutes that survived, he explained, were those known as guided discretion
statutes. If a defendant were found guilty of murder, they provided that the
court, in sentencing, had to take into account ''the aggravation and mitigation
for that crime and that particular defendant.''

And in spite of the 1972 and '76 rulings, Mr. Schwarzchild maintains that the
death penalty is unfair. In cases where a murder victim is white, he said, a
black person convicted of murder stands 10 times the chance of being sentenced
to death that a white person does.

''We very arbitrarily and discriminatorily pick out some individual people,'' he
said, ''not even those who commit the most heinous crimes. But we virtually
never execute white middle-class people, especially women.

''All of us,'' he said, alluding to middle-class whites, ''have an absolute
license to commit any crime no matter how atrocious and be sure of the knowledge
that we are absolutely free of execution.''

But Mr. Scharzchild said he would oppose capital punishment even if a way were
found to administer it equitably.  ''In a nutshell,'' he said, ''the death
penalty teaches the most hurtful of all lessons to society - that the killing of
a human being is an acceptable answer to a problem. It is an example of public
and ceremonious violence.

''It is an illusion and a misrepresentation that the death penalty has something
to do with the rate of violent crime. It does not serve as a deterrent. It does
nothing but aggravate the atmosphere of violence and disrespect of human life.''

Mr. Schwarzchild readily conceded that the acts of those whose lives he worked
to save were dastardly. But he said that his opposition to the death penalty was
born out of respect for life.

''Is it not absurd,'' he asked, ''to be killing people who kill people in order
to teach people that killing people is wrong?'' The execution of Steven Judy, he
said, was ''insanely destructive.'' ''Not that I take what he has done lightly.
It is so outrageous that I would not have the state do the same thing in my
name.'' Mr. Judy, who was convicted of the murders of a mother and her three
children, had said that he might kill again if released, and that he preferred
execution to the prospect of life in prison.

The 55-year-old Mr. Schwarzchild said he had opposed the death penalty ''as long
as I had been a conscious political animal.'' He traced this commitment to his
childhood in Nazi Germany, which ''we escaped in just barely enough time.''

''It connects very directly,'' he continued. ''In Berlin, we were 'Jewishly' and
politically conscious and active.  ''We've seen governments shed endless
torrents of blood in wars, revolutions, counterrevolutions, labor camps, by
sheriffs and every conceivable agency. The one thing we should have learned is
that Government ought not to be in the business of killing human beings.''

Nor does he believe in life in prison without parole, unless that is necessary
to protect society.  ''Charles Manson should not be paroled as long as anybody
reasonably believes he is a danger to society,'' said Mr.  Schwarzchild. ''I
would not want to meet Manson in a dark alley or Judy for that matter.''

Mr. Schwarzchild came to the United States in 1939 and was educated at City
College and Columbia University. In the early 1960's he participated in the
first sit-ins in the South and worked with numerous civil rights leaders,
including the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

He did civil rights work for the A.C.L.U. from 1964 to 1971 and then headed its
project on amnesty for Vietnam War resistors, which ended with the amnesty
granted by former President Jimmy Carter shortly after he took office.

It was at that point, he said, that the Court came down with its 1976 ruling,
''and the A.C.L.U. decided to do something.'' So he took over the capital-
punishment project, whose goals are to abolish the death penalty, and, failing
that, to try to prevent as many executions as possible.

Abolition of capital punishment does not seem ''to be in the cards,'' he said,
since the present Supreme Court does not believe it to be unconstitutional,
''and is unlikely to become more liberal.''

In addition, he said, public opinion is ''terribly and rightly concerned with an
ever higher incidence of violent crime and is looking for ways of dealing with
it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Schwarzschild

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JANE FONDA OF THE 80'S MELLOWER BUT STILL AN ACTIVIST

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words


THERE in the middle of the Ocean Life Room of the American Museum of Natural
History stood Jane Fonda, dressed in an ice-blue sequined gown and surrounded by
300 extras. One woman pressed a lock of Miss Fonda's hair in place, and another
adjusted the draping of her dress, carefully taping a bit of rhinestone trim in
place. Meanwhile, a cameraman was having trouble getting the actress in his line
of focus. ''Could you move a little to the left?'' he asked. ''Always,'' she
said, and several people - Miss Fonda not among them - laughed.

In her new movie, ''Rollover,'' which was being filmed last week, Miss Fonda
plays Lee Winters, a former film star and petrochemical heiress, who spends her
time making business deals and attending elegant parties. In the original script
commissioned by the actress's production company, this particular party was to
be a Save the Whales benefit - hence the setting in the Ocean Life room - but
the producer, Bruce Gilbert, decided to turn the party into a simple ''wealthy
society-type benefit, because a woman in Lee Winters's position wouldn't be
interested in things like whales.''

Active Activist

Certainly the same cannot be said of Miss Fonda herself. At the age of 43, the
actress remains an active activist indeed - a fact that became altogether clear
during a dinner break, when she began to talk with well-rehearsed urgency about
political issues. Her manner is businesslike, her gaze straightforward and her
tone insistently earnest. If she lacks a visible sense of humor, she does not
want for passion. Indeed, she recites her lines - lines, which on occasion, she
concedes, have been unsophisticated, even naive -with the aplomb of an
accomplished actress.

''Did you know,'' she says, leaning forward intently and ignoring a visitor's
question, ''and this to me is a staggering statistic - that if you weatherized
37,000 homes, you'd be saving more fuel than will be found on the entire North
Slope of Alaska?''

Even such matters as diet and fitness - she recently opened an exercise center
in Los Angeles - are charged with political import, for Miss Fonda believes that
health cannot be discussed without considering ''pollution and industrial causes
of cancer, which are the result of government and industrial policy.'' More than
anything, it seems, Miss Fonda wants to be taken seriously; she is terrified of
being irrelevant.

Lasting Role

After all, she explains, it was the activism of the 60's that galvanized her as
an individual and as an actress. Until then, she had led a fancy but curiously
unexamined life as the daughter of Henry Fonda and the wife of Roger Vadim. In
contrast, political commitment, with its promise of intellectual camaraderie,
possessed for her a kind of moral glamour. She threw herself into this new role
of activist with great enthusiasm, just as she had thrown herself, in the past,
into playing the parts of a Paris art student and Mr.  Vadim's ''sex-symbol.''
But this time, the role would be a lasting one.

''I had 15 years of an acting career with no controversy,'' she says, recalling
those years when she made films like ''Barbarella.'' ''I was a really popular
kid, and you know what I felt about it? - nothing. Money wasn't new to me.
Mobility wasn't new to me. I learned very early on in life that money doesn't
bring you a sense of fulfillment or meaning, and I wanted to feel my life had
meaning. I wanted to have friends that I could talk to about things beyond how
we looked or what we bought. I wanted to have relationships that were about
something, and in order to do that, I had to go beyond my career and my
profession.''

Watching Jane Fonda today on the set of ''Rollover'' - examining still
photographs of herself, being attended by hair-stylists, makeup men and wardrobe
assistants - it would seem that the rebel of the 60's and early 70's has
mellowed. And in certain respects, she has.  She no longer calls herself a
''revolutionary woman,'' as she once did at Black Panther rallies, but says she
is ''a democrat with a small 'd,' '' dedicated to working through the system.

Scoring Points

What is more, she no longer feels in conflict about her dual careers as ''movie
star'' and activist. Indeed, she has used many of her recent films -films
produced by her own production company, IPC (the letters come from an
organization called the Indochina Peace Campaign) - to score social and
political points. Presumably, ''Rollover'' will do for the petrochemical
industry what ''Coming Home'' did for the Vietnam War, ''The China Syndrome''
did for nuclear energy and ''9 to 5'' did for working women.

So far at least, this formula seems to have worked; the actress whose films were
once boycotted by the Veterans of Foreign Wars is now ranked as the country's
top female box-office star. It is a development Miss Fonda attributes to the
changing temper of the times and her own growing maturity:

''There was a lot of unnecessary abrasiveness and shrillness in the 60's,
especially if you were inexperienced and somewhat naive, like I was. Because I
lacked confidence in myself and experience in talking publicly as Jane Fonda, I
would borrow other people's rhetoric - rhetoric that doesn't suit me. In many
instances, I didn't even know what some of the words meant. There must have been
something that seemed false about it that I think turned people off, and I can
understand it. It's not that my emotions were false, but that I sometimes chose
the wrong manner in which to express them.  Maybe it's my fault for being the
way I am - I am impetuous, I am an extremely emotional person.''

Concedes Mistakes of Style

Yet if Miss Fonda's manner of expression has undergone something of a sea
change, her politics have not. She and her husband, Tom Hayden, a former leader
of Students for a Democratic Society, have simply refocused their attention from
such causes as the Vietnam War to such domestic issues as housing, solar energy
and environmental cancer. They have set up a ''grass roots'' organization called
the Campaign for Economic Democracy on their 120-acre Santa Barbara, Calif.,
ranch, and Mr. Hayden is contemplating another run for political office
-possibly a Senate seat from California.

As for her anti-Vietnam War activities, Miss Fonda acknowledges mistakes of
style, but not of content. Ever ready to question the politics of others, she is
unwilling to question her own radicalism.  ''The nature of the war was wrong, so
going there was not wrong,'' she says of the broadcasts she made over Hanoi
radio, criticizing American involvement. ''My only regret is that people still
don't understand the war.''

Many of her former antiwar colleagues disagree, having reassessed their
positions in the light of recent events in Southeast Asia. Two years ago, when
Joan Baez and 80 other former activists drafted a petition criticizing the new
Communist leadership of Vietnam for its treatment of political prisoners, Miss
Fonda and her husband refused to sign it.

'I Know What I Know Well'

''People want to think what they want to think about the Vietnamese because they
won and we can't stand that,'' she says briskly. ''It's a country that was
totally devastated by war, and I'm sure that harsh measures have been taken to
try to rally people around the cause of rebuilding, and that means taking
intellectuals and urban people and saying you've got to go into the country and
work in the fields, and they don't want to and they're forced to.  Well, from
our perspective, that's rotten, but I don't know enough about what's going on
there to criticize.''

She paused and took a long puff off a visitor's cigarette. ''Oh Lord, why did I
say that? No matter what I say, I come off like an apologist, and I'm not. I
don't care one way or the other.

''I know what I know well, and I feel what I feel strongly, but I'm not an
organizer, I'm not a politician, I'm not a diplomat and shouldn't be. I'm a
cultural person - an actress.'' And with that, she stood up and left for another
makeup session.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 370 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Refugees' Boats Burned in Texas

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: SEABROOK, Tex., March 30


Two fishing boats owned by Vietnamese refugees have been burned in Galveston Bay
in the latest of a series of incidents over disputed shrimping rights along the
Texas Gulf Coast, authorities said today. One boat valued at $25,000 was
destroyed yesterday and another vessel was scorched but not seriously damaged,
according to the police.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
