
                               1 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OUT OF CAPTIVITY;
SKETCHES OF AMERICAN HOSTAGES FROM HIJACKED T.W.A. PLANE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4165 words


Victor Amburgy <cf65,8.5,9.2>31 years old . . . Worked as a letter carrier for
the United States Postal Service in San Francisco for three years . . . Resigned
in December to go on a world tour with a friend and roommate, John McCarty, who
was also taken hostage . . . Had gone with Mr. McCarty to Hong Kong, Australia,
Fiji, Thailand and the Greek islands and was headed back to the United States
when hijacking occurred . . . Born in Langlade, Wis., a small farm town . . .
Studied for the priesthood and attended St. Norbert College in West De Pere,
Wis., for one year, but dropped out to work for the Postal Service in Green Bay,
Wis. . . . Has performed with his guitar in coffeehouses and clubs in Wisconsin.


Kenneth Anderson

Construction superintendent for Power Construction Co. in Elmhurst, Ill. . . .
62 years old . . . 6 feet 1 inch tall, 200 pounds . . . Resident of Fox River
Grove, Ill. . . . Married and a member of the St. Margaret Mary Roman Catholic
Church in Algonquin, Ill. . . . He and wife, Lorraine, were among 22 parish
members returning from a visit to the Holy Land when jet was hijacked . . . Mrs.
Anderson was released . . . Andersons have one daughter, Karen Terhune of
Madison, Wis. . . . Mr. Anderson, one of three children, is a Navy veteran who
has used his construction skills to build retaining walls, repair bridges and
resurface roads in the small private river-front community of Venetian Gardens,
where he lives.

Jerome Barczak 52 years old . . . Civil engineer who has been employed for more
than year by General Dynamics on a low-income housing project near Cairo, Egypt
. . . Native of Milwaukee . . . Of Polish Roman Catholic background . . . Has
done construction engineering in Japan, Europe and the Middle East . . . Owns a
home in Memphis, Tenn., his legal residence . . . Marriage to Maryann Foglio of
San Diego, Calif., ended in divorce . . . Couple had five children, David, 26;
Frank, 23; Mike, 21; Diane, 17, and James, 14 . . . When jet was hijacked, Mr.
Barczak was returning to the United States from Cairo to attend the graduation
of his daughter, Diane, in San Diego . . . His son David says he runs two miles
a day and is in excellent physical condition.

Kenneth M. Bowen 23 years old . . . Lives in Norfolk, Va. . . . A United States
Navy diver with the rank of petty officer, third class . . . Worked on a
construction project in Greece with a fellow Navy diver, Robert Dean Stethem,
who was shot dead by the hijackers and thrown out onto the tarmac of the Beirut
airport . . . Joined the Navy immediately after graduating from high school in
St. Petersburg, Fla., in 1980 . . . Father says he joined with with the
intention of becoming a diver.

Michael B. Brown 27 years old . . . Lives in North Miami Beach, Fla. . . . Was
married June 9 to his wife, Judy, 25 . . . Couple were on their honeymoon when
Flight 847 was hijacked . . . Mrs. Brown was released . . . A partner in a small
business, Window Covers to Go . . . A 1976 graduate of Churchland High School in
Portsmouth, Va.

Robert Gordon Brown

Resident of Stowe, Mass. . . . Has been a sales and marketing representative for
Medi-Tech Inc., a medical instrument company in Watertown, Mass., for 14 years .
. . 42 years old . . . Handles the company's overseas business . . . He and his
wife, Jill, have two daughters, Wendy, 19, and Melissa, 13 . . . Family lives in
a bedroom suburb northwest of Boston that is popular with employees of
high-technology industries.

Leo Byron 47 years old . . . Resident of Harrisburg, Pa. . . . An executive in
the Office of Clients' Rights of the Department of Public Welfare of the state
of Pennsylvania . . . At the time of the hijacking, was on a two-week vacation
with his wife, Carolyn, 44, and their daughter Pamela, 13, both of whom were
released earlier.

Kurt L. Carlson 38 years old . . . Resident of Rockford, Ill. . . . Operates a
roofing business, Roofing Systems Inc., with his wife, Cheryl . . . Couple is
also developing an office park on land they own in a Rockford suburb . . .
Carlsons were married 18 years ago after meeting in Winston-Salem, N.C., where
he attended Wake Forest University and where she grew up . . . They have one
child, Meredith Alice, born five months ago . . . Mr. Carlson likes golf and
tennis, and has worked with a local Boys Club and the Little League . . . His
wife has competed in body-building contests, winning five trophies . . . Family
members describe the Carlsons as conservative Republicans.

Allyn B. Conwell 39 years old . . . Resident of Houston, Tex., and Muscat, Oman
. . . Salesman of oil exploration equipment . . . Was designated spokesman for
the hostages . . . Is said to speak Arabic . . . Has spent much of the last
decade living and working overseas in places such as Dubai and Singapore, and is
described by relatives and friends as a persuasive and poised talker . . . Has
worked since March 1984 as the Middle East area manager for Enterra Oil Field
Services, a subsidiary of a Houston-based oil equipment rental company . . .
Born in Texas and raised in Indiana . . . Has been married twice . . . Has a
19-year-old daughter, Terri, from his first marriage, to Carol Smith, and two
children, Alexander, 5, and Alexis, 2, from his current marriage to a Greek
national . . . His wife, Olga, and children have been staying with her family on
the island of Corfu, where Mr. Conwell had spent his vacation before boarding
Flight 847.

Thomas V. S. Cullins 42-year-old architect who lives in a Victorian house in
Burlington, Vt., that was built by his great-grandfather . . . Attended local
schools and showed an early love for travel, including a trip to Europe when he
was 17 . . . Received an architecture degree from Syracuse University and a
master's in design from Harvard in 1967 . . . He and his wife, Kelly, took their
honeymoon in Greece and spent an additional four years there doing designs for
houses and public buildings in Athens . . . They speak Greek, serve Greek coffee
at home, and have a cat named Zorbaki, or Little Zorba . . . They have a
12-year-old daughter, Sarah . . . Was on a three-week business trip when the
plane was hijacked.

Stewart L. J. Dahl 31 years old . . . Serves in the United States Navy and is
stationed in Norfolk, Va. . . . He and his wife rent a house in Norfolk.

William J. Darras 9 years old . . . Resident of Arlington Heights, Ill. . . .
Vice president for international sales at Weber Marking Systems Inc. . . . Has
been with the concern, a label-making company, for 27 years . . . Son of Greek
immigrants, he often travels on business and had been on a monthlong trip when
the plane was hijacked . . . He and Violette, his wife of 37 years, have three
adult sons and live in a large, ranch-style home . . . Is described by
associates as an outgoing, conscientious man who loves gardening and is deeply
devoted to his family . . . Darrases are member of St. Nectarios Greek Orthodox
Church in Palatine, Ill.

Stuart Darsch

Celebrated 30th birthday on the day of his release from captivity in Beirut . .
. Works for a graphics design firm, Sametz-Blackstone Associates, in Boston's
South End . . . Lives in a condominium in the Dorchester section of Boston . . .
Parents live in Reston, Va. . . . Was finishing a five-week vacation in Italy
and Greece with a friend, Terry Swack, when the plane was hijacked.

The Rev. Thomas J. Dempsey 49 years old . . . Pastor of the St. Patrick Roman
Catholic Church in St. Charles, Ill. . . . A priest for 24 years . . . Said by
parishioners and friends to have wanted for many years to visit the Holy Land,
but was talked into joining a pilgrimage to the Holy Land for Chicago-area Roman
Catholics by the two fellow priests who had organized the tour, and then only at
the last minute . . . Said to be a fitness enthusiast who jogs six miles a day
and is in excellent physical condition.

Grant Elliott 27 years old . . . Lives in Algonquin, Ill. . . . Another of the
religious pilgrims, he was returning from the Holy Land when Flight 847 was
hijacked . . . Converted to Roman Catholicism last year and was baptized on
Easter Sunday of 1984, fulfilling what his family said was a desire he had
expressed for several years . . . Was inspired by that religious devotion, they
said, to join the Holy Land tour . . . Works for the Precision Twist Drill
Company in Crystal Lake, Ill., as an order filler.

Vincente Garza 53 years old . . . A wealthy developer with wide connections
throughout Laredo, Tex. . . . In the Laredo area, owns the River Drive Mall, a
small department store complex called El Rio Family Center and the Santos
Department Store . . . Member of the board of Banco Mexico, Mexico's largest
bank . . . Was on vacation with his wife, Irma, their daughter, Irma Trautmann,
and her husband, Robert, and the daughter's three children . . . Robert
Trautmann was also held hostage.

Simon J. Grossmayer 57-year-old resident of Algonquin, Ill. . . . A manager at
the Jewel Tea General Store in Barrington, Ill. . . . A eucharistic minister at
St. Margaret Mary Roman Catholic Church in Algonquin, he and his wife, Elaine,
were on the Holy Land tour with other church members when the hijacking occurred
. . . Father of five children . . . Has only one lung and there have been
persistent concerns about the impact of the ordeal on his health . . . In a
telephone interview with ABC News, he asked that word be passed to a pregnant
daughter that he was in good health.

Richard P. Herzberg 33-year-old resident of Norfolk, Va. . . . An insurance
salesman . . . Was returning from his honeymoon with his wife, the former Sue
Ellen Deutch, when the plane was hijacked . . . She was released in Algiers . .
. Lives in a block of modest apartments in a working-class section of Norfolk .
. . His parents, Charles and Norma E. Herzberg, live nearby and keep his
bar-mitzvah picture on their wall.

Peter W. Hill 57 years old . . . Sales executive and tour guide for the Good
News Travel Agency, based in Schaumburg, Ill., a suburb 25 miles northwest of
downtown Chicago . . . Specializes in tours of religious groups and often goes
abroad as many as 10 times a year as a tour escort . . . Although he is a
Protestant, he was escorting the tour from St. Margaret Mary Roman Catholic
Church when the plane was hijacked . . . Native of Bermuda . . . Lives in
Hoffman Estates, a suburb near Schaumburg . . . Has three children, Paul, 32, a
computer technician in Boca Raton, Fla.; Nina Hill, 35, a speech therapist in
New York, and Roxanne, 28.

James W. Hoskins Jr. 22 year-old resident of Indianapolis . . . A recent
graduate of Butler University in Indianapolis . . . Was on a trip to Europe, a
graduation present from his parents, when the plane was hijacked . . . With him
was his fiancee, Kathryn Davis, 22, who was among those released . . . The only
son of James W. Hoskins Sr., a football coach at Beech Grove High School in the
Indianapolis suburb of Beech Grove, and Deanna Hoskins, an interior designer . .
. At Butler, he studied to become a teacher, played varsity football and ran for
the track team . . . Was the Butler Bulldogs' leading pass receiver for the
1984-85 season, and scored five touchdowns with 43 receptions for 756 yards . .
. Has ''real good hands and ran great pass patterns,'' according to Don Benbow,
the team's offensive coach. ''We always knew who we had to get the ball to in
key situations.'' Jeffrey J. Ingalls 24 years old . . . Lives in Virginia Beach,
Va. . . . Serves in the United States Navy . . . Was president of the junior
class and vice president of the sophomore class at his New Hampshire high
school, and was on the school's baseball, soccer and ski teams . . . He and his
fiancee, Nancy Moyer, a special education teacher in the Chesapeake, Va., junior
high schools, live in a well-appointed rented house in a bayside community
called Chick's Beach . . . His parents, John and Priscilla Ingalls, live in
North Woodstock, N.H. . . . His father works for the state highway department
and his mother works at an electrical company. Raymond R. Johnson 62 years old .
. . Retired truck driver . . . Was on his second trip to the Holy Land when the
plane was hijacked . . . A baker in the Navy during World War II, he worked for
the Sunbeam Corporation from 1961 to 1983, delivering appliances . . . Lives
with his wife, Margaret, 60, in Aurora, Ill., about 35 miles west of downtown
Chicago, in a one-story house with white clapboard and light green shutters and
a fading baskteball backboard over the garage . . . Couple have four grown
daughters, Kathleen, Ruth, Mary and Barbara, and two sons, Alfred and Joseph . .
. Described as a deeply spirutual man, Mr. Johnson has been a deacon at
Annunciation Roman Catholic Church, near his house, for seven years. George
Lazansky 53 years old . . . A vice president of the Algonquin State Bank in
Algonquin, Ill. . . . Like numerous other passengers on Flight 847, he was
returning from the Holy Land tour with a group from the St. Margaret Mary
parish, to which he has belonged since childhood . . . Among the hostages
released soon after the hijacking was his wife, Joanne, who waited for him in
Paris . . . Both Mr. and Mrs. Lazansky, who have been married for 27 years, are
volunteer paramedics for a community ambulance service . . . Couple has three
grown sons. John McCarty 40 years old . . . Manages a restaurant in San
Francisco, where he shared an apartment with another hostage, Victor Amburgy . .
. As a birthday present he treated himself to a world tour, on which Mr. Amburgy
accompanied him . . . The two were on their way home when the T.W.A. plane was
hijacked . . . Was born in Dorchester, Mass., and grew up there and in suburban
Braintree . . . Attended Northeastern University in Boston before going to work
as a sales representative for the Hilton hotel chain . . . Owned a restaurant in
Gloucester, Mass., for eight years . . . Moved to San Francisco three years ago.
The Rev. James W. McLoughlin 45 years old . . . Resident of Geneva, Ill. . . . A
Roman Catholic priest who was escorting parishioners on a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land . . . Has been priest of St. Peter's Roman Catholic Church since November
1983 . . . Celebrated his 20th anniversary as a priest in May . . . Traveling
with Father McLoughlin and other church members was his 73-year-old mother,
Loretta, who was among the first passengers released. Philip G. Maresca Resident
of Salt Lake City . . . 42 years old . . . First officer on the hijacked plane .
. . Joined T.W.A. as a flight engineer in 1967 after serving as a military
reconnaissance pilot in Vietnam . . . Though normally assigned to domestic runs,
Mr. Maresca had twice been assigned to temporary overseas service and was just
beginning another temporary, monthlong stint when Flight 847 was hijacked . . .
Born and raised in Baldwin, L.I., where his parents still live . . . Moved to
Utah to be able to enjoy his his favorite sport, skiing, at nearby Rocky
Mountain resorts . . . On June 10, just before heading for Athens, he had
attended a family reunion on Long Island and told his parents that he would be
home by July 4 . . . Divorced and has no children. Dr. Richard Y. Moon 62 years
old . . . Has been an internist in Asheville, N.C., since 1956 . . . Son of John
T. Moon, general manager of Southern Railway . . . Graduated from the University
of North Carolina in 1946 and from the University of Cincinnati School of
Medicine in 1953 . . . His wife, Alison, is the daughter of a prominent
Asheville doctor and a graduate of Vassar College, and was a student at the
Sorbonne . . . Couple have a son, John Thomas, and a daughter, Mary Alison . . .
Family lives in a large, red brick home in an affluent neighborhood south of the
city. Before the plane was hijacked, the couple had been on a
three-and-a-half-week vacation in Greece and Italy . . . Mr. Moon the T.W.A.
flight home from Athens, while Mrs. Moon boarded a separate flight for Istanbul
to visit with the wife of the United States Consul General there.

Thomas Murry 58 years old . . . Newbury Park, Calif., resident . . . A senior
field service engineer for Northrop Corporation, a company he has been with for
20 years . . . Was traveling on business when the plane was hijacked . . . Lives
with his wife, Jeanne, 56, in a small ranch-style house in a comfortable
suburban community about 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles . . . Born and raised
in Vallejo, in northern California . . . When he was 3, his father died, and he
and an older brother, Frank, were raised by their mother, Grace . . . Spent two
years in the Navy training to be an engineer . . . Couple have two daughters,
Marianne Robertson, 31, of Perkins, Okla., and Marilee, 26 . . . A Mason . . .
Involved with a community theater group, the Conejo Players . . . Favorite
relaxation, according to his wife, is sitting on a small front porch and
watching the hills change colors in the sunset.

Robert Peel Jr. 33 years old . . . Works with his father at the family business,
Peel's Friendly Beauty Supply Co., in Hutchinson, Kan. . . . Both men and their
wives were on a trip sponsored by a beauty supply company when the hijacking
took place . . . The two women were released soon after the hijacking, and the
elder Mr. Peel was freed during the final stop in Beirut . . . The younger Mr.
Peel and his wife, Kristi, have three children, ranging in ages from 6 years to
7 months . . . Mrs. Peel awaited her husband's release in Paris, while her
parents were taking care of the couple's children and seeking to shield them
from the news of their father's captivity.

Clinton Suggs 29 years old . . . A Navy petty officer, second class . . .
Stationed in Virginia Beach, Va. . . . His wife, Chantal Gauthier-Suggs, was in
the Canadian Navy until 1982 . . . Couple have a 9-month-old son, Paton
Alexander . . . Grew up in Elkhart, Ind., and graduated in 1974 from a local
high school, where he had been on the football, wrestling and track teams and
been active in a drama group and in student government . . . Went to Indiana
University, specializing in English and history, but dropped out after a couple
of years and enlisted in the Navy . . . Was a close friend of Robert Dean
Stethem, the Navy diver who was killed by the hijackers . . . Both men had been
part of a naval underwater construction team sent to Greece . . . Before he left
Greece, wrote his wife a letter saying he wanted them to see Europe while they
were still young.

Blake Synnestved 24 years old . . . Resident of Bryn Athyn, Pa. . . . Was
married May 31 in a candlelight ceremony at the cathedral in his home town,
outside Philadelphia . . . He and his wife, Jane, 21, were on their way back
from their honeymoon and were shifted to Flight 847 after their original flight
was canceled . . . Of Swedish descent . . . Earned a civil engineering degree
from Penn State University and had been scheduled to begin a job in Phoenix with
the Garrett Pneumatic Division on June 17.

John L. Testrake 57 years old . . . Lives in Richmond, Mo. . . . Was the pilot
of T.W.A. Flight 847 . . . A native of Ripley, N.Y., . . . Joined T.W.A. as a
flight engineer in 1953, became a co-pilot in the 1960's, and regarded his
assignment last March to international flights as a long-desired promotion . . .
Has three children, Debbie Barnes, 32; Diane Smith, 27, and John Jr., 22 . . . A
gregarious and deeply religious man, he has lived through a number of
misfortunes . . . His first wife died of cancer nine years ago, and an infant
daughter was killed in an automobile accident before he moved to Richmond . . .
His oldest son, Alan, died in an accident . . . He and his second wife, Phyllis,
live in a spacious, tastefully decorated farm home that has a barometer and an
aviation-weather radio on the sun porch . . . On a landing strip near his home
he keeps his 1952 Navion, a single-engine craft that was developed during World
War II.

Dr. Arthur W. Toga

A 33-year-old assistant research professor of neurology at the Washington
University School of Medicine in St. Louis . . . Originally from the Boston area
. . . Did graduate work in psychology at St. Louis University before joining
Washington University as a post-doctorate fellow in 1978 . . . Director of the
university's Laboratory of Neuro-Imaging . . . Colleagues describe him as a
serious and accomplished young scientist who has developed innovative new ways
to apply computer analysis to medicine . . . He and his wife, Deborah, 27, were
originally scheduled to return from a three-week European vacation on an earlier
T.W.A. flight, but were transferred to Flight 847 when their original plane
developed mechanical problems . . . Mrs. Toga, a psychiatric nurse, is expecting
the couple's first child in September.

Ralf Traugott 32 years old . . . Resident of Lunenberg, Mass. . . . Owns a car
dealership called Mass Avenue Motors . . . Lives alone in Lunenberg, which is in
the north central part of the state . . . Had been visiting his fiancee in
Athens and was returning home when the plane was hijacked . . . His brother,
Axel, is director of marketing at the Lafayette Hotel in downtown Boston . . .
His mother, Ingrid, and stepfather, Leonard, live in Garden City, Mo.

Robert Trautmann Jr. 37 years old . . . Lives in Laredo, Tex. . . . An affluent
developer, like his father-in-law, Vincente Garza, another hostage . . . Owns
North Town Development Company, which builds residential subdivisions . . . His
wife, Irma, their two children, and a stepdaughter were traveling with their
in-laws on an ambitious itinerary when the plane was hijacked . . . The women
and children were released earlier.

Tony D. Watson 27 years old . . . A Navy diver, like the slain hostage, Robert
Dean Stethem . . . Was on his way back from Greece, where he and other Seabees,
or naval construction battalion engineers, had been on an assignment . . . He
and his wife, Pam, are both from North Carolina and both graduated from St.
Stephen's High School in Hickory, N.C., in 1976 . . . Couple have two young
sons, Bradley, 10, and Greg, 6 . . . Enlisted in 1978 to become a construction
electrician in the Seabees . . . Cultivated a love of diving while he was
stationed in the Bahamas, then was trained by the Navy in salvage operations,
underwater search and recovery, underwater hull inspection and ship repair.

Claude E. Whitmoyer 38 years old . . . Resident of Severn, Md. . . . Said by his
neighbors to be an Air Force sergeant, though the Air Force will neither confirm
nor deny that information . . . In the middle of a yearlong assignment in
Greece, he was on his way home for a family vacation when the hijacking occurred
. . . He and his wife, Judy, have two children, a 15-year-old daughter, Tracy,
and an 11-year-old son, Danny . . . Since moving to Severn, a Baltimore suburb,
about four years ago, after living in Japan for several years, he has become a
familiar figure at local baseball and football games through his activities as a
volunteer coach.

Steve Willett 37 years old . . . Lives in Choupic, La., where he is a sales
manager with Cameco Industries, a company founded by his father that
manufactures sugar processing machinery . . . Said by family members to be a
calm and quiet man with a strong sense of humor . . . His business requires him
to travel around the world and he speaks Spanish and Portuguese fluently . . .
When the plane was hijacked, he was traveling through Italy and Greece with his
wife, Marsha, and their sons, Christopher, 17, and Joshua, 19, to show them some
of the places he had visited on business . . . Born in Hakalau, Hawaii, he moved
to Louisiana's Cajun country when he was 14 . . . Attended Nicholls State
University in Thibodaux, La., then left college to work at his father's company
. . . Likes to fish in the Gulf of Mexico and the coastal bayous.

Benjamin C. Zimmermann 45 years old . . . Resident of Cascade, Idaho . . .
Flight engineer aboard Flight 847 . . . A headquarters squadron commander and
intelligence officer in the Idaho Air National Guard . . . Has flown for T.W.A.
since 1968 . . . An ordained Lutheran minister, known to his congregants by his
middle name, Christian . . . Born in China, the son of American missionaries who
spent 14 years there . . . Was educated at Concordia Seminary in St. Louis . . .
In 1980, moved to Cascade, a logging town with a population of less than 1,000
people high in the Rocky Mountains, to open the Cascade Lutheran Mission . . .
Was a pastor there until returning to the cockpit full time in 1983 . . . His
wife, Melvia, 42, is a former flight attendant . . . The couple have three
children, Eric, 16; Steve, 12, and Elizabeth, 5 . . . Mr. Zimmermann's father,
Elmer, 88, who was retired from his job as a theology professor specializing in
Islam, died of a heart attack in St. Louis the day he learned his son was being
held hostage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of hostages at new conference in Damascus

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon;
The Life Of the 'Ops Dep'

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


Lieut. Gen. David L. Nichols is a fighter pilot who flew 100 missions in F-105
Thunderchief fighter-bombers over North Vietnam, but he hardly fits the mold of
the silk-scarf-and-eye-goggles flyers of yore.

To the contrary, General Nichols is a quiet, unassuming and self-controlled
officer whose task today is to stay out of the public eye as the Air Force's top
operations officer and alter ego of the Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Charles
A. Gabriel.

He and his counterparts who wear three stars in the Army, Navy and Marine Corps
have two vital facets to their assignments, one to back up their chiefs as
members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the other to run the operations of
their services.

When the Chiefs of Staff gather at 4 o'clock on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday
afternoons around the long, dark table in the windowless Pentagon conference
room known as the ''tank,'' sitting to General Gabriel's right is General
Nichols.

He and the other operations deputies, or ''ops deps'' in Pentagon lingo, are the
guardians of the portals through which the issues must pass to reach the Joint
Chiefs; then they are the executors who see that decisions made by the chiefs
are carried out.

In their respective services, the operations deputies are responsible for
training and preparing their forces for battle today and for planning the kinds
of troops, arms and equipment that may be needed for the wars of tomorrow.

Getting Inside Their Minds

General Nichols, whose formal title is Deputy Chief of Staff for Planning and
Operations, says his job and those of his Army, Navy and Marine colleagues is to
get ''inside the minds of those chiefs.''

Besides meeting with the Joint Chiefs three times a week, the deputies confer on
Wednesday and Friday mornings to sift out the issues, settle those they can
themselves and prepare their bosses for the afternoon sessions in the tank.

In recent weeks, the ops deps and the chiefs have been wrestling with the
organization and staffing of the new unified space command, which is scheduled
to take control of military space operations on Oct. 1, with headquarters in
Colorado Springs.

''Its roles and missions were easy to define,'' General Nichols said, with much
having been done by colonels two levels below. ''We're now working on the hard
parts,'' he said, referring to staffing of the new command.

Since the Department of Defense and Joint Chiefs were organized in 1947, among
the most vigorous bureaucratic battles inside the Pentagon have been the
struggles of each service to secure choice positions for its officers in the
unified, four-service commands.

In this case, General Nichols suggested, the issues have been so tough that the
chiefs themselves were making the decisions.

Within the Air Force itself, life is not so complicated. In the year he has held
the job, General Nichols has worked to establish a Center for Low Intensity
Conflict at Langley Air Force Base in Hampton, Va. Officers there have been
asked to determine how the Air Force can best operate in guerrilla wars,
counterinsurgency operations and antiterrorist actions in what military people
call the lower end of the spectrum of conflict. Nuclear war is at the other end.

In another initiative, General Nichols has approached the problem of having few
military leaders who are experienced in combat.

In a way, he said, it is good that there have been no wars to fight since
Vietnam. ''But you worry about that a little bit because you want to be able to
do your job without having wars to fall back on,'' he said. ''In the Air Force
today, you do not see any leaders who were generals in previous conflicts.''

He has thus instructed the Air University at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama
to set up a short, intense course for new generals that will focus on war games,
case studies from military history and experience of former leaders. He himself
will be in the first class next January.

Beware the 'Activity Trap'

General Nichols, a trim man who looks considerably younger than his 51 years,
said, ''The single most critical thing in working this job is managing the time,
because there's a danger of getting caught in an activity trap, having
everything scheduled up, and that's bad.''

Instead, he seeks to leave time for the unexpected and for his staff. Gesturing
toward the door to his office, he said ''I try not to have that door closed
except during a meeting.''

With nearly 800 Air Force and civilian people working for him, there is not much
time for a personal touch. But the general takes a few minutes each day,
including weekends, to call everyone on his staff whose birthday it is to wish
them a happy birthday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut Gen. David Nichols

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 2, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE HOSTAGES' RETURN;
EX-HOSTAGES TO GET PRESIDENTIAL WELCOME TODAY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


President Reagan plans to welcome the returning American hostages on Tuesday
afternoon in a ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base in suburban Maryland, the
White House said today.

At the same time, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said the United
States was also seeking the release of seven Americans missing in Lebanon over
the last 15 months.

''The United States is still dedicated to securing their freedom,'' he said.
''We hope to increase our intelligence capabilities in it. We hope to utilize
other nations that might have an influence in the situation.''

In response to a question, he noted that President Hafez al-Assad of Syria had
used his influence in obtaining the the release of the 39 hostages of the Trans
World Airlines plane.

''We would hope that he could be helpful in securing the release of the seven,''
Mr. Speakes said.

Reagan Ready to Meet Relatives

Mr. Speakes said President Reagan was willing to meet with families of the seven
who have complained that the missing Americans have been virtually ignored in
the effort to obtain the release of the air hostages. Mr. Speakes and other
officials have denied this.

White House officials said plans for the 30-minute ceremony to greet the
returning air hostages on Tuesday at 3 P.M. included a speech by Mr. Reagan. The
hostages and their families will then go their own ways. It was unclear whether
all the 39 hostages would be returning on Tuesday or whether some had decided to
remain in Western Europe.

Officials said that plans had initially called for a T.W.A. charter carrying the
hostages to Kennedy International Airport in New York. Officials said the White
House decided that Andrews Air Force Base offered better facilities for the
welcoming ceremony.

Officials said that Kennedy would be swarming with planes at the time of the
welcoming event, which is to include a private meeting between Mr. Reagan and
the hostages, and that the ceremony would have had to occur in a cramped area.

''From everyone's point of view, Andrews was just more convenient,'' said a
White House official.

Mr. Speakes, at a briefing, said Mr. Reagan was ''joking obviously'' on an open
microphone Sunday before his televised address from the Oval Office.

Mr. Reagan said: ''Boy, I'm glad I saw 'Rambo' last night. Now I know what to do
next time.''

Rambo, portrayed by Sylvester Stallone, is a veteran of the Vietnam War who
returns to rescue American prisoners and fights his way out by killing dozens of
Vietnamese and Russians.

Mr. Speakes was asked by a reporter, ''Does that mean next time he is going to
go in there and blow people away with all this firepower?''

Mr. Speakes replied with a smile, ''Have to wait and see.''

Later, announcing Mr. Reagan's plans to welcome the hostages with Mrs. Reagan,
Mr. Speakes said the President wanted to greet each one.

A White House official said: ''The President wants the least amount of
disruption. He will greet them personally, make some remarks, tell them we are
proud to have them home and then let them make their connections home.''

Mr. Reagan, who canceled a trip to his ranch near Santa Barbara, Calif., plans a
quiet week. On July 4, he is scheduled to have a private dinner and then watch
the fireworks display on the Mall.

On Friday, he is to fly to Camp David, Md., for the weekend with his wife and
with Charles Z. Wick, director of the United States Information Agency, and his
wife, Mary Jane. They are scheduled to celebrate Mrs. Reagan's birthday on
Saturday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Aids U.S. Recovery Of 13 American Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


The remains of 13 American airmen killed in the crash of their Air Force gunship
in Laos more than 12 years ago have been recovered by a joint United
States-Laotian excavation team and returned to the United States, the White
House announced today.

The Administration spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the remains, which were
recovered last February, had been identified by the Army.

A Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Keith Schneider, identified the men, all Air Force
personnel, as: Col. Paul O. Meder, of Jamaica, Queens; Lieut. Col. Thomas T.
Hart 3d, of Orlando, Fla.; Lieut. Col. Harry R. Lagerwall, of Carmel, N.Y.; Maj.
Robert L. Liles Jr., of Shreveport, La.; Maj. Francis A. Walsh, of Westport,
Conn.; Capt. Delma E. Dickens, of Omega, Ga.. Also Capt. Stanley N. Kroboth, of
Savannah, Ga.; Capt. George D. MacDonald, of Evanston, Ill.; Chief Master Sgt.
James R. Fuller, of Cibolo, Tex.; Senior Master Sgt. John Q. Winningham, of
Grover City, Calif.; Master Sgt. Robert T. Elliott, of El Dorado, Ark.; Master
Sgt. Charles F. Fenter, of Tucson, Ariz., and Master Sgt. Rollie K. Reaid, of
Dora, Ala.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 989 words


CARPENTER'S GOTHIC. By William Gaddis. 262 pages. Elisabeth Sifton/ Viking.
$16.95.

ONE comic scene in William

Gaddis's remarkable new novel - his first in nearly a decade and his third in 30
years - reveals Paul Booth, a Vietnam veteran turned media consultant,
frantically drawing a diagram for his harried wife, Elizabeth. In it, he tries
to show her certain outlandish schemes he is currently working on.

As the passage reads in Mr. Gaddis's quirky style: ''Problem look, problem Liz
you don't try and see the big picture he came on scattering bills, envelopes,
mailing pieces in thrilling colour, flushing the blank side of a letter opening
Dear Friend of the Bowhead Whale -look.'' It continues: ''He had a blunt pencil,
-here's Teakell. . . and a smudged circle appeared and shot forth an arrow. -Got
his own constituency here. . . a blob took roughly kidney shape, -Senate
committees and the big voice for Administration policy up here. . . something
vaguely phallic, -and his whole big third world Food for Africa program over
here. . . and an arrow shot to distant coastlines shaped up abruptly in a
deformed footprint.''

About 20 pages later, another character, a man named McCandless who owns the
house overlooking the Hudson River that the Booths are renting, pays a call on
her and remarks, ''I didn't know you had children?'' She sees that he is looking
at her husband's ''blobs and crosses, lightning strokes, hails of arrows'' and
says, ''Oh, oh that that's just, nothing.''

This little joke illustrates any number of things about Mr. Gaddis's compressed,
complex novel, not least of them Paul Booth's nutty patronization of his
deceptively compliant wife. But, more significant, the incident is typical of
the way that the discovery of innocent-seeming objects is the instrument by
which the plot of ''Carpenter's Gothic'' unfolds. Indeed the novel could be
described as a mosaic of curious objects, which seem to have lives of their own
and must be viewed just so if the pattern they form is to be seen.

And, most important of all, the joke of the diagram evokes one of the novel's
major themes, which has been sounded only a moment earlier when McCandless
echoes Liz Booth's lament of the Halloween mess that the neighborhood kids have
made. ''Like the whole damned world isn't it,'' he says, ''kids with nothing to
do.''

In this respect, Mr. Gaddis's new novel reverses the situation of his earlier
work of fiction, ''JR,'' which won the National Book Award for 1975 and, with
the publication of ''Carpenter's Gothic,'' is being reissued in a Penguin
paperback along with his still earlier novel, ''The Recognitions'' (1955). For
if ''JR'' focused its plot on an 11-year-old boy who parlays a school assignment
into a vast financial empire, then ''Carpenter's Gothic'' is about a scheming
grownup who makes a child's mess of everything.

Or does he really? Another character, a C.I.A. agent, looks at Paul Booth's
diagram and says, ''it's Cressy. I just figured it out. It's the battle of
Cressy,'' meaning of course the village of Crecy-en-Ponthieu, where in 1396 the
English fought the French in one of the most significant battles in history.
Paul's doodling may not be so childish after all. Just as the objects in Mr.
Gaddis's plot have multiple ways of presenting themselves, so do the actions of
his characters. It may just be that Paul succeeds in his plan to start a war in
Africa by promoting the interests of a fundamentalist preacher named Reverend
Elton Ude. On the other hand, Paul may amount to nothing but words and empty
gestures.

It depends to some degree on which of the several meanings of the novel's title
one chooses to emphasize. Most literally, ''Carpenter's Gothic'' refers to the
style of the house that the Booths are renting. As its owner, McCandless,
comments: all that ''these country architects and the carpenters'' had ''were
the simple dependable old materials, the wood and their hammers and saws and
their own clumsy ingenuity bringing those grandiose visions the masters had left
behind down to a human scale with their own little inventions.''

But the title may also refer to the rude and barbarous Christianity that
Reverend Ude has made of what history's most famous carpenter began. Or to
McCandless's embittered view of American civilization: ''Two hundred years
building this great bastion of middle class values, fair play, pay your debts,
fair pay for honest work, two hundred years that's about all it is, progress,
improvement everywhere, what's worth doing is worth doing well and they find out
that's the most dangerous thing of all, all our grand solutions turn into'' the
rest of the world's ''nightmares.''

Or one might apply the title to the form of the novel itself. This seems
appropriate in several ways. Out of the simple situation of a married couple
renting a house, Mr. Gaddis has ''carpentered'' ''grotesque and violent events,
and an atmosphere of degeneration and decay,'' to cite one dictionary's
definition of literary gothic. More satisfying still is to compare the present
book with Mr. Gaddis's previous two novels, both of which seemed to this reader
at least virtually unreadable because of their length, their repetitiousness and
their complexity. Not least among the things for which one can be grateful is
that if ''The Recognitions'' and ''JR'' were grandiose, then Mr. Gaddis has
taken their visions and in ''Carpenter's Gothic'' has brought them down to
''human scale.''

Some of Mr. Gaddis's more passionate admirers may regard this act of becoming
comparatively accessible as one of stepping down in esthetic class and
compromising the best things he has stood for. But I disagree. In ''Carpenter's
Gothic'' Mr. Gaddis hasn't so much reduced the complexity of his fiction as
compressed it. By doing so he has transformed a tiresome task into an inviting
challenge - in short, something very like an entertainment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Gaddis

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE HIJACKING AFTERMATH;
SAILOR SAYS HIS MILITARY TRAINING HELPED HIME DURING ORDEAL

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va., July 3


One of the Navy sailors held captive in Lebanon said today that his military
training had helped him and his comrades survive their ordeal.

''We stuck together,'' said the sailor, Petty Officer Stuart L. J. Dahl, who was
spending his first day in several weeks surrounded by his family and neighbors
after 17 days held captive by a group of Shiite Moslems.

Part of his training, Mr. Dahl said, came in a course at the Navy's Survival,
Evasion, Resistance and Escape School in Maine in 1983. His wife, Martha, played
a role, as well, he said.

Based on the lessons learned in dealing with American prisoners in Vietnam, Mr.
Dahl said, the Navy suggested that members of captives' families not talk to
reporters, since even the tiniest contradiction might be seized by suspicious
captors and lead to hardships for the prisoners. Mr. Dahl said he was pleased to
learn today that his wife had politely put off all questions during his
captivity.

Mr. Dahl was trying today to return to a normal life, or one as normal as is
possible in the Navy. He has been away from home so much that Thursday will mark
only the second Fourth of July that he has spent in the United States since he
joined the Navy 11 years ago.

No Sympathy for Captors

A banner stretched across the street in front of his family's house declared,
''Welcome Home Stuart, We Missed You Dad.'' Mr. Dahl, 31 years old, drank iced
tea and discussed his captivity, disclosing many details for the first time.

He spoke of his lack of sympathy for his captors, saying whatever sympathy he
had was for the people suffering from the killing in Lebanon.

''I have no sympathy for any group that would advocate or support kidnapping,''
he said.

He said he and the other military prisoners from the Trans World Airlines flight
were kept in a small room that had a steel door and bars on the winders. On two
occasions, he said, a Palestinian prisoner was brought to the house, beaten in
an adjoining room and taken away in the trunk of a car.

Mr. Dahl was the highest-ranking active-duty serviceman in the group. Another
hostage, Kurt L. Carlson, was a major in the Army reserve, Mr. Dahl said, and
the two worked to keep the captives' morale as high as they could.

Much of what he did, Mr. Dahl said, was the result of what he learned at the
Navy school. ''They put you in situations where you are trying to survive off
the land,'' he said of the school. ''They put you in P.O.W. camps and provide
you the opportunity to escape.''

Information Not a Goal

Mr. Dahl was prepared to resist interrogation, he said, but that never came. ''I
assumed they would pump me for information, but they didn't,'' he said. ''Their
goal was not to get information. I think their goal was to further the cause of
the Amal militia, to try to act as if they are not thieves, murders and thugs,
which is just what they were.''

Mr. Dahl said that he had learned much about surviving under hostage situations.
''No. 1 is to keep faith in the United States of America,'' he said, ''next to
keep faith in yourself and in your unit, and to keep your faith in God.

''We talked about this as a group,'' he said. ''I told them: 'We are going to
get out of here with honor, dignity and safety.''

The captives had made careful note of when the largest number of their captors
were in the house and in which rooms they were being kept, he said. They started
learning Lebanese customs and some Arabic terms, he said. And they determined
that they were just a mile from the beach.

Asked if they had developed an escape plan, Mr. Dahl replied: ''You bet!''

There was no chance, however to put the plan into effect, he said. First, he
said, he wanted to give the United States a chance to negotiate the release of
the captives, and, second, he said, any escpae by the military personnel might
have endangered the lives of the larger number of civilian prisoners.

''They didn't know we knew how to fire their AK-47 Russian automatic weapons,''
Mr. Dahl said of the guards. ''We didn't at first, but we learned when we got to
Bierut - by watching.'' He noted that the militiamen fired their weapons
frequently.

''They were just boys but they were playing with automatic weapons,'' Mr. Dahl
said. ''They were careless about them. One guard banged a fully loaded gun on
the floor and it fired four times. If it fired another round, it would have hit
one of my men. It was very unnerving to have something like that happen.''

On the Fourth of July, the Dahls plan to take their children - Maria, Maggey,
Stuart Jr. and Steven - to join friends for a quiet celebration of both
independence and homecoming.

''I don't want to hear any fireworks,'' Mr. Dahl said. ''I have heard enough
banging.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Petty Officer 1st Class L.J. Dahl and his wife (NYT/Jose R.
Lopez)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORANS FIND A HAVEN IN CANADA

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, July 3


A half-dozen refugees from El Salvador sit around a living room here, sipping
coffee and watching their children playing on the floor.

One man, now a dishwasher but 18 months ago a law student, tells of being
captured by the National Guard, thrown over a cliff and left for dead. A
freelance photographer tells of being blindfolded and imprisoned with no
explanation. A former university student says she found her house sacked,
grabbed her baby and ran until she reached Canada.

Most do not want their names disclosed, fearing for the safety of relatives. But
all would rather be here than in their war-torn homeland.

''To tell you the truth, the first day I was here was the first day I could
sleep in six years,'' Flora Barillas said. A friend added, ''You begin to
organize your thoughts for the first time.''

A Difference in Attitude

Unlike the United States, where an estimated 600,000 Salvadorans are living
illegally, Canada has welcomed these and other Salvadorans as official refugees,
a status accorded only a handful south of the border.

The policy reflects different attitudes toward Central America. Ottawa refused
to break relations with Cuba, and only last month restored aid to El Salvador
that had been cut off in 1981 because of concern about death squads.

Others see parallels with Canada's acceptance of fugitive slaves before and
during the Civil War, and its acceptance of draft dodgers during the Vietnam
War. ''Canada feels it is its responsibility to kind of soothe the hard edges of
American policy,'' Jeffry House, a Toronto refugee lawyer, said.

Last year, Canadian authorities said, 2,025 Salvadoran refugees were accepted
into Canada, compared with 1,752 a year earlier. They are usually accepted by
Canadian diplomats in San Salvador and neighboring countries, in camps in
Mexico, or in detention centers or consulates in the United States.

Some 733 who showed up at the Canadian border gained refugee status, about a
third of the number who applied. Other Salvadorans, however, are granted asylum
status at the border - a condition that does not involve the financial and other
benefits accorded refugees. Some, with the aid of United States church groups,
were passed northward in a latter-day version of the Underground Railroad.

Can't Be Sent Home

Most significant for all, particularly those granted temporary approval, is a
1981 program making it impossible to deport any Salvadoran who does not pose an
immediate threat to national security. Inspired by El Salvador's death squads,
it enables Salvadorans to work legally and progress toward becoming permanent
Canadian residents.

By contrast, the United States has accepted only some 200 Salvadorans as
official refugees - a group of political prisoners admitted last year. Most
Salvadorans in the United States did not apply for asylum, preferring to stay
illegally rather than risk being sent home.

Their reasoning is understandable. Just 328 of the 13,373 Salvadorans who
applied for asylum last year were accepted, Immigration and Naturalization
Service statistics show.

Refugee aid groups contend that the United States is not living up to its
international commitments to aid legitimate Salvadoran refugees, largely because
Washington backs the present Government in El Salvador.

''Both Canada and the United States have signed the United Nations Convention on
Refugees,'' said Nancy Pocock, a Quaker who has been active in helping Latin
American refugees. ''The United States doesn't live up to it, and we do.''

Standards Called the Same

American officials reply that they examine each case individually by the same
standards as Canada. They say that the United States position is fundamentally
different in that it is already home to hundreds of thousands of illegal
Salvadoran immigrants.

''It's a lot easier to be sanctimonious if you don't have that situation
yourself,'' a State Department official said.

But the fundamental American argument is that most Salvadoran exiles are
pursuing economic gain, rather than fleeing political persecution. If safety
were the major concern, they could have stopped in any of the two or three
countries most passed through to reach the United States, American officials
suggest.

Officials here largely agree that this country is generally not the first choice
of refugees accepted by Canada at the border or at United States detention
centers. ''We only get those who have exhausted their legal remedies,'' Raphael
Girard, Director of Refugeee Affairs, said.

California Draws Many

Refugees themselves say many would prefer to be in Los Angeles illegally than
here legally. Southern California is estimated to be home to more than 250,000
Salvadorans, providing a much broader community.

They say the weather there is closer to that of Central America. They add that
work is more available because so much of the economy is based on illegal labor
and that the various Canadian Government welfare programs for refugees sometimes
seem demeaning.

''In a way, you feel like you're begging from them,'' one man said.

United States officials suggest that the preferred solution for some Salvadorans
is to seek refugee status in Canada, and then sneak into the United States to
live. If caught by immigration officers, they can demand to be deported to
Canada, a ploy that often works, the Americans say.

The cultural alienation refugees feel as they watch their children speaking
English, eating Big Macs and growing up without much memory of the homeland is
clear. Most come from rural backgrounds and say they want to go home at the
earliest opportunity.

Family Is Missed

''My highest hope would be to be able to go back in security,'' said Oscar
Martinez, a lawyer who has worked here at a succession of menial jobs. ''It's
terrible not to be with your family.''

Some try to fill the void at a coffeehouse called the New Trojan Horse, where
the clatter of happy Spanish conversation fills Sunday afternoons and spicy
pupusas, made of tortillas, are the favored food. It sometimes does not seem
enough.

''You can't bring five million Salvadorans to Canada,'' a young woman said
sadly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vita Cuadra and her son; photo of Luis Garcia with his wife
and children (Canada Press)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'CURRENTS,' ON PBS, EXAMINES PATRIOTISM

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 548 words


WHAT is ''The New Patriotism,'' and is it good, bad or something of both?

That is the topic of tonight's episode of ''Currents.''

The half-hour program, on Channel 13 at 9:30 o'clock, begins with a familiar
recapitulation of how the mood of the nation appears to have changed from the
protests of the Vietnam period to the flag-waving of the Reagan era, illustrated
with the usual contrasting scenes from peace demonstrations and political
conventions. The time may have arrived to store away both sets of pictures in
the archives.

Next comes a minidocumentary about Army volunteers going through basic training
at Fort Dix in New Jersey, where, we are told, ''patriotic feeling is running
particularly high.'' And indeed, the recruits do seem to be gung-ho about
America. ''We're going to stand up for the country,'' says a female soldier,
whom we have just watched laboring gamely over an obstacle course.

At the end of this documentary, somebody, possibly the producer, Michael
Rosenblum, or the director, Bob Morris, seems to be trying to make a point: no
sooner has the commandant of Fort Dix commented that Americans are the kind of
people who think for themselves, than the screen is occupied by a company of
trainees chanting in unison like, well, trainees. Get it?

Then comes a literate little essay by Roger Rosenblatt, an essayist for Time
Magazine, who makes the unexceptionable observation that patriotism - or
''collective affection,'' as he pleasantly calls it - can be either good or bad,
depending.

What it depends on is the subject of the program's final segment, one of those
panels in which the panelists do not so much converse as pound away as though in
an effort to panel themselves in from one another's opinions.

Stanley Aronowitz, a professor at City University of New York, thinks people are
''deeply scared'' and searching desperately for ''authority figures.'' He fears
that the new patriotism may turn out to be the old chauvinism.

Peter Dawkins, a retired Army brigadier general, is more optimistic. He sees in
the new patriotism a wish to ''feel positively.'' He believes it expresses ''a
fundamental desire to feel that you're part of something more than yourself.''

For John Henry Faulk, a former CBS correspondent who was blacklisted during the
McCarthy era, the new patriotism is symbolized by bumper stickers that say
''America, Love It Or Leave It!'' He discerns a fresh outburst of McCarthyism in
the land. Mr. Faulk, who is given to down-home Fourth-of-July speechifying
chockful of quotes from the Declaration of Independence, is, at length, cut off
by the host, Marty Goldensohn, when he shows no intention of ever stopping.

Altogether, it's rather an odd sort of program. Mr. Goldensohn begins by asking,
''What's behind this trend toward patriotism and where is it leading us?'' as
though he were investigating a social disease. At the Fort Dix graduation, he
asks the father of one of the new soldiers, ''Is it easy to be proud of
America?'' The man replies, ''It's always been easy for me to be proud of
America.''

Is it possible that there's less new here than meets the camera's eye? Maybe an
interesting program could be done on what accounts for all the breast-beating
and brain-bashing over some old-fashioned patriotism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Speakes Charges TV Violated Talks Vow

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 230 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


The television networks ''failed to honor their pledge'' regarding open
microphones by broadcasting President Reagan's off-the-cuff remarks about
handling the next hostage crisis like ''Rambo,'' the White House spokesman,
Larry Speakes, charged today.

''If the networks can't honor their pledge, we're going to have to look at it,''
Mr. Speakes said.

Before delivering his four-minute address to the nation last Sunday after the
release of the 39 Beirut hostages, Mr. Reagan joked into an open microphone:

''Boy, I saw Rambo last night. I know what to do the next time this happens.''

He referred to the Sylvester Stallone movie in which a Vietnam veteran violently
rescues a group of American prisoners of war from North Vietnam.

Mr. Speakes was angry when reporters, waiting for the start of the President's
speech, picked up his quip and reported it.

''The networks failed to honor their pledge to keep microphones closed,'' Mr.
Speakes of the test. Asked if he thought the President's remark was damaging, he
said, ''Well, you never know.''

It was the second time the White House was embarrassed Mr. Reagan's off-hand
quips before a broadcast.

Last August in the midst of his Presidential campaign, he wisecracked: ''My
fellow Americans, I am pleased to tell you that I've signed legislation that
will outlaw Russia forever. We begin bombing in five minutes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 6, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
ANALYSIS OF A FAILURE

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


THE 25-YEAR WAR: America's Military Role in Vietnam. By Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr.
210 pages. Illustrated. The University Press of Kentucky. $24. The Vietnam War
so stirred and confused the United States that writing about it has generally
been equally stirring and confusing. There have been some good novels, but very
few objective analyses of what went wrong and why in that long, ultimately
fruitless conflict.

Gen. Bruce Palmer, retired, has put that to rights. ''The 25-Year War'' is a
thoughtful, reasoned analysis of the United States military, political and
diplomatic performance in Vietnam. Other such books are sure to come. They will
have to be very good to match this one.

The book was published last year by University Press of Kentucky in limited
numbers. It soon attracted the attention and applause of students of the war
including the military. Simon & Schuster is to publish the book this autumn.

The author deals not only with the Vietnam War itself but also with the politics
that inevitably intruded into its conduct. He rejects the notion, common among
some in the military, that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had a strategy for winning
the war but were unable to implement it because of political interference.

General Palmer believes that the Joint Chiefs never really decided on the
purpose of the United States forces in Vietnam and that consequently they were
unable to design a strategy that the White House could adopt.

He also argues that the strategy of attrition adopted by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, commander of United States forces in Vietnam, did not work because
it was a strategy unsuited to a localized war of limited objectives.

This is a valid point. But some historians feel the blame lies with Washington,
which early in the war decided that its objective was to sustain the Saigon
government and eliminate the Vietcong. The real enemy, of course, was North
Vietnam, supplied and sustained by the Soviet Union and China. This fact, clear
to any battalion commander, was never recognized publicly by the Johnson
Administration.

At the time, many armchair experts contended that the war could have been won by
huge air attacks. But, as the author stresses, the services had doubts about
this, particularly the Army and the Navy.

''North Vietnam did not possess the industrial development to justify strategic
bombing,'' the author writes, adding that practically all of the war materiel
Hanoi needed for either conventional or guerrilla fighting came from the Soviet
Union or China. Strategic bombing in World War II, he points out, had only
limited success against modern, industrialized states.

Here and throughout the book, General Palmer writes with a lucidity and
objectivity that is refreshing. Although he commanded Field Force II in Vietnam
and later was General Westmoreland's deputy, there is no attempt to gloss over
the extent of the muddle and disarray that contributed to the United States
failure.

''Let us make no bones about it,'' he writes, ''the United States failed to
achieve its objectives in Vietnam.''

A contributory reason, he writes, was the Administration's decision not to
mobilize new forces but to expand the active forces; a decision that compounded
what the author calls ''an inherently difficult military situation.'' The
failure to mobilize resulted in a steady deterioration of United States forces
not only in Vietnam but also in Europe, where the Seventh Army became
''singularly unready, incapable of fulfilling its NATO mission.''

The author is generous to Robert S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense under
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson and often attacked as one of the architects of
the United States failure, and pretty rough on Henry A. Kissinger, first
President Nixon's national security adviser and later his Secretary of State,
who, the author writes, ''willingly assumed a field marshal role when things
went well,'' but became ''irritable and upset'' when things went badly.

In his final chapter on the larger lessons of the Vietnam War, General Palmer
makes some telling observations. The United States, he contends, is no longer
the arsenal of democracy. Nor does it have a clear technological advantage over
the Soviet Union. Other, less powerful, nations also have sophisticated weapons
and sound training and advice.

The United States, the general says, ''must change its traditional way of
fighting a war.'' The ''unwise, unsound and wasteful manpower policies'' used in
Korea and Vietnam are no longer affordable, nor can the United States count on
superior weapons and equipment in unlimited amounts.

The author suggests the United States must ''plan to mobilize the necessary men
and women to meet a major emergency with the intention of their serving for the
duration.'' Quality weapons will be needed, the general writes, but these must
stress affordability, reliability and simplicity of maintenance.

''The 25-Year War'' focuses on Vietnam. But the lessons General Palmer draws
from that war are far-reaching.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr. (UPI,1968)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI WELCOMES M.I.A. DISCUSSIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


Vietnam has offered to hold high-level talks with the United States to resolve
questions within two years on Americans missing in action, State Department
officials said today.

The Hanoi offer, conveyed by Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia
four days ago, has received a skeptical response from some Administration
officials, who regard it as a possible Hanoi maneuver to deflect attention from
repeated criticism of its occupation of Cambodia.

There was also strong suspicion voiced by some officials that the offer was made
at this time, virtually on the eve of the annual meeting of the chief
non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia, to make Hanoi appear conciliatory,
after months of being condemned for its military activity along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

Nevertheless, the Administration said it would study the offer to see if it
represented a sincere desire by Vietnam to end the continuing problem of the
more than 2,400 Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina, of
which some 1,375 are believed to be missing in Vietnam.

'An Enormous Advance'

Officials traveling with Secretary of State George P. Shultz in Hong Kong said
the offer appeared ''to be an enormous advance over what has been done so far.''

Since the capture of Saigon by the Communists in 1975, the United States has
been calling for a full accounting of the missing in action. The Vietnamese, who
have repeatedly said they have no interest in making an issue out of the
question, have nonetheless been slow about returning the remains of Americans
who died in Vietnam and are still listed as missing.

There has been one report, which is given credence by American officials, that
the remains of at least 400 Americans are in a Vietnamese warehouse.

Administration officials long ago concluded that they did not believe any
Americans were still alive in Vietnam, but the search for the remains of the
Americans has continued.

Concern Over Chinese Influence

Mr. Mochtar, who is one of the most eager of the Southeast Asian leaders to seek
an easing of tensions with Vietnam, has been urging for some time active
high-level talks between Washington and Hanoi. He has said that if such talks
could be held, this might lead to resolution of the missing-in-action issue and
eventually provide the impetus for diplomatic relations between the United
States and Vietnam.

Earlier, Mr. Mochtar had proposed that Hanoi and Washington agree on
establishing an American technical mission in Hanoi in an effort to step up the
recovery of remains. It was not clear if the Hanoi message was a response to
that proposal.

Indonesia is concerned about a resurgence of Chinese influence in the region and
would like Vietnam to be a buffer, but recognizes that Vietnam should first pull
out of Cambodia.

Administration officials said today that no consideration would be given to
diplomatic relations with Vietnam until it agreed to withdraw from Cambodia.
----U.S. Says It Is Interested HONG KONG, Sunday, July 7 - A senior official
traveling with Secretary of State Shultz said today that the United States was
willing to hold high-level talks with Vietnam but that the United States
continued to insist on a settlement in Cambodia as a condition for improving
relations with Hanoi.

The official said a new proposal made by Vietnam to hold talks aimed at
resolving the issue of missing Americans within two years appeared ''to be an
enormous advance over what has been done so far'' in determining the fate of the
more than 2,400 Americans still listed as missing in Indochina. ----Inquiry on
Remains Demanded SAN FRANCISCO, July 6 (AP) - A Florida woman demanding
independent identification of 13 American servicemen killed in a 1972 plane
crash in Laos has won a federal court order barring the Air Force from returning
their remains to relatives.

Ann Hart of Pensacola, Fla., the widow of one of the servicemen, obtained the
temporary restraining order late Friday night. The remains were received at
Travis Air Force Base Friday night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By WILL CRUTCHFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 36, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


PURCHASE, N.Y., July 5 -

You have to admit it: The plot of Handel's ''Giulio Cesare'' is strongly
reminiscent of the news we read daily from the Middle East. Each important
figure seems to command a private militia; loyalties among Eastern leaders shift
and splinter; alliance with Western power is sought and betrayed as opportunity
dictates.

Resourceful play on these themes puts Peter Sellars's production of the opera,
unveiled tonight (to a surprisingly small audience) at Pepsico Summerfare, into
the class of operatic updates that merits argued, as opposed to dismissive,
rejection. Like Jonathan Miller in his Mafia ''Rigoletto,'' Mr. Sellars has
chosen a period (''the unspecified near future'') and place (poolside at a major
international hotel) in which a good deal of the original text can proceed
without utterly contradicting the drama being played on the stage. So Julius
Caesar, in a garish day-glo blue suit, is ''the unquestioned leader of a major
world power''; Ptolemy is a ''self-styled local potentate''; Curius is Caesar's
advance man, and so on.

Of course, the parallels eventually fail in greater and lesser ways. For
instance: Rightly or not, challenges to single combat, sexual ambition and the
wiles of scheming women play a part in our idea (and Handel's) of the military
affairs of ''antiquity,'' but not our idea of summit meetings, hostage crises
and competing militias.

To Mr. Sellars's credit, though about two dozen similar objections could be
raised, only a few arias (Caesar's ''Va Tacito'' in particular) were played in
opposition to their intended sense. And the director obviously has a gift for
working closely with actors: Everything was tight, finely studied and detailed.
One rarely sees the like in opera.

But it was also prevailingly artificial, unspontaneous, and too busy with
signals for much feeling to come through. And Mr. Sellars runs aground on the
need to invent constant alternate actions and time-fillers to get through
Handel's inconveniently long (and - irrelevantly under these cicumstances -
beautiful) arias. By far the majority of these added bits are comic, and most of
the comedy is slapstick; Mr. Sellars's idea of being an enfant terrible
emphasizes the enfant. Many also involve elaborate by-play with props. So one
aria might be about a gun, another about a rubber snake, another about the
foreign news that traditionally appears on page two of The New York Times. The
heavenly aria ''V'adoro, Pupille'' was several times interrupted by laughter.
Against all this Susan Larson's singing didn't stand a chance. (It was all
right, a little tweety and shallow, but assured, fluent and clear. Anyway maybe
she was cast for her legs; another of her arias is about a bathing suit.) But
there you have it: Ultimately the music becomes an appurtenance, funny because
it is so archaic-sounding, in an absurdist comedy about current events. No, not
even that: a show about the director's cleverness. The cleverness is
considerable, sophisticated and quick to take its cue from ideas in the music.
But ''Giulio Cesare'' runs from 6 P.M. to nearly 11, and by 8 or so it has
become very predictable. By the end both Handel and the serious concerns that
the director does from time to time address (especially in Act III) have been
defeated by narcissism.

That term is not a condemnation in and of itself. For re-creative art to have
vitality, the re-creator must wish and need to see himself, as well as the
author, in the recreated work. But when it gets to the point of uprooting,
disguising and overlaying with alternate material an entire opera, the
interpretation threatens to eradicate the original, and the narcissism has
become extreme.

One needn't read much about the director's earlier operas to realize that this
is his preferred way of working: ''Cosi'' about Vietnam Vets; ''Mikado'' in
modern technological Japan; ''Orlando'' in Cape Canaveral and on Mars. Does Mr.
Sellars have it in him to do an opera? Or can he only do this? The answer will
be awaited with interest, because he has talent.

Among the sins on the head of Directors' Opera as a genre is the regrettable
kind of review that dwells on the production and relegates the music to a few
adjectives at the end. The singers were: Jeffrey Gall, brilliant; Lorraine Hunt
and James Maddalena, beautiful, heartfelt singing; Mary Westbrook-Geha,
considerable dramatic thrust; Susan Larson, see above, and others, all
respectable. Craig Smith conducted, and his orchestra played, well
(musicological rectitude, B-minus); sets and costumes by Elaine Spatz-Rabinowitz
and Dunya Ramicova, good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: MUSIC: 'GIULIO CESARE,' AT SUMMERFARE FESTIVAL

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
FORGING A NEW DRAMATIC LANGUAGE

BYLINE: By J. R. Bruckner

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1765 words


Sometimes, when you listen to people in and around theater talk, you can get the
notion that progress is from wake to funeral. Well, American theater may be
threatened by all kinds of economic difficulties, but it is surviving a much
more serious threat - the loss of an authentic theatrical language. David
Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' and David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly'' lately on
Broadway and two of Sam Shepard's plays, ''Fool for Love'' and ''Curse of the
Starving Class,'' currently running a few doors from one another in Theater Row
on West 42d Street are powerful reminders not only of what good writing there is
in current theater, but of the struggle by a handful of first-rate playwrights
to find a new dramatic language. If, as Marsha Norman said recently in these
pages, ''writing is what the theater cannot do without,'' that effort is the
most important thing going on in theater.

Miss Norman's own writing in '' 'Night, Mother'' is unimaginable without the
background of the extraordinary experimentation of the late 60's and 70's and
the imaginative access to the world that work gave to playwrights. Plays as
different as ''Amadeus,'' ''On Golden Pond'' and ''As Is'' testify in their very
vocabularies and structures to the influence of people like Samuel Beckett and
Sam Shepard. It seems to me that the level of writing in the theater now is very
high. At its best it has a lyricism, a tautness and vividness not found in other
kinds of current fiction. Could that have been said 30 years ago? It is
especially striking, since any kind of writing is terribly difficult in an era
of such rapid devaluation of language as ours. For the playwright such a period
is most trying, since in theater word and gesture are inseparable and word,
action, story and character are born together or they are born dead.

In 1952 Arthur Miller pointed out in an article in this newspaper that there
were a lot of good writers around, but not many good plays, and he wondered if
the whole traditional idiom was not being lost. It is true that Tennessee
Williams was creating an antique traditional lexicon for himself at the time,
but it was not the kind of language that pointed the way for others. And it was
certainly the case that by the 50's the very vocabulary that had supplied tools
for playwrights for 30 or 40 years was exhausted. Playwrights went on using it,
some quite successfully, but if one looks for work in the 50's and early 60's
that extended the realm of theater, one finds only a few - some of the plays of
John Osborne and Harold Pinter in England, the early Edward Albee plays, Samuel
Beckett's work, ''The Connection'' by Jack Gelber.

The normal erosion of traditions and cultural patterns became an avalanche in
those years and it was almost impossible for a playwright to locate any common
culture outside a very narrow range of personal concerns. The range of public
issues was wider. The Vietnam war, the civil rights movement, the women's
movement and other causes provided a political impetus for drama, but they also
gutted traditional speech. If it was possible for a playwright to ask wrenching
questions about such issues as the limits and legitimacy of violence, it became
virtually impossible for him to deal with many personal concerns that are
essential to theater - the corruption of conscience, religious instincts, the
traps that passions lay for us, even freedom in Sartre's sense of personal
freedom as the sole source of tragedy on the stage. Ironically, the playwright
was in the place Sartre assigns to dramatic heroes - an extreme situation which
only allows a couple of ways out, and only one of those ways will save him.

The way out was the way back. The playwright had to abandon other people's
meanings and create a whole world that would somehow be open to his audience.
David Rabe has a deceptively simple description of his own practice: ''The
simple, real event is hidden by each character in the language he uses. A play
is a world. The language of the play displays and defines the nature of that
world.'' It was indeed the language, more than the time or place dislocations he
used, that gave the first performances of ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel''
their excitement in 1971. And the power of the language was even greater in
''Sticks and Bones'' in 1972. The gradual rejection of the blind son, David, who
has returned from Vietnam, builds up for two hours in an astonishing series of
metaphors that finally explode in a torrent of mad eloquence from his father. At
that moment David becomes aware of the girl appearing to him in his room. What
he says to her sweeps away the world as her presence has obliterated space and
time and he offers her bits of the shattered world as gifts: ''The seasons will
amaze you. Texas is enormous. Ohio is sometimes green.'' That speech suddenly
lifts the play into a revelation of human destiny and incidentally reminds us
that, while people don't talk like Romeo and Juliet, they would if they could.

Rabe often reaches for language and rhythm that are on the edge of being alien.
You could come out of ''Hurlyburly'' hesitant to choose words for your own
conversation -not about the play but about anything. The exchanges between Phil
and Eddie at the beginning use language that seems to strip the characters and
flay them rather than building them, and that process continues throughout the
play until at the end one is a little suprised there is anything left of the
actors but bones. What the playwright has done is turn them inside out. As they
diminish, their language builds up a vision of the repulsive world they live in,
work in and believe in even as they are destroyed by it.

David Mamet does that all the time, but in much sparer language. Like Shepard he
borrows vocabulary and dramatic devices from everywhere. In ''Sexual Perversity
in Chicago'' he takes the speeches of a man making a pass at a woman in a bar
right out of television sit-coms and then he introduces a television set as a
character - it gives a little moral sermon to this oaf about praying for sex and
not getting it. Mamet strips the speech of his people down to exact definitions
that seldom allow for ambiguity or resonance, and it is rare for a Mamet
character to use the same words with different shades of meaning. In ''Glengarry
Glen Ross'' the destruction of decency that emerges from the conniving of the
real estate sharks is revealed as events change the meanings of words. It is
tempting to say that is Mamet's comment on the way business is done, but the
technique is much more fundamental to his art. It is what reveals the depravity
of the two older crooks and traps their gofer in ''American Buffalo'' and it
defines the basic innocence of the inventor in ''The Water Engine.'' Mamet is as
precise in his use of words as Beckett is. But he uses torrents of obscenities
not only to give you the illusion this is talk you hear on the street every day,
but to direct your attention to what the characters are not emphasizing but
really mean. Sometimes his orchestration of foul expressions can produce the
surprising effect of a litany.

It is often said the difficulty with Sam Shepard is finding his meaning.
Actually, I think it is in choosing one. He is not only by far the most prolific
of the experimental playwrights; he is incomparably the most philosophical, and
he has had a greater effect on theater than anyone now writing, including
Beckett. He is not likely to construct a whole dramatic piece on an alexandrine
line of verse as Beckett did in his meditation on metatorture, ''What Where''
(''Take him away and give him the works until he confesses''), but Shepard's
bursts of lyric fever produce a language that is almost Elizabethan in its
richness, variety and detail. He has a wonderful ear for the rhythms of speech,
and of song, and a powerful instinct for the effect of silence. Effective
silences define the climactic moment in several of his plays, in none more
astonishingly than in ''La Turista.'' The hero is being pursued by three men,
one of them sweet-talking him while the others try to move in on him unseen. The
two speakers talk at the same time and their speeches, loaded with metaphors,
sound like rock lyrics (or Gregorian chant). Just as the two captors are about
to grab the hero he swings away on a rope and leaps right through the upstage
wall, leaving a cut-out silhouette of his body there. There is no arguing with
that silent declaration of freedom.

Circus? A bit of it. Shepard plunders everything - rock and folk music, movies,
television, art, dance, stock-car races. When you have looked at the everyday
world through his eyes, or at his dreams through the collages of debris from the
world he assembles, you can never again look casually at what is around you. But
techniques, and even his extraordinary power of expression, cannot account for
his great influence on everyone else involved in theater. That can only come
from his ideas. He has often said plays do not come from ideas but the other way
around. His plays are the best evidence for the assertion; they are the most
intellectual theater we have, and it is impossible to separate the ideas they
suggest or the visions they conjure up from the plays. They are not about
thought; they are thought and thus universal. They escape, and defy, psychology,
sociology, mythology and all the isms that cloud our minds.

In ''Fool For Love,'' when Eddie and May, who share a father, try to recount how
they fell in love, and the father, sitting at the side of the stage in a rocker,
keeps trying to correct them, you get a personal history that transcends
individuals and evokes without mentioning it a nation's disordered evolution;
and the speeches are so beautiful a call to what love is that one is torn right
through social and moral restraints into that realm where action is fate. And in
''Buried Child'' Shepard makes the earth itself yield up the missing character
in a revelation as brilliant as some in classical tragedy.

It may be that economics, internal battles among those involved in theater or
some other force will empty a lot of stages. But that will not kill the theater
when there is writing of this quality. There is no way to predict what kind of
common theatrical language can develop out of such work, but playwrights like
Shepard, Mamet, Rabe and a few others have shown how to shape a language that
can draw the world again onto the stage and present it in forms that will
enchant an audience and compel thought. That is a splendid achievement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 24, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


Fiction 1 FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years. 2
'... AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Berkley, $5.95.) Life
in an Ohio hamlet, 1868-1932. 3 THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Bantam, $4.95.) One
man's experience in the wars of the Holy Land. 4 LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal.
(Ballantine, $4.95.) A fictionalized accoaunt of the Civil War Presidency. 5 *
DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket Books, $4.50.) One man copes with a sinister
Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot. 6 THE WHEEL OF
FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch. (Fawcett, $4.95.) A wealthy Welsh family haunted by
an ominous heritage. 7 THE WTICHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike. (Fawcett,
$4.50.) Three witches wreak havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town. 8 THE
MIRACLE, By Irving Wallace. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) Six strangers' lives are
changed when they go to observe a miracle at Lourdes. 9 TENDER IS THE STORM, by
Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York heiress's passionate encounter with
an Arizona rancher. 10 * SWITCH, By William Bayer. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) The case
of two women, murdered in Manhattan, whose heads are switched. 11 RAMBO: First
Blood Part II, by David Morrell. (Jove, $3.50.) Novelization of the film about a
Vietnam veteran who rescues prisoners of war. 12 THE MODIGLIANI SCANDAL, by Ken
Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.50.) An early work, first published pseydonymously,
about a 'lost masterpiece' and dirty deadlings in the international art world.
13 * MISSISSIPPI! by Dana Fuller Ross. (Batam, $3.95.) The 'Wagons West' series
reaches the post-Civil War South and New Orleans. 14 THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis
L'Amour. (Batam, $3.95.) A young man from Brittany sets out to free his father,
enslaved in 12th-century Asia. 15 POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket,
$4.50.) A woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.

Nonfiction

General 1 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. 2 IN SEARCH OF
EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr. (Warner, $8.95.)
Lessons from well-run corporations. 3 SON, by Jack Olsen. (Dell, $4.50.) The
case of a young psychotic rapist at large in Spokane, Wash. 4 * THE GREAT
THOUGHTS, compiled by Gilbert Seldes. (Ballantine, $12.95.) Thoughts of 'the
world's greatest thinkers.'

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1 PENGUIN DREAMS AND STRANGER THINGS, by Berke
Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from the syndicated 'Bloom County'
strip. 2 RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally,
$5.95.) For 1985. 3 BRIDE OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews, McMeel &
Parker, $5.95.) Cartoons. 4 THE SILVER PALATE GOOD TIMES COOKBOOK, by Julee
Rosso and Sheila Lukins with Sarah Leah Chase. (Workman, $11.95.) Recipes from
the owners of a Manhattan gourmet food shop. 5 EAT TO WIN, by Robert Hass.
(NAL/Signet, $4.50.) A regimen for sports and fitness activities. 6 MORE
SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and Friends. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) Invented words.
7 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity. 8 * WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE
1985, by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press, $8.95.) Advice for job seekers
and career changers. 9 GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances Cavolina Meara
and others. (Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor. 10 SNIGLETS, by Rich Hall and
Friends. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) Newly minted words 11 GARFIELD MAKES IT
BIG, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying. * An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words


July 7, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 3 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 4 16 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submraine driver defects to the United Staes with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 3 3 7 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine
orphanage earlier in this century.

* 4 2 7 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner to
the 17-volume Sackett saga, restless explorer scouts the 17th-century American
wilderness.

* 5 6 8 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in 'A Woman of Substance.'

* 6 11 3 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte, $14.95.) In his 12th
case, the private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal agens to bring down a
powerful scoundrel.

* 7 8 12 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A new desert
world rises from the ashes of the Old Empire in the latest volume of the science
fiction series.

* 8 * 7 24 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeseved prison term.

* 9 9 19 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this pseudonymous
novel by Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously wasting away.

* 10 5 16 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditional Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 11 10 11 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Batam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard.

* 12 13 2 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 13 15 18 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married
couple with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 14 2 FOOTFALL, by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle. (Del Rey/Ballatine,
$17.95.) Aliens from Saturn arrive on Planet Earth; science fiction.

* 15 1 CONFESSIONAL, by Jack Higgins. (Stein & Day, $15.95.) A plot to kill the
Pope.

Nonfiction

* 1 1 36 IACOCC: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Batam,
$19.95.) The rise of the automobile executive from immigrants' son to top jobs
at Ford and Chrysler.

* 2 2 9 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random House,
$19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 3 4 14 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson
N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes and
failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 4 3 8 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 5 6 45 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for 'setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.'

* 6 5 19 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 7 7 6 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British diplomat, naval hero and royal conselor.

* 8 15 137 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.)
Light verse and drawings by the author.

* 9 * 8 8 MY MOTHER'S KEEPER, by B.D. Hyman. (Morrow, $16.95.) A portrait of the
actress Bette Davis, by her daughter.

* 10 13 44 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of 'Jonathan Livingston Seagull' tells of his search for love.

* 11 * 10 5 THE HEART OF THE DRAGON, by Alasdair Clayre. (Houghton Mifflin,
$29.95.) Companion volume to the PBS television series on China.

* 12 9 12 THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The
tangled lives of Charles Song and his six children, wh shaped much of China's
modern history.

* 13 11 24 SON OF THE MORNING STAR, by Evan S. Connell. (North Point, $20.) A
biography of George Armstrong Custer that is also a history of the Plains Indian
wars.

* 14 1 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon miltimillionaire.

* 15 15 'SURELY YOU'RE JOKING, MR. FEYNMAN,' by Richard P. Feynman. (Norton,
$15.95.) A Nobel laureate in physics recounts his curious misadventures inside
an outside his profession.

ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

* 1 1 4 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to lose weight while improving health and increasing
energy.

* 2 2 38 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.

* 3 3 14 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 4 4 31 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of 1980 book.

* 5 5 38 WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H.
McCormack. (Bantam, $16.95.) Notes and tips of a 'street-smart' executive.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not general large enough
to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above. AND BEAR IN MIND (Editor's choices of other recent
books of particular interest) BERNARD SHAW: Collected Letters, 1911-1925, edited
by Dan H. Laurence. (Viking, $45.) The irrepressible wit and the equally
irrepressible seriousness - in private leters as in public life - of the great
Irish playwrights, critic, socialist, gadfly and show-off.

THE IMAGE: And Other Stories, by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $17.95.) 'It's quite possible,' says one of Mr. Singer's characters,
'that hell is made up of yearning.' Unruly lusts and uncontrollable passions
dominate the inhabitants of this latest collection of the Yiddish wrier's short
stories. CHAIM WEIZMANN: The Making of a Zionist Leader, by Jehuda Reinharz.
(Oxford, $29.95.) The first four decades in the life of Israel's first
president, a charming, paradoxical man, a chemist who became a world celebrity
before World War I ended. A second volume, to deal with his subsequent political
life, is promised.

THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) In this short and
unremittingly intense novel by a leading French formalist, an emotionally
ravaged narrato in her 60's recounts an adolescent sexual initiation by a rich
Chinese lover in Saigon in the 30's. THE TUNNELS OF CU CHI, by Tom Mangold adn
John Penycate. (Random House, $19.95.) The war under the earth in Vietnam, where
Vietnamese guerrillas scratched out a huge complex of tunnels to balance
American technological superiority.

I DIDN'T SAY GOODBYE, by Claudine Vegh. (Dutton, $14.95.) Interviews with French
men and women whose parents were sent to German death camps in World War II;
unable to mourn, many of them fell unworthy to live, trapped in emotional
vacuums. THE SWEET-SHOP OWNER, by Graham Swift. (Washington Square/Pocket Books,
$7.95.) This earlier novel by the author of 'Waterland' recounts, in one day,
the poetry of a small man's life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VROOM! THE TRUE AMERICAN HERO

BYLINE: By Donal Henahan; Donal Henahan, the chief music critic of The New York
Times, was a P-51 fighter pilot in Europe during World War II.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words


YEAGER An Autobiography. By Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. Illustrated. 342 pp. New
York: Bantam Books. $17.95.

HEROISM is a debased currency. In our society, movie stars, rock singers and
politicians may become worshiped celebrities for no better reason than that they
know how to posture truculently and act out the role of the fearless bravo.
There seems to be a vast befuddled audience that believes World War II was won
singlehandedly by John Wayne -or was it Frank Sinatra? Charles Bronson has
cleansed the streets and subways of criminals, and Sylvester Stallone, the
heavyweight champion of the world, has lately been engaged in driving Communism
out of Vietnam. Image drives out fact.

Still, we need to be reminded occasionally that the true hero does exist. Chuck
Yeager is the genuine article, a World War II fighter ace who went on to become
the Air Force's premier test pilot, a dauntless Icarus whose test flights made
feasible the piloted space shuttle. He was the first human to go faster than the
speed of sound and live to tell about it: on Oct. 14, 1947, he flew the Bell X-1
rocket plane 700 miles an hour at 42,000 feet. It took Mr. Yeager, with his
eagerness to live at the edge of disaster, to push through that wall and
discover that flight on the other side was as smooth as a ''perfectly paved
speedway.'' His career has been an incredible series of such breathtaking acts,
many beyond the comprehension even of fellow fighter pilots, whose awed
recollections of the man's feats alternate in this autobiography with Mr.
Yeager's own laconic versions. Written in a disarmingly flat, down-home style,
with the help of Leo Janos, a former correspondent for Time, ''Yeager'' may read
like a boy's adventure fantasy but is plain, documented truth. All his life, the
self-described West Virginia hillbilly has needed to be the first, the fastest,
the smartest, the toughest, the best. The record will show that he usually was
all of the above. As Maj. Gen. Albert G. Boyd puts it, Mr. Yeager was ''the best
pilot I've ever seen fly.''

Almost any human is capable of sudden, unplanned acts of courage: the mother who
enters the burning building to save her baby, for example. And yet steady,
workaday, premeditated bravery such as Mr. Yeager's is hard to explain. Each
time, the adrenaline must be brought up to survival level, the trembling in the
gut must be overcome, the potentially deadly machinery must be tamed. Possible
reprieves are death, disabling injury or retirement from flying, of which only
the last option seemed unthinkable to Mr. Yeager. In the 1950's, he and a small
band of fellow fighter pilots lived in almost primitive isolation at Muroc Field
in the Mojave Desert, brutally testing every new machine the aircraft companies
could devise. His memoirs tell of riotous nights in desert bars and other
airmanly fun, but they also describe a life of fearsome mechanical emergencies,
dead-engine landings, fiery crashes and parachuting escapes, as well as crises
of an even more frightening kind, such as his wife's recovery from cancer.
Glennis, his wife of more than 40 years, injects her own memories of their time
together and comes off as something of a hero herself for coping with life as a
professional daredevil's mate.

Fear, of course, is part of the daily diet of heroes, as Mr. Yeager admits:
''You feed off fear as if it's a high-energy candy bar. It keeps you alert and
focused.'' Early in his World War II career as a P-51 Mustang pilot, he was shot
down over France, found his way into the Maquis and finally escaped over the
Pyrenees into neutral Spain, dragging a wounded fellow fugitive with him. The
Spanish police put him in jail, but he promptly hacked his way out, using a tiny
saw from his survival kit. Many years later, Mr. Yeager was pulled burning from
a crashed jet in a pressurized flying suit whose metal neck ring could not be
clipped through by firemen using a bolt cutter. Not by chance, he was carrying
his trusty hacksaw, which the crew borrowed to free him. Recklessly daring
though he often seems, Mr. Yeager is really the eternal Eagle Scout, prepared
for any emergency by his superior experience, training and mechanical know-how.
He is Natty Bumppo in a flying suit.

Inevitably, Mr. Yeager has become confused with his own legend. Portrayed in the
film by Sam Shepard, the real Mr. Yeager appeared only fleetingly (as a
bartender) in the movie version of ''The Right Stuff,'' Tom Wolfe's rather
flossy account of what led up to the first piloted space flight, even though his
career served as the film's theme and propulsive force. Currently we can find
Mr. Yeager playing himself on television as the grizzled jet pilot selling auto
parts, in a further confusion of image and reality.

Some readers might very well not approve of this hotshot hero.

Some well-placed Air Force people did not, as is evinced in the trouble he had
in obtaining his test pilot's certification even after exceeding the speed of
sound. His Medal of Honor came to him over official objections 29 years after
that historic feat, probably only because his close friend and flying buddy,
Jacqueline Cochran, turned Washington inside out to get it for him.

Childishly, an enemy might say, he chose to remain a one-star general because
promotion would have meant a desk in the Pentagon and an end to flying.

Especially in barroom confrontations with bomber pilots, Mr. Yeager was
aggressive and, as one of these larger friends fondly puts it, ''obnoxious'' -
the typical fighter pilot of song and story. In fact, the key to Mr. Yeager's
personality and probably to his survival is that he always thought of himself as
a fighter pilot. No matter how fast or how high he flew at the edge of space, he
remained the quintessential ''fighter jock,'' eager to challenge any plane in
the sky simply because ''fighter pilots aren't impressed by anything but
dogfighting.'' Being able to get behind another pilot and ''wax his tail'' was
always indisputable proof for Mr. Yeager that he remained Number One. He was
also smart enough to know that in piloting high-speed planes staying alive means
staying aggressive.

Mr. Yeager goes right on enjoying himself doing what perhaps nobody in the world
ever did as well. At 62, still flying the fastest jets for fun, he can say, ''If
I auger in tomorrow, it won't be with a frown on my face.'' Now, that is how
heroes should talk. In a line of work where unbelievable courage was the norm,
he was the bravest of the brave. fun and comradeship When Chuck Yeager read the
finished manuscript of his autobiography, prepared by his collaborator, Leo
Janos, he said he exclaimed, ''Hell, it's just like me talking.'' With good
reason. As Mr. Yeager explained by telephone from his home in Grass Valley,
Calif., the core of the book is derived from 40 hours of taped interviews he did
in 1975 for the Air Force Oral History Program. He was encouraged to expand this
into a book after Tom Wolfe published ''The Right Stuff.''

''Tom did a marvelous job, but he just played up the space angle of test
pilots,'' Mr. Yeager said. ''There was nothing about the fun we had in training
for World War II or the comradeship of pilots.'' He said he also wanted to show
that military pilots ''are really a breed apart.'' Their courage, he said, is
more than bravery: ''It's a dedication to do a job and do it damn well, no
matter.''

Writing his autobiography does not mean that Mr. Yeager is retiring from the
cockpit. ''I'm not going to hang it up and sit back and drink beer and get fat.
To hell with that noise,'' he said. ''I can crawl in an F-20 and fly it because
I've stayed abreast and I don't mean to quit.''

Would he like to fly the space shuttle? ''It would be fun, but I'd do it only if
I could contribute something that would be worth the expense. I wouldn't want to
just sit in the back like some passenger barfing in his beard.''- John Noble
Wilford

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Brig. Gen. Chuck Yeager, 1985; Photo of Chuck Yeager 1954 (AP)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DINING OUT;
VIETNAMESE SPICE IN BRENTWOOD

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


THE Anh-Hong Vietnamese Kitchen in Brentwood may be the only Vietnamese
restaurant on Long Island. There was one in Patchogue that closed a few years
ago.

Vietnamese cuisine is something of a cross between Thai and Chinese, with the
stir-fried dishes, spring rolls and the like that are so typical of Chinese
cooking plus the hot spices, pungency and curries that characterize Thai food.
For those with a bit of adventure in their palates, the Anh-Hong Vietnamese
Kitchen is intriguing and worth trying. But do not expect a grand dining
experience. Wear jeans.

Brentwood is not exactly restaurant row, and this storefront take-out shop with
its six tables in a small shopping center is strictly utilitarian, like
pizzerias and Chinese take-out places nearby. The kitchen is open to view, the
place is brightly lighted with fluorescent fixtures, healthy plants fill spare
corners and the tables are set only for those who eat in. It is not
air-conditioned, but there is a ceiling fan. Paper or plastic plates, flatware
and chopsticks, plastic glasses for soft drinks and paper napkins are provided.

The restaurant is owned by a Vietnamese woman, Anh Hong, whose mother had a food
stand in the markets of Saigon. Her sons Darryn and Eric assist her with the
cooking and service. The three of them are extremely helpful and friendly, ready
to make suggestions, to describe the various dishes and sometimes even to offer
a taste of something extra.

The lightly seared beef shish kebab - tender, touched with a bit of char and
basted with a homemade barbecue sauce - is served on slender wooden skewers for
an excellent appetizer. The shrimp toast is like fritters with pieces of small
shrimp embedded in the batter, a trifle doughy on the inside but still very
good.

Fried spring rolls and egg rolls are filled mostly with vegetables and rice
noodles. The egg rolls also contain minced pork, and both are lighter and quite
unlike the Chinese versions. Another type of interesting filled roll is wrapped
in a rice dough and steamed. Goi cuon is the version made with shrimp, scallions
and rice noodles, and bi cuon contains beef.

A steamed rice noodle dish topped with slices of a type of processed meat,
chilies and crispy fried noodles and called banh cuon cha lua was somewhat less
appealing because the broad steamed rice noodles were rather gummy.

We tried two soups, both forcefully spiced and very savory. Beef stew noodle
soup contained chunks of beef, tripe, carrot and onions with noodles in a ruddy,
chili-spiced soup. Equally fiery but balanced with a note of astringency was the
my tho noodle soup, a shrimp and pork soup served with a jalapeno pepper sauce
on the side for those who cannot be faced down by someone else's idea of hot.

One of the most unusual dishes available here is something called banh xeo,
which is a bright golden folded cross between an omelet and a crepe and filled
with bean sprouts and scallions. It is actually made with cornmeal and served
with a sweet homemade duck sauce, colorful, curious but not something worth
ordering twice.

Shrimp fried rice is done Vietnamese style with a hauntingly delicious pungency,
and the Vietnamese version of chicken with curry sauce consists of nuggets of
chicken with the bone, in a smooth, creamy, startingly vibrant pale-yellow sauce
flecked with red chilies.

A bed of crispy fried noodles topped with a mixture of beef, pork, shrimp and
chicken with bean sprouts, cabbage and celery in a fairly glutinous sauce is
called mi xao don. It might be the Vietnamese version of chow mein if such a
thing existed. Lo mein moodles topped with a similar assortment of ingredients
plus broccoli was quite bland. Chunks of beef with rice noodles and broccoli,
called bun nem nuong, was rich and savory, one of the best of the dishes we
tried.

Crisp hot banana fritters provide a fine sweet finish. Soft drinks, canned
litchi nuts in syrup and ice tea are also available. Bring your own beer for a
more appropriate and stronger quaff. It must be said that the disposable
tableware does not set the food off to advantage, but considering that it would
be difficult to finish more than $10 worth of food (including tax) a person, one
can't complain.

Anh-Hong Vietnamese Kitchen

* 1058 Islip Avenue, Brentwood. 348-6868.

Atmosphere: Strictly utilitarian, fluorescent-lighted storefront with a few
tables; friendly, helpful service.

Recommended dishes: Shish kebab, egg roll, spring roll, shrimp toast, steamed bi
cuon and goi cuon rolls, my tho noodle soup, beef stew noodle soup, shrimp fried
rice, bun nem nuong (beef with rice noodles), chicken with curry sauce, banana
fritters.

Price range: A la carte dishes at lunch and dinner 80 cents to $5. Credit cards:
Not accepted. Reservations: Not necessary.

What the stars mean: (None)Poor to fair

* Good

*

* Very good

*

*

* Excellent

*

*

*

* Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and
price in relation to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM PROMISES TO RETURN BODIES OF 26 AMERICANS

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 7


Vietnam has promised to return the remains of 26 more American servicemen who
died in the Vietnam War, the largest such turnover since the fighting ended,
Americans officials said today.

Officials traveling with Secretary of State George P. Shultz on a tour of
Southeast Asia and Australia appeared surprised and delighted at the commitment,
which was made to a United States military casualty research group that just
ended a three-day mission to Hanoi.

Visit With Cambodia Rebels

On Monday, Mr. Shultz will meet with Thai officials in Bangkok, and on Tuesday
he will visit a Cambodian refugee camp inside Thailand on the border with
Cambodia. United States officials said Mr. Shultz would meet with two leaders of
Cambodia's non-Communist resistance movement in Bangkok.

Hanoi's offer to return the Americans' remains followed a Vietnamese proposal
last week to open talks aimed at clearing up the question of missing Americans
within two years, a proposal that the American officials said they intended to
explore quickly.

''I think in this meeting we had expected some concrete results; the magnitude
of what we got was unexpected,'' said a Reagan Administration official who has
been involved in trying to determine the fate of the 2,400 Americans listed as
missing in Indochina, more than half of them in Vietnam.

All Were Military Personnel

The officials traveling with Mr. Shultz said Vietnam had provided names for all
of the 26 people whose remains were to be turned over and had said all were
military personnel.

They said the remains would be processed by the Joint Casualty Research Center
in Hawaii to confirm the identifications before families were notified. They
added that they had established that some of the names on the list matched
servicemen known to have been taken prisoner, but who never came out of Vietnam.

The American officials reported the Vietnamese had said the remains were found
''in the provinces'' and had given no further explanation.

It is expected to take six to eight weeks to complete arrangements for the
turnover, the officials said. They said the Vietnamese had also provided
''material evidence or information'' on six other missing Americans.

Until now, the largest number of Americans whose remains were provided by
Vietnam was around 20 in 1975, one official said. Since then, remains have been
turned over sporadically in groups of six to eight at a time.

Crash Site Is Surveyed

The primary activity of the technical group that visited Vietnam last week was
to survey the site of a B-52 crash as a step toward excavation, the officials
said. They said that Hanoi had not made a commitment to excavate the site but
that a survey to determine the time and manpower required to do so was a normal
preliminary.

A senior Administration official said that before responding to Vietnam's
expressed willingness to settle the question, the United States must ''define
clearly on our side'' what needs to be done to accomplish the work on a two-year
schedule. The officials indicated that they would do this as quickly as
possible, adding that two years was not too long a time considering the large
number of sites that will probably have to be excavated.

''On the technical level, what we are talking about is mid-rank military people
digging the mud, essentially,'' one of the officials said.

The technical mission made one of six such visits to Vietnam that are permitted
each year under an agreement worked out early this year.

The American officials here said the United States was willing to consider
establishing a permanent technical presence in Hanoi if that became necessary to
facilitate the search for and processing of remains, but they stressed that that
was not to be interpreted as movement toward normalization of relations between
Washington and Hanoi. They said that still depended upon Vietnam's ending its
military occupation of Cambodia.

But a senior official said the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, who is serving as a go-between for Vietnam and the United States,
had told the Vietnamese that while the Cambodian occupation stood in the way of
normal relations, the issue of the missing Americans also constituted an
obstacle.

The officials said that while Vietnam's latest proposal spoke of ''high-level
talks,'' it was expected that contacts would continue to be between the
Vietnamese Foreign Minister and various assistant secretaries of state or
defense or senior members of the National Security Council. Five such meetings
have been held in the last three years, they said. ---- #100 Bodies Already
Returned WASHINGTON, July 7 - A State Department official said today that
Vietnam had previously returned the remains of about 100 American soldiers.

Every time remains have been returned, Vietnam has asserted that the bodies were
recently discovered and that it knew of no others, the official said. He said
Washington was skeptical of such claims because some of the remains were of
servicemen known to have been captured in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, JULY 8, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 823 words




International

Vietnam has promised to return the remains of 26 American military personnel who
died in the Vietnam War, United States officials said. The promise followed a
proposal by the Vietnamese to begin talks aimed at clearing up the question of
missing Americans within the next two years.[Page A1, Column 3.]

The president of Guinea said that the leader and co-conspirators of a coup
attempt against him would be executed by a firing squad. The President, Brig.
Gen. Lansana Conte, told an audience of more than 50,000 people gathered in
front of the People's Palace in the Guinean capital of Conakry that the coup
leader, Col. Diara Traore, had been arrested.[A1:1.]

OPEC oil ministers failed in three days of talks to reach agreement on any
changes in its pricing or production of oil. The lack of agreement among the
ministers is seen by analysts as a setback to the group. Production is at a
20-year-low and prices are being undercut in the spot market by about $1 a
barrel. [A1:6.]

Mexicans voted for candidates in nationwide elections for offices of seven state
governorships, the 300 elected seats in the national Chamber of Deputies and
hundreds of municipal and state legislative offices. The election is seen as an
importaant test of the policies of President Miguel de la Madrid. [A4:3-6.]

American visitors who arrived in El Salvador recently were offered insight into
the complexity and bitterness of the five-year-old war. [A4:3-6.]

More than any part of the Soviet Empire, it may be Central Asia that has made
the longest social and economic leaps under Russian and Communist rule. It is a
region that has been changed from a backward land of nomads and subsistence
farmers into a productive region of gas wells, universal schooling and elaborate
irrigation systems. [A10:3-6.]

National

More than a million Americans have purchased satellite dish antennas and pointed
them toward the satellites that are the commercial capital of the communications
industry. The growth of the industry, however, has produced a number of
commercial, legal and environmental complications. [A1:2-4.]

Laws to enforce child support orders have been enacted by states seeking to
comply with Federal standards for programs dealing with parents who fail to
support their children. The standards, strongly endorsed by the Reagan
Administration, were included in a law approved unanimously by Congress last
August. A major purpose of the Federal law was to assist the growing number of
children who live in one-parent households. [A1:4-5.]

Scientists working with 11 bodies recovered from the police bombing of a
barricaded house in Philadelphia in May are using new scientific technologies
and old-fashioned detective work to identify the victims. The bodies, burned
beyond recognition, were crushed and dismembered by tons of smoldering rubble.
So far six have been identified by forensic scientists. [A13:1-2.]

The hostages' return was celebrated by the Roman Catholic parish of Saint
Margaret Mary and the village of Algonquin. Many of the former hostages were
present for a day of thanksgiving. [A12:2-5.]

The High Court reaffirmed its insistence on the constitutional barriers between
religion and government in the term that ended last week. The Court handed down
four decisions over the past month that reinforced beyond argument the principle
that ''government must pursue a course of complete neutrality toward religion.''
The development confounded expectations that the Court would substantially relax
the constitutional barriers and was a sharp setback for the Reagan
Administration. [B5:1-6.]

Metropolitan

New York's fiscal crisis has changed the way the decision-makers responsible for
the city's future are charting its course into the next century. A legacy of
lowered expectations about government's ability to solve every problem guides
those responsible for running the city. [A1:5-6.]

Shoreham power station began producing its first substantial nuclear reaction.
The plant will operate on a low-power program for the next several weeks to test
the plant's entire operating system under actual operating conditions,''
according to a spokesman for the Long Island Lighting Company. [B3:1.]

City correction officials will seek changes from Federal immigration authorities
in response to a disturbance Saturday at a Brooklyn jail, where a dozen Cuban
detainees attacked 18 guards. Correction officials want tighter screening of
deportees who are temporarily transferred by the Federal Immigration and
Naturalization Service to the city facility. [B1:5-6]

Financial problems have forced the need for personnel and program cutbacks at
Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children. By Sept. 30, 40 members of the
agency's 125-member staff would be terminated, according to the agency's
executive director. [B3:3-5.]

Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AFFIRMS SUPPORT FOR THAILAND

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 8


Thai and American officials said today that President Reagan, in a letter
delivered here by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, had affirmed United
States support for Thailand in the face of what is viewed as a threat posed by
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

The officials said that Mr. Shultz, who arrived from Hong Kong for a two-day
stay, had given the letter to Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda of Thailand.

Mr. Shultz also met with officials of the two non-Communist members of a
Cambodian rebel coalition that is fighting against the Vietnamese-backed
Cambodian Government.

Before receiving the rebel leaders, Mr. Shultz condemned what he called ''the
arrogant and illegal nature of the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia'' during a
ceremony allocating $3 million in American aid for Thai areas suffering from the
spillover from the fighting in Cambodia.

Shultz to Visit Refugee Camps

On Tuesday, Mr. Shultz is to visit Cambodian refugee camps and Thai military
sites near the border.

An American official said the three rebel leaders had given Mr. Shultz a
''generally upbeat'' assessment of the military situation. The official said Mr.
Shultz had limited his own remarks to expressing the support of the United
States for rebel efforts.

The insurgent leaders who met with Mr. Shultz were: Gen. Sak Sutsakhan, a vice
president of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front; Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, who represents the forces loyal to his father, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, and Abdul Gaafar, an aide to General Sak.

General Sak, a former Cambodian Defense Minister, is second to former Prime
Minister Son Sann in the hierarchy of the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, but he is the key military figure in the non-Communist segment of the
rebel coalition.

According to an American official, Mr. Shultz was told by the three visitors
that their forces were growing more rapidly than those of the Khmer Rouge, the
Communist member of the rebel coalition. The Khmer Rouge of Pol Pot, which ruled
Cambodia from 1975 until ousted in 1979 by the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian
Communists of Heng Samrin, have since then been accused of a reign of genocide.
Rebels' Strength Assessed The American official, in assessing the strength of
the two non-Communist rebel groups, said:

''What is going on is a much greater effort in the interior by both these
groups,'' the official said. ''The level of effort is considerably higher than
seen in the past. Still, the Khmer Rouge is larger, but it is also true that the
two non-Communist groups are the ones that have been growing most rapidly.

''Their troops have a good morale. After the Vietnamese dry-season offensive,
they are making a major effort to get people into the interior. They cited
fairly large figures and they said the defections of Vietnamese and from members
of the Cambodian forces of Heng Samrin are up from last year.''

The visitors declined to talk with reporters after the meeting, except to deny a
report that they had been receiving millions of dollars in nonmilitary from the
Central Intelligence Agency.

The American official who was briefing reporters said that the insurgents had
neither asked for, nor received, any assurances of United States military aid.

The insurgency is understood to receive most of its weapons from China. The
United States provides humanitarian and technical aid at the level of $16
million a year.

While the House Foreign Affairs Committee recently passed an amendment that
would authorize $5 million a year in military help, Mr. Shultz has said that he
opposes the measure on the ground that rebels' military needs are being met by
Asian nations.

Mr. Shultz said he preferred the Senate version of the Cambodian aid proposal,
which would allow the United States to decide how to spend the money.

The combat strength of the non-Communist rebels is estimated at 20,000 to
30,000, but many of them are thought to be in Thailand as a result of the recent
Vietnamese offensive. The American official said he understood from the
Cambodian visitors that the number now fighting in Cambodia was ''in the
thousands.''

''They made the point that they had no pretense of being able to evict the
Vietnamese militarily,'' he said. ''But they believe that by creating military
pressure on Vietnam they can get Vietnam to the negotiating table.''

He said the visitors had expressed support for moves by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, meeting this week in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to open
discussions on Cambodia through so-called proximity talks. The latest proposal
refers to talks with Vietnam rather than directly with the Cambodian Government,
with Cambodians being part of the Vietnamese delegation. ----Asian Appeal to
Vietnam KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 8 (Reuters) - Non-Communist Southeast Asian
nations called on Vietnam today to hold indirect talks with Cambodian rebels.

The call for so-called proximity talks was made in a joint statement issued
during the annual meeting of foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

The group - Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines and Brunei
- said it would seek endorsement for its strategy from the United States and its
Western allies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz, Abdul Gaafar, Gen Sak Sutsakhan and Prince
Norodom Ranariddh (Agence France/Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FEATHER-LIGHT PLANE POINTS TOWARD A GLOBAL RECORD

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2247 words


NEARLY a quarter of a century ago, a B-52H jet bomber flew 12,532 miles from
Okinawa to Spain to establish the distance record for nonstop, unrefueled
flight. That record has never been beaten, and all attempts since 1962 have been
thwarted by the performance limitations inherent in conventional aircraft.

But two private pilots, Richard G. Rutan and Jeana Yeager, have built a
remarkable airplane based on new materials and design principles in which they
intend to set the ultimate distance record. Their plan is to fly all the way
around the world - 25,000 miles - without landing or refueling.

The feather-light airplane on which their hopes and safety will ride is made
largely of stiffened paper, and yet it is as large as an airliner. The craft
weighs less than an automobile, and yet it can carry as much fuel as a gasoline
tank truck.

Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager hope to make their epochal flight early next year,
provided they can raise the money to complete the project. Assuming that they
survive the 12-day ordeal, their plane, Voyager, is assured a place in the
Smithsonian Institution's Air and Space Museum, along with Charles A.
Lindbergh's Spirit of St. Louis and other trail-blazing aircraft.

No cash prize or trophy awaits them for setting a new distance record, and their
only reward will be personal satisfaction. The venture, which has cost nearly $2
million over the past five years, has nearly exhausted their funds, raised
mainly from hundreds of small donors. The company founded by Mr. Rutan and Miss
Yeager, Voyager Aircraft Inc., is never likely to make a profit; its purpose
will end once Voyager has completed its round-the-world flight.

A few fellow pilots have called Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager quixotic throwbacks to
the time between the two world wars, when such fliers as Lindbergh and his wife,
Anne, Howard Hughes, Wiley Post and Amelia Earhart could thrill the world with
their exploits. In those days, the daring aviator could win immense acclaim and
rewards for risking tragic fate, often met. But times have changed; neither
ticker tape parades nor fat prize purses go to record-breakers anymore.

Undeterred, Mr. Rutan, 46 years old, and Miss Yeager, 33, are pushing
preparations in their hangar workshop at Mojave Airport, about 60 miles north of
Los Angeles. ''We've put our lives and careers on the line,'' Miss Yeager told a
visitor, ''and we mean to finish what we've started.'' With the help of Bruce
Evans and a handful of other expert craftsmen -some paid, but all donating most
of their time, skill and labor - Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager are putting the
finishing touches on the gleaming white Voyager. 1,489 Gallons of Gasoline
Nearly the entire airplane - wings, booms and fuselage - will be filled with the
1,489 gallons of 100-octane gasoline needed to fly 25,000 miles and provide an
additional 3,000-mile fuel reserve. At takeoff, Voyager's gasoline will weigh
nearly five times as much as the 1,858-pound airplane itself, and to get into
the air the machine will need a very long runway. Its pilots therefore plan to
use nearby Edwards Air Force Base, rather than Mojave Airport, for the start of
their trip.

The takeoff is likely to be hair-raising; Voyager's long, thin wings are so
flexible that the weight of the gasoline inside them will bend them downward
about five feet, so that the tips will almost touch the ground.

The tentative course Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager have charted leads westward over
the Pacific, Australia and the Indian Ocean, around the southern tip of Africa,
then across the South Atlantic, the Caribbean and the United States. The route
will take advantage of westerly trade winds wherever possible, and will avoid
all land, except for Australia and possibly South Africa. ''Our main concern is
to avoid falling hostage to some third-world dictator,'' Mr. Rutan said.

Later this month the Voyager team plans to install the two special engines built
for the record flight. The cruising engine, a new type unveiled by Teledyne
Continental Motors in June at the Paris Air Show, was designed to run for 3,000
hours without requiring overhaul, 1,000 hours longer than most aircraft piston
engines. The maker says that the liquid-cooled, four-cylinder, 110-horsepower
engine is very light (about 200 pounds), exceptionally sparing of fuel and,
above all, reliable.

Flying on One Engine

It will have to be. Although the Voyager has two engines, one in the nose to
assist at takeoff and the special cruise motor at the rear of the fuselage, the
forward engine will be running only during takeoff and for the first few
thousand miles. After that, it will be shut down to conserve fuel, and the
Voyager will putter along at about 80 miles an hour for the rest of the flight.

Special reversible-pitch propellers for Voyager's engines, designed and built in
West Germany, will help it slow down when it lands. The plane's huge wings have
neither flaps nor spoilers, and the machine is so light that it tends to float
into the air at very low speeds.

Should its cruise engine fail, the plane would have to land or ditch. To save
weight, electric starters were omitted, and once the take-off engine is shut
down it must remain dead weight for the duration of the flight.

The Voyager looks far too big for the two small engines that propel it. Its
knife-like wings, with a span of 110.8 feet, are nearly three feet longer than
those of a Boeing 727 airliner. Besides the main wings, which are joined to the
rear of the tubular fuselage, the plane has a shorter set of canard wings, or
horizontal stabilizers, near its nose. The tips of the canards are attached to
the noses of two long outrigger booms that extend tailward past the main wings
and culminate in a pair of rudders. From the ground, the Voyager looks like a
Canada goose carrying a gigantic croquet wicket on its back.

Innovative by Design

Outlandish though the Voyager's layout may appear, the plane was designed by one
of the world's most innovative aircraft builders, Mr. Rutan's younger brother,
Burt Rutan.

Burt Rutan has won global acclaim from aircraft manufacturers for his
trailblazing designs, particularly his distinctive canard-wing planes, that look
as if they were flying backward. (The main wings of a canard airplane are
attached to the aft part of the fuselage, and smaller wings near the nose
provide pitch control. The design is not only aerodynamically efficient, but it
eliminates unintentional stalls.) Designs by Burt Rutan shaped Beech Aircraft
Corporation's revolutionary new Starship I executive transport, the first
commercial canard plane to go into production.

Richard Rutan recalled a conversation that led to the Voyager project. ''My
brother Burt and I were sitting in a Mojave coffee shop back in 1981,'' he said,
''when we got to wondering whether it would be possible to build a plane that
would fly around the world without refueling. He started sketching on a napkin,
and it wasn't long before we realized that it could be done - and that we were
going to do it.''

Richard Rutan's qualifications as a pilot are as impressive as are his brother's
credentials as a designer. Richard, a former fighter pilot who was awarded a
Silver Star and five Distinguished Flying Crosses for his 325 combat missions in
Vietnam, is a seasoned test pilot. He holds six world records for speed and
distance in various light-aircraft categories.

Miss Yeager, his pilot partner, is a drafting engineer who established five
world records piloting light aircraft on her own. She is not related to Chuck
Yeager, the Air Force test pilot who was first to break the sound barrier.

Space-Age Materials

Besides the Voyager's bizarre shape and propulsion system, the most radical
departure from convention is its structure. Apart from engines, fasteners,
cables and fittings, there is no metal in the plane at all; it is built entirely
of graphite fiber, resin-impregnated paper and other space-age composite
materials.

Starting with wood or plastic mock-ups of the plane's components, Mr. Evans and
other members of the Voyager team made casts of each section of the wings, booms
and fuselage. Next, the casts were lined with graphite-fiber tape impregnated
with epoxy resin. After fixing several layers of tape in place, the builders
added an appropriate thickness of backing, a thick honeycomb of
resin-impregnated paper called Nomex. Finally, another layer of graphite-fiber
tape was laid over the Nomex to complete the sandwich.

Once such a part is oven cured, it is far stronger and lighter than an
equivalent part made of metal could ever be. A wing, boom or fuselage assembled
from these components requires little or no internal supporting structure. Since
it is impervious to gasoline, moreover, it can be used as an integral fuel
reservoir, obviating the need for conventional gasoline tanks.

Not a Comfortable Ride

There is so little substance to Voyager that when the plane flies it twists,
bends and flaps its wings disconcertingly, giving occupants a singularly
uncomfortable and exhausting ride. In flight, Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager change
places from time to time, the duty pilot seated in a cramped cockpit in the
right of the fuselage, the off-duty pilot lying prone in a tube-like bunk to the
left. Because of the plane's configuration, neither occupant can see much
outside the craft's tiny windows and cockpit bubble.

The Rutan-Yeager project is not the only one competing for the round-the-world
record. A half dozen other airplane builders, including Paul B. MacCready,
builder of the first successful man-powered airplane, and Jerry Mullins, holder
of the closed-circuit distance record for piston-powered aircraft, have entered
the race in the past several years. Some have already built aircraft and one,
Thomas Jewett of Mojave, was killed in 1982 while testing his plane.

But the Voyager, which finished its preliminary flight tests last year, has a
head start. Mr. Rutan and Miss Yeager expect to begin the final phase of flight
testing in August, gradually increasing the length of their hops until they can
comfortably stay aloft for two days at a time. After that, they will assault the
closed-course unrefueled distance record - 11,337 miles - by flying the Voyager
back and forth between San Diego and San Francisco. Finally, some time early
next year, they hope to circle the earth.

Place in the Records

Merely flying around the world is scarcely new.

In 1924 the dirigible Graf Zeppelin became the first aircraft to fly around the
world, and since then, commercial airliners have made the trip routine. A few
airplanes have made nonstop circuits by refueling in midair from tanker planes
at rendezvous points along the way. But none has come close to doing what is
expected of Voyager: circumnavigation of the globe on a single load of fuel.

The trip will test the crew as sorely as their aircraft. On a 12-hour flight
over the Rockies and Plains states last summer, Miss Yeager, who had never
suffered from airsickness before, became ill.

''It's kind of claustrophobic inside the plane,'' she said, ''and we were in
severe turbulence the whole time. The way Voyager pitches, twists and heaves, it
feels more like being aboard a boat in a heavy sea than flying.''

That flight was so bad, in fact, that Mr. Rutan realized Voyager would have to
fly at fairly high altitudes (20,000 feet or so) to escape the dangerous and
uncomfortable turbulence closer to the ground. But higher altitudes will force
the pilots to use oxygen, which ordinarily comes in heavy steel tanks. A supply
sufficient to last nearly two weeks would substantially increase the weight of
the plane, thereby diminishing its range.

But Mr. Rutan has found a way around the problem: a medical oxygen concentrator
specially adapted for use by Voyager's crew. The concentrator, much lighter than
an oxygen tank, works by pumping ordinary air through a catalytic material. The
latter absorbs most of the nitrogen but lets the oxygen through.

Minimum of Instruments

Voyager will carry a bare minumum of instruments, including an automatic pilot
and a small weather radar unit. The pilots plan to leave their navigating to a
mission control center operated by the Smithsonian Institution in Washington,
D.C., with which Voyager will be in continuous radio contact. The control center
will assemble meteorological reports from around the world and compute the best
courses for avoiding turbulence and headwinds.

Bland food concentrates, a few pints per day of drinking water and a stock of
plastic human-waste disposal bags will provide the minimum for the pilots'
physical needs. ''As my brother Burt told us when he designed the plane,'' Mr.
Rutan said, ''we'll have enough of the essentials to survive 48 hours longer
than the projected flight time. Provision for more than that would have been a
luxury we can't afford.''

As Mr. Rutan showed a visitor around his plane, a group of white-haired women on
an outing from Pasadena peeked through the open door of Hangar 77 for a glimpse
of Voyager. ''Mr. Rutan,'' one said as she handed him a check, ''we'd like you
to accept this little donation. We're all rooting for you.''

''We're going to succeed,'' Mr. Rutan said, ''partly because of the advanced
technology in Voyager, and partly thanks to a lot of people who share our dream.
They've helped us in large ways and small, and they'll be flying with us in
spirit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Rutan (page C5); photo of Jeana Yeager (NYT/Malcolm W.
Browne)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 9, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A SEQUEL TO 'ALIEN' READY TO GO INTO PRODUCTION

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 8


As another proof that sequels are big business in Hollywood right now, James
Cameron, the co-writer and director of ''The Terminator,'' has written and will
direct ''Aliens,'' a sequel to 20th Century-Fox's 1979 science fiction horror
movie, ''Alien.''

In Ridley Scott's ''Alien,'' a deadly extraterrestrial ate its way through the
human inhabitants of the spaceship Nostromo. Only Sigourney Weaver escaped. In
''Aliens,'' which will start production in London on Sept. 30, Miss Weaver
returns to confront the same species of extraterrestrial at a different time and
place. However, there will be nothing in the new movie as graphic as the alien
that burst out of John Hurt's chest. ''There are ways to thrill, enthrall, and
exhilarate an audience without a splash of blood,'' Mr. Cameron said.

Mr. Cameron has already turned down numerous offers to make a sequel to ''The
Terminator,'' his hit movie of last fall, which starred Arnold Schwarzenegger as
a relentless machine sent from the future to destroy a young girl before she can
bear a son who will defeat the machines that rule the world 40 years later.

Makes Use of Nightmares

Made for $6.4 million, ''The Terminator'' sold more than $35 million worth of
movie tickets in the United States and did well abroad. Mr. Cameron, who
remembers his dreams and nightmares for later use, says ''The Terminator''
tapped into two deep fears: ''Being blamed for something you didn't do and being
chased by that which cannot be stopped, the primal fear of something out in the
woods that is bigger and stronger.''

Now on video cassette, ''The Terminator'' was the No. 1 rental movie for six
straight weeks last spring. According to the Hollywood trade paper Variety,
''The Terminator,'' with sales of 170,000 video cassettes, is also the all-time
third best-selling of the high-priced cassettes. At $79.95, it has been outsold
by ''Gone With the Wind'' and ''The Empire Strikes Back.''

Young directors with such artistic and commercial success are hotly pursued.
''For two weeks we were the hottest commodity,'' said the 30-year-old Mr.
Cameron of himself and his co-writer-producer wife, Gale Anne Hurd. ''You don't
know who's sincere. Studio executives have a strong acquisitional sense. They
like to put you in their box. But their enlightened self-interest does allow you
to make movies.''

'Other Things to Do'

As to why he is not accepting a great deal of money to make a sequel to ''The
Terminator,'' Mr. Cameron said, ''Gale and I have other things to do as film
makers. Besides, I'm starting to build up an allergic reaction to sequels.''

His first chance to direct - he started his career as an artist drawing garish
posters for low-budget horror movies and then worked as an art director and
production designer for Roger Corman at New World Pictures - was Mr. Corman's
''Piranha II.'' And he shares the screenwriting credit with Sylvester Stallone
on this summer's blockbuster movie, ''Rambo,'' the sequel to ''First Blood.''

''The action is mine; the politics is Stallone's,'' he quips of ''Rambo.''

''Aliens,'' like ''The Terminator,'' will have a strong woman at its core. ''I
hate the image of the female simpering in fear,'' Mr. Cameron says. ''In 'The
Terminator,' I stripped away one by one the people who could help the heroine.
She had to take responsibility for her own survival.''

Although he described ''Aliens'' as ''a straightforward story about a group of
United States marines 200 years in the future,'' he said that his story ''works
on one level as an allegory for Vietnam.'' The movie, he said, will pit
''high-tech soldiers against an unseen, wraithlike enemy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sigourney Weaver

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STOCKMAN RESIGNS TOP BUDGET POST; GOING TO WALL ST.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


David A. Stockman, the White House budget director and a key architect of the
Reagan Administration's efforts to reduce the size and scale of the Federal
Government, announced today that he would resign Aug. 1.

The White House said Mr. Stockman was planning to take a job at the New York
investment banking concern Salomon Brothers. In New York City, John H.
Gutfreund, the chairman and chief executive officer of Salomon Brothers, said
Mr. Stockman would join the concern Nov. 1 as a managing director involved in
corporate and governmental affairs.

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said President Reagan was considering
a list of candidates to replace Mr. Stockman, whose departure this summer had
been expected.

Possible Successors

White House sources said the list of possible successors included Commerce
Secretary Malcolm Baldrige; Drew Lewis, a former Transportation Secretary;
Richard G. Darman, the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury; Paul H. O'Neill, who
was deputy budget director under President Ford, and John A. Svahn, the
assistant to the President for policy development. There were indications that
the President might choose a budgetary technician rather than a prominent
politician.

Economists and members of the financial community expressed sharp regret at Mr.
Stockman's departure, and some voiced concern that the Reagan Administration
might no longer include an outspoken advocate of reduced budget deficits and
higher taxes. [Page A14.] Mr. Stockman's blunt comments questioning
Administration budget figures and programs periodically irritated the President
and his aides. But even his critics have conceded that Mr. Stockman was an
energetic, complex and often brilliant tactician who had mastered the Federal
bureaucracy and the budget process.

Mr. Reagan spoke warmly today of the departing 38-year-old budget director.
''David Stockman has served with dedication and distinction,'' he said. ''His
tireless effort to bring fiscal discipline to the Federal Government and insure
economic stability for the country are deeply appreciated.''

Mr. Speakes said: ''The President has nothing but the highest admiration for
Dave Stockman. I think that goes from top to bottom in the Administration and a
wide segment of Capitol Hill.''

The Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, said: ''They're going to have a
tough time finding a replacement. He knows the numbers. He knows the programs.''
Mr. Dole said that although many lawmakers disagreed at times with Mr. Stockman,
''At least he knew what he was talking about, and that is refreshing around this
town.''

As director of the Office of Management and Budget, Mr. Stockman oversaw the
preparation of the Federal budget and emerged as a dominant figure in what
became known as the ''Reagan Revolution.'' His focus was reducing the scale of
the Federal Government in order to limit the budget deficit. Foes on Capitol
Hill and social welfare organizations said, essentially, that he ''cooked
figures'' to support his denial of their contentions that Administration budget
cutbacks had fueled poverty and damaged the poor. Mr. Stockman denied it.

House Budget Chief 'Shocked'

With House and Senate conferees struggling over the budget for the next fiscal
year, Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania, the Democratic chairman
of the House Budget Committee, said he was ''shocked'' at the timing of the
resignation. He called it ''a serious blow to the process,'' which could ''slow
down the reaching of a compromise and breaking the logjam'' on the budget. ''Who
knows the numbers?'' he asked ''Who knows all of the programs at this critical
moment?''

Close friends of Mr. Stockman said he informed Donald T. Regan, the White House
chief of staff, last Thursday about his intention to leave, and White House
aides indicated that the budget director had discussed his plan to depart with
Mr. Regan before then.

Timed to the Budget Cycle

''I think the time frame was always for him to leave after the budget cycle,''
said one former White House associate who is a friend of Mr. Stockman. ''He had
put together and tramped through five budgets. He thought that this cycle had
come to an end and thought there would be a compromise.'' The preparation of the
budget for the fiscal year 1987 begins in September.

White House officials said Mr. Stockman would have preferred to have announced
his resignation next week, in an effort to minimize the effect on current
negotiations, but decided to issue the departure statement this afternoon when
word began circulating around Washington. Privately, Mr. Stockman has said he
wanted to leave partly because he wanted to earn more money after the birth of
his first child in April.

Mr. Stockman now earns $75,100 a year. As one of 88 managing directors at
Salomon Brothers, his salary may range between $100,000 and $200,000 yearly. But
he will probably earn far more in bonuses.

Speculation on Departure

Mr. Speakes conceded that Mr. Stockman's departure had been the ''source of
speculation in the last six months.'' He said: ''As you know, from time to time
we have had some things to say about Dave and the things that he said. Many
times he has been misinterpreted.''

Mr. Stockman, a former Congressman from Michigan and onetime anti-Vietnam War
activist, was known as the Wunderkind of the Reagan Adminstration in early 1981.
But Mr. Stockman nearly lost his job after conceding, in an article by William
Greider in The Atlantic, that he had private doubts about his budget numbers.
Mr. Stockman also questioned the ability of the Administration to balance the
budget while cutting taxes and increasing military spending.

Earlier this year Mr. Stockman stirred an outcry from veterans and farmers when,
in a Congressional hearing, he said that military pensions were unduly swollen
and that many of the nation's farmers had brought economic difficulties upon
themselves.

Last month, in an off-the-record speech to the directors of the New York Stock
Exchange, Mr. Stockman suggested that higher taxes might be one option to solve
the nation's mounting deficit. Mr. Reagan has repeatedly said he opposed raising
taxes.

On these occasions, Mr. Reagan stood by Mr. Stockman and refused to ask for his
resignaton, partly because of the budget director's mastery of the budget
process.

It was an open secret that Donald Regan, as Treasury Secretary, had periodically
disagreed with Mr. Stockman. But aides to Mr. Regan said late today that,
although there was ''some truth'' to reports of friction between the two men
earlier, Mr. Stockman and the chief of staff had maintained a smooth
relationship in recent months.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Stockman (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE APPROVES A MEASURE TO AID CAMBODAIN REBELS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


The House voted today to approve $5 million in military and economic aid to the
non-Communist rebels in Cambodia. The vote was 288 to 122.  On the same vote,
the House rejected an amendment that would have limited the $5 million to
humanitarian aid, including food and medicine.

The action, on an amendment to the foreign aid authorization bill for 1986 and
1987, marks the first time that the House has approved aid to forces fighting
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

The House measure, which is identical to one approved earlier this year by the
Senate, prohibits any aid to the Khmer Rouge, the Communist faction that ruled
Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 and is accused of killing some two million citizens.

The House Foreign Affairs Committee had approved $5 million in aid, including
military assistance, to be funneled through the Thai Government. The rebels are
operating from areas along the Thai-Cambodian border.

Senate Provisions Substituted

But the full House approved an amendment offered by Representative Stephen J.
Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, that substituted the provisions set by the Senate.
Under the amendment, the funds are to be distributed through the Reagan
Administration.

Mr. Solarz offered his amendment as a substitute for one proposed by
Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, that would have limited the $5
million to humanitarian assistance.

Mr. Leach, in opposing military aid to the rebels, said, ''It is not enough to
conclude that the cause is just.'' But Mr. Solarz said the aid would ''send a
very strong signal to the Vietnamese.''

Earlier, Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana and chairman of the
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, questioned whether military
aid could be sent only to the non-Communist rebels and kept from the Khmer
Rouge.

Mr. Hamilton told reporters that he feared the $5 million would be the first
installment in a long-term commitment in Indochina. ''We can't seriously believe
we're going to throw the Vietnamese out of Cambodia with a few million
dollars,'' he said.

Mr. Hamilton, who as committee chairman is briefed on covert intelligence
activities, declined to discuss reports that the Central Intelligence Agency is
spending about $5 million to assist Cambodian rebels this year. But he said he
felt the covert aid was preferable to the military assistance proposed by Mr.
Solarz.

''The overt aid is military,'' he said. ''The covert aid is nonmilitary.''
Administration Opposes Bill The action on Cambodia came as the House opened
debate on the foreign aid bill. The Administration opposes the House bill
because it prohibits military aid to Jordan until the kingdom publicly
recognizes Israel and enters peace negotiations. In addition, the bill
authorizes more for economic and development aid and less for military aid than
President Reagan asked.

The Senate has approved a $12.8 billion foreign aid authorization bill that the
Administration supports.

On its first vote, the House overwhelmingly approved a freeze in the foreign aid
authorization for 1986 and 1987, which would limit funds for each year to $12.6
billion - $700 million less than the Reagan Administration has requested and
about $500 million less than approved by the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
The freeze would not affect aid to Israel or Egypt.

The amendment, approved 386 to 2, was proposed by the Foreign Affairs Committee
chairman, Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, in an effort to
gain support for the bill.

In a test on military aid, the House voted 279 to 125 against an amendment to
restore $60 million in military aid to the Philippines. The Administration
requested $100 million in military aid, but the House approved only $25 million
and transferred $60 million to economic assistance.

On a voice vote, the House reduced military aid for Turkey from $740 million to
$711 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ AT CAMBODIA BORDER: A 'GUT' UNDERSTANDING

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: KHAO I DANG, Thailand, July 9


Secretary of State George P. Shultz took his message of American support for
non-Communist Cambodian rebels and for Thailand's national security to the
border of Cambodia today, touring refugee camps, a relocated village and a
military base within a few miles of massed Vietnamese troops.

He traveled into the area around Aranyaprathet by plane, helicopter and car,
landing on dirt airstrips as thousands of Thai troops stood guard in the
surrounding rice paddies and along the roads.

In the Cambodian refugee camps and at the Thai village of Ban Thap Thai,
children and adults lined the roads in front of their recently built
bamboo-and-thatched-roof houses. The Cambodians carried posters and signs
pleading for help in ridding their country of the Vietnamese soldiers who have
occupied it since 1979. The Thais waved American and Thai flags.

At a Thai military base called Task Force 523, just two and a half miles from
the border, Mr. Shultz climbed into the turret of an M-48A5 tank acquired with
some of the $100 million a year in military assistance that the United States
provides to Thailand, mostly as loans.

Nearest to Border Zone

United States Embassy officials in Bangkok said Mr. Shultz's visit to the
Aranyaprathet area was thought to be the closest that any high-level American
official had been to the border zone, which has frequently been the scene of
heavy fighting between the Vietnamese military and three Cambodian guerrilla
groups.

In a major offensive during the last dry season beginning roughly in November
1984 and ending in March 1985, the Vietnamese pushed some 230,000 Cambodians
sympathetic to the guerrillas out of the border area and into Thailand. They now
live in 11 so-called evacuation camps, including the one at Khao I Dang.

In late afternoon, after a visit back in the capital with King Phumiphol Aduldet
and Queen Sirikit, Mr. Shultz said the morning trip to the border area ''kind of
makes you take into your gut what you knew in your head about conditions and the
outline and difficulties of the human tragedy involved.''

Despite his expressions of sympathy and understanding, however, he was
noncommittal when the Cambodian head of the camp near Khao I Dang made a strong
plea for American military assistance to the two non-Communist groups within the
rebel coalition. The third group is the Communist Khmer Rouge, which ruled
Cambodia until 1979 when the Vietnamese invaded and set up a regime sympathetic
to Hanoi. The Khmer Rouge has been widely charged with responsibility for the
death of two million or more Cambodians. $5 Million in Military Aid The camp
leader, Thou Thon, said members of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front,
a guerrilla group that has charge of the camp here, had been ''overjoyed'' to
hear about the $5 million in military assistance that would be made available to
it and the other non-Communist guerrilla organizations under an amendment
recently passed by the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

He said that for the Cambodian insurgent movement the proposed aid was like ''a
branch of a tree floating on the surface of water.'' Declaring that the
Cambodian rebels have no home, the camp leader said the Shultz visit ''raises
the spirits of Khmer people everywhere.''

He added: ''You give us hope to carry on our battle against the cruel Vietnamese
invaders. Your visit, we hope, marks America's commitment to the plight of our
people.''

The Reagan Administration, however, has said repeatedly that, while it is
prepared to increase humanitarian aid to the Cambodian refugees if necessary, it
does not wish to provide military assistance, arguing that Asian countries are
providing enough. China openly assists the Cambodian rebel movement, and there
are unacknowledged reports that Thailand also provides military help. American
humanitarian assistance to the Cambodian refugees now runs about $16 million a
year, most of it given through international or nongovernmental agencies.

While not responding directly to Mr. Thon's plea for military aid, Mr. Shultz
said at his news conference in Bangkok that it is ''apparent that the people
involved have many economic needs of various kinds.''

He went on, ''If the funds are provided, there is plenty to do with them.''

Signs and Banners

Outside the meeting room where Mr. Shultz heard Mr. Thon, many of the camp's
54,000 refugees displayed signs and banners with phrases such as: ''Please
Rescue Cambodia,'' ''God Bless America'' and ''We're Real Freedom Fighters.''
One said: ''U.S.A.: Please help us turn 'Killing Fields' to Cambodian farming
fields. We want to go home.''

At Ban Thap Thai, a Thai village that had to be moved in its entirety because of
the border fighting, Mr. Shultz saw the bamboo houses that have been built in a
few months' time and presented a gift of books and sports equipment. Ban Thap
Thai is one of many Thai villages that have had to relocate away from the
immediate border. The United States has provided $8 million in assistance so far
this year to help what are called ''affected Thai villages,'' a separate program
from that for the Cambodian refugees.

In his final stop, at the Panat Nikhom processing and transit center for
refugees who are preparing to go to the United States or other countries, Mr.
Shultz met briefly with several refugees who were ready to depart for the United
States. Practicing the English they had learned at the center, they told him the
stories of how they and their families had left Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.

''I wish you good fortune in the United States,'' Mr. Shultz told them. ''You
will find the United States a country where people value freedom, independence
and the willingness to work. We revere the past but we like the future more and
we want to look forward to a better future for our children and grandchildren.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AUDITORS TESTIFY AT TRIAL OF A GENERAL

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., July 9


Government auditors used flow charts today to help explain the arcane world of
Swiss banking to a jury hearing the case of a retired Air Force major general
accused of embezzling funds from a fund used to bankroll spy operations.

The former general, Richard B. Collins, 55 years old, faces charges in Federal
District Court of converting $19,000 in interest from the secret $450,000 Air
Force fund to his own use while he managed the fund as a high-ranking NATO
commander 10 years ago.

Justice Department prosecutors said the officer pocketed the interest earnings
by switching the account between banks in Switzerland.

A lawyer for the highly decorated former fighter pilot said his client switched
the fund to an interest-bearing account after failing to convince Gen. George
Brown, then chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, that the fund should be
closed.

Fund Called 'Time Bomb'

The defense lawyer, Stephen Bronis, told the jury his client had told General
Brown that the fund, used to finance various Air Force spy operations, was ''a
political time bomb'' that could explode if its existence was leaked to the
press.

The subject came up, Mr. Bronis said, after General Collins became head of plans
and policy for the United States European Command in the troubled political
climate left by the resignation of President Nixon.

Instead of dissolving the account, General Collins was directed to conceal
information concerning the fund from Government auditors, Mr. Bronis told the
jurors.

Mr. Bronis said General Collins retired from the Air Force in 1978 because he
could not support the nuclear and defense policies of President Carter. He lives
in Fort Lauderdale and has been fighting the Government's charges for the past
two years, threatening that his defense in a trial would hinge on revelations
about intelligence-gathering operations of military agencies and the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Judge James C. Paine, who is presiding at the trial, ruled in 1983 that Mr.
Collins could introduce classified documents at a public trial to demonstrate
that he acted in good faith in the management of the fund.

Six Counts of Embezzlement

Government prosecutors appeared to skirt references to the purpose of the fund
while examining the auditors who testified today on the movement of the fund's
capital between banks in Switzerland.

According to his indictment on six counts of embezzlement Mr. Collins went to
Geneva from his headquarters in Stuttgart, West Germany, in 1975 to transfer the
secret fund from an account that did not pay interest to an interest-bearing
account under his own name. In 1977 he withdrew $19,000 in three separate
transactions, the indictment charged.

The first witness called by the Government yesterday was a former Air Force
major, Joseph Zielezienski, who helped administer the fund. He testified that
officials of the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation had a secret arrangement with the
Air Force to draw money from the fund.

Mr. Bronis contended in his opening remarks to the jury that the fund was used
by Lockheed officials in the Vietnam War to bribe foreign officials on behalf of
the United States.

Use for Bribery Alleged

News reports published earlier contended that Lockheed officials passed this
money to foreign governments to permit American military spy planes to operate
from their countries on missions across North Vietnam, North Korea and China.

A Lockheed official, A. Gene Ostea, who heads Lockheed Aircraft International
A.G., has been subpoenaed by the defense to testify at the trial.

In an effort to spare the Government embarrassment, Judge Paine has ruled that
testimony concerning the bribes can stop short of identifying the compromised
countries by name. They are to be identified in court only as Country A, B or C,
he has instructed the lawyers on both sides.

A videotaped deposition taken from former Gen. Alexander Haig, who was supreme
commander of NATO in the mid-1970's, is expected to be introduced at the trial.
According to Mr. Bronis Mr. Haig stated in the deposition that he was unaware of
the fund's existence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard B. Collins (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 10, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HUMANITAS PRIZES GIVEN FOR 1984-5 TV SEASON

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 9


The writers of ''The Dollmaker,'' an ABC television movie starring Jane Fonda as
the poverty-stricken mother of five children, and episodes of NBC's ''St.
Elsewhere'' and ''The Cosby Show'' were awarded the Humanitas Prize today for
the 1984-85 television season.

The Humanitas Prize is given annually for television programs that ''probe the
meaning of human life'' or ''most effectively communicate enriching human
values.''

'Loving Relationships'

The $25,000 prize in the category for programs longer than an hour was given to
the author-actor Hume Cronyn and Susan Cooper, writers of the three-hour
''Dollmaker,'' for the ''lucid statement that it is loving relationships, not
things, that make human beings happy'' and ''its moving depiction of the
glories, the demand and the heroism involved in being a mother.''

''The Dollmaker'' was based on a book of the same name by Harriette Arnow. It is
about a woman uprooted with her children in 1945 from the hills of Kentucky to
the alien city of Detroit.

''Bye, George'' - the last hour of a three-part story on ''St. Elsewhere'' about
a young black African man who needs a kidney, and a doctor who realizes he can
not turn his back on his African clinic - won the $15,000 prize in the hour
category for John Masius and Tom Fontana. This is the third year in a row that
Mr. Fontana has been nominated.

In the half-hour category, John Markus was awarded $10,000 for an episode of
''The Cosby Show'' in which the son of the character played by Bill Cosby finds
some marijuana, and the father must decide whether to believe his son's story.

The Humanitas Prize, which has been given annually since 1975 by the Los
Angeles-based Human Family Institute, was broadened this year to include
children's programming. In animation, the $10,000 prize was won by Jeffrey
Scott, the writer of an episode of ''Jim Henson's Muppet Babies.'' In live
action, the award went to Charles Purpura for ''The Day the Senior Class Got
Married.'' For news-documentary, a nonmonetary prize was given to an NBC ''White
Paper'': ''Vietnam - Lessons of a Lost War,'' which was written by Marvin Kalb,
Anthony Potter and William Turque.

The Rev. Ellwood E. Kieser, president of the ecumenical Human Family Institute,
said that although television as a whole may not be better this year, he felt
there were an increasing number of humane programs. ''The improvement in the
sitcom area is especially noticeable,'' he said. He added that for a while it
appeared that ''the classic character comedies'' - ''Mary Tyler Moore,'' ''All
in the Family,'' and ''M*A*S*H'' - would not be replaced, but that now their
place has been taken by ''The Cosby Show'' and ''Family Ties.'' ''Family Ties''
had the other two finalists in the half-hour category.

Father Kieser said that although children's programming had been called a
national scandal, the judges did not ''find it quite that bad.'' However, he
said that the animation programming was particularly weak and that all five
nominees came from a single network, CBS.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hume Cronyn (Albert N. Bray)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ RESPONDS TO HANOI BID FOR TALKS ON MISSING AMERICANS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 10


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the Reagan Administration
was ready to work ''promptly and decisively'' with Vietnam to resolve the issue
of missing Americans.

In his first public response to a request for ''high level'' talks on the issue
passed from Hanoi to Washington last week by Foreign Minister Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia, Mr. Shultz said at a news conference at the United
States Embassy here today:

''I think the next step for us is - as we will be doing - to organize the kind
of group we think would be best able to respond and to let them know in Hanoi
that we'd like to start to work on this problem. We want to work at it as
promptly and decisively as possible.''

Mr. Shultz's comments followed a decision by Vietnam last week to turn over the
remains of 26 Americans thought to have died in Indochina. This was the largest
repatriation of remains of M.I.A.'s - missing in action - announced since 1975,
when South Vietnam fell to the armies of the North, two years after the
withdrawal of American forces. More than 2,400 Americans are still listed as
missing in Indochina, over half of them in Vietnam.

Criticizes Congress on Cambodia

In his remarks today, Mr. Shultz was also critical of Congress for what he
called its ''changeability'' as he expressed the Administration's reservations
about Congressional efforts to provide non-Communist forces battling Vietnamese
troops in Cambodia with $5 million that could be used for military aid. The
measure was approved by the House of Representatives on Tuesday.

''I think we're going to have greater success in our program if we keep it the
way it is now,'' he said, referring to the Administration's limiting of aid to
mostly humanitarian expenditures.

''Congress is a very changeable operation,'' he said. ''They are in favor of
something at one time and then some things can happen and they can change their
mind and you've got a program that's working that gets derailed. We'd like to
avoid that.''

Mr. Shultz is in Kuala Lumpur for annual consultations with ministers of the
member nations of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines.

The Secretary, asked by reporters to clear up a misunderstanding about whether
he had brought Thailand a new letter of support from President Reagan, said he
had not presented such a document to Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda when they
met in Bangkok on Monday. But he indicated that the subject had come up in their
conversation when the Thai leader referred to an letter Mr. Reagan sent last
April. The letter pledged backing for Thailand in the face of what both
countries view as Vietnam's threatening presence in Cambodia.

In his answers to questions at the news conference, he indicated that the United
States was prepared to deal with Vietnam directly at a high level. Officials
traveling in the Shultz party have suggested that Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, might be among officials
likely to visit Hanoi, with which the United States has no formal diplomatic
relations.

Indonesian Is Thanked

Mr. Shultz thanked Foreign Minister Mochtar of Indonesia, with whom he will meet
privately Thursday, for his efforts in ''supporting our concerns about the
M.I.A.-P.O.W. issue.'' He added that on the larger issue of diplomatic ties,
Washington would prefer to act on its own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
POLITICALLY ATTUNED ADMIRAL: WILLIAM CROWE JR.

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


In 1962, when William J. Crowe Jr. was fresh from his first command as skipper
of the diesel attack submarine Trout, the logical step for an upwardly mobile
Navy man was nuclear submarine school.

Instead, the young commander enrolled in Princeton to earn a doctoral degree in
politics.

The choice that seemed unusual then now seems prescient. The political skills he
has learned in an extraordinarily broad array of assignments over a 42-year Navy
career will be in great demand in his next job.

The White House announced today that President Reagan would nominate Admiral
Crowe as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

As such, he will be the arbiter among the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines in
their discussions of military strategy and budgets, at a time when those budgets
are under intense pressure from a deficit-weary Congress. And he will be Mr.
Reagan's preeminent military adviser on issues ranging from the slumping image
of the Pentagon at home to the exasperating trial of arms control negotiations
in Geneva.

Compared With Vessey

He will succeed Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., who is retiring in October, eight
months before the completion of his second two-year term.

The contrast between the two officers could hardly be greater.

General Vessey was a combat soldier who won his officer's commission on the
battlefield at Anzio and performed his job as chairman quietly, without
rhetorical flourishes or public comment.

Admiral Crowe - his name rhymes with now - was schooled at Annapolis and
Stanford as well as Princeton, and is known as a man who prides himself on
serious intellectual credentials. He tinkers with his own speeches, and seems to
relish interviews as much as General Vessey has shunned them.

R. James Woolsey, a former Under Secretary of the Navy, said that the admiral
sometimes exaggerates his slow, Oklahoma drawl and a ''manner that says 'Gee, I
don't really know how to play this game but I'd love to learn.' '' In fact, the
admiral is quick-witted, erudite, and fluent in French and German.

''Crowe is an untraditional, independent thinker with unusually broad-gauge
political as well as military experience,'' said Robert W. Komer, Under
Secretary of Defense in the Carter Administration. ''This is one very smart
cookie.''

Choice Wasn't Expected

Many had expected that the job would go to the Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
James D. Watkins.

But Pentagon officials said Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was impressed
and charmed when he first met Admiral Crowe in Naples, where the Admiral was
stationed as commander in chief of North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in
Southern Europe from 1980 to 1983.

William James Crowe Jr. was born Jan. 2, 1925, in La Grange, Kan., and grew up
in Oklahoma City. His father was a lawyer, and the admiral once told an
interviewer that, as a child watching his father's predictable routine, he
yearned for travel and change.

He got it, in a wide range of international assignments. In the Vietnam War, he
served as an adviser to South Vietnamese forces. As commander of a Middle East
task force in 1976 and 1977 he developed a fascination with Persian Gulf
politics. As commander of NATO's southern flank, he played referee between
Turkey and Greece. And most recently, as commander in chief of the United States
Pacific Command, with responsibility for American forces in the 100 million
square miles between the California coast and Africa, he has made himself
conversant with the politics of North and South Korea, Indochina, the
Philippines and New Zealand.

He is married to the former Shirley Grennell, and they have three children,
including a son who is a lieutenant in the Marine Corps.

Responsibility Beyond Navy

Perhaps most important, Admiral Crowe has an unusual amount of experience in
joint positions, where his Navy loyalties were subordinated to responsiblity to
all the services. As commander of NATO's southern flank and in his current
assignment, he has known the frustration of fighting in Washington for money to
buy ammunition and other items that the individual services sometimes give short
shrift in their preoccupation with planes and ships.

Although the Navy has generally been the fiercest defender of its independence
from joint authority, Admiral Crowe has signaled a keen, if cautious, awareness
of the dangers of too much independence.

In a memorandum last February, for example, he noted that as joint commander in
the Pacific he has watched the services use their power to eliminate innovative
joint tactics and training, and squeeze out shared logistical needs like fuel
and bullets.

Admiral Crowe stopped short of prescribing a wholesale change in the system that
many analysts have recommended. With a political scientist's insight, he
concluded, ''Those in command today have grown up under this system and
understand its strengths and how to work around its weaknesses.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Crowe Jr. (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Public TV Demonstrates Press Freedom

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


To the Editor:

''If the Press Were Tame,'' Anthony Lewis's June 27 column, which takes issue
with PBS for running ''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story,'' the Accuracy in
Media-produced program, is an example of flawed reasoning and press overreaction
to perceived incursions into its freedom.

While expressing his concern that the program was run after it got what appeared
to be a politically motivated ''leg up'' from the National Endowment for the
Humanities and its then chairman (now Education Secretary), William J. Bennett,
Mr. Lewis goes on to say:

''PBS apparently decided it would look worse to turn the film down -worse
especially to the conservative zealots who now run the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting.''

What Mr. Lewis overlooks almost completely is that the AIM film was not run by
itself but within the framework of a larger program, produced by me, in which
several people, including our ''Inside Story'' unit, took issue with many of
AIM's allegations as well as its point of view. That's what a free press is
about.

Mr. Lewis says this was propaganda dressed up as journalism.

There is surely some difficulty in fixing a label of propaganda on something
done by AIM and concluding that the label invalidates the broadcast, especially
if you place that charge in the context of modern-day journalism, where Op-Ed
pages reflect powerful political views themselves and are considered
approp-riate for inclusion in a newspaper.

Further omitted is any consideration that, if PBS had refused to give air time
to this heavy-handed AIM film starring Charlton Heston, which brings with it a
stern message about the evils of Communism, it could have become a conservative
cult film. More to the point, it could have been circulated in Washington as an
example of a patriotic effort that left-leaning media conspirators had
suppressed.

Mr. Lewis concludes that putting this film on the air could be compared to
allowing outsiders to write bits of page one of The New York Times. Not so. It
is really much more like allowing another voice on the page where such
columnists as Mr. Lewis regularly express their opinion on Vietnam, Israel or
any subject of national importance.NED SCHNURMAN Senior Executive Producer
''Inside Story''

New York, June 27, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHUTTLE SET TO LIFT OFF TOMORROW ON A MISSION TO OBSERVE THE STARS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 476 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., July 10


The countdown began today for the scheduled liftoff of the shuttle Challenger
Friday on a seven-day mission that will transform the winged spaceplane into an
advanced orbiting astronomical observatory.

The flight, set to begin at 4:30 P.M. Friday, is the 19th in the shuttle series
and the first for a special package of 13 experiments that are to study the sun,
the stars and distant galaxies.

The equipment was developed by the European Space Agency as part of the Spacelab
program. On two previous shuttle missions, pressurized Spacelab modules have
allowed crew members to work on scientific experiments in the shuttle's payload
bay. On this Spacelab flight, however, large instrument platforms in the payload
bay are to be directly exposed to open space while crew members control them
from inside the ship.

The commander of the seven-member crew is Col. C. Gordon Fullerton of the Air
Force, a 48-year-old veteran astronaut from Rochester who served as the pilot on
the third shuttle mission. The Challenger's pilot this time is Col. Roy D.
Bridges Jr., 41, of the Air Force, a native of Gainesville, Ga., a fighter pilot
who flew combat missions in Vietnam.

Only 2 Have Flown Before

The mission specialists are Dr. Anthony W. England, 43, a geophysicist from
Fargo, N.D., who was selected as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; Dr. Karl G.
Henize, 58, an astronomer from Cincinnati who has conducted extensive research
with both earth- and space-based instruments, and Dr. F. Story Musgrave, 49, a
physician from Lexington, Ky., who was a mission specialist on the sixth shuttle
flight. Mission specialists are full-time astronauts who work for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.

The payload specialists on this flight are Dr. Loren W. Acton, 48, a solar
physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory in California, and Dr.
John-David F. Bartoe, 41, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory in
Washington. Payload specialists are experts from outside the space agency who
are selected to participate in shuttle flights. Dr. Acton and Dr. Bartoe are the
third pair of career scientists to work on Spacelab.

If the flight goes off as scheduled, Dr. Henize, who was born Oct. 17, 1926,
will become the oldest man to fly in space, a distinction that has belonged to
Dr. William E. Thornton, two years his junior. Dr. Henize, who is also a jet
pilot, joined the astronaut corps in 1967 and was a member of the support crew
for the Apollo 15 mission in 1971.

This is the eighth flight for the Challenger, the most frequently flown of the
winged orbiters. The Challenger, which first went into space April 4, 1983, is
named for a Navy research vessel that made extensive oceanographic cruises in
the 1870's.

The shuttle is scheduled to land July 19 at 12:42 P.M. at Edwards Air Force Base
in California.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE APPROVES FOREIGN AID BILL OPPOSING MARXISTS AROUND WORLD

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


The House passed a $12.6 billion foreign aid bill today that appears to reflect
a growing determination on Capitol Hill to confront Communist and other leftist
governments around the world.

The legislation authorizes new aid for rebels battling the Marxist Governments
in Cambodia and Afghanistan, and lifts a nine-year ban on American help to
insurgent forces in Angola.

Last month, the House reversed earlier votes and supported renewed aid to forces
seeking to topple the leftist Government of Nicaragua.

'Don't Want to Look Weak'

Vin Weber, a Minnesota Republican, summed up the mood by saying, ''Members of
Congress don't want to look weak right now.'' Michael D. Barnes, a Maryland
Democrat, added: ''It's sort of an angry mood around here. Who can we stick it
to next?''

The bill was approved in a voice vote as lawmakers sought to avoid a recorded
vote that could prove politically troublesome. The Senate has already passed a
$12.8 billion foreign aid bill, and a conference will be needed to reconcile the
two versions.

The action today means that Congress is now likely to approve its first foreign
aid bill since 1981. In recent years, such legislation was swamped by a number
of emotional issues and Congress found it easier to finance foreign aid programs
through catchall spending bills that avoided controversy.

Administration Opposes Bill

However, the Administration opposed the bill offered today, raising the
possibility that the President might veto whatever compromise emerges.

The White House said the measure placed too much emphasis on economic assistance
and not enough on military aid. In addition, the Administration is incensed at a
provision that would bar Jordan from receiving advanced weapons unless the
President certifies that the Jordanian Government is ready to recognize Israel
and enter peace negotiations with it.

The bill adopted today outlines $12.6 billion in foreign aid programs for the
fiscal years 1986 and 1987. Appropriations in a later bill would be needed to
finance those programs.

Conservative Support

Many conservatives swung behind today's bill after several amendments were
approved that moved the legislation toward the right.

Representative Weber, a leading conservative voice in the House, said of the
bill: ''It's a change in policy in the right direction. We're really enunciating
a Reagan doctrine in the Congress - that we will support resistance movements
around the world.''

Mr. Weber also said that, with Mr. Reagan in the White House, Republicans had a
greater responsibility to support foreign aid. ''A majority party,'' he said,
''cannot be an isolationist party.''

'Like Taking a Cast Off'

Conservatives said the most important provision lifted the ban on American aid
to the Angolan rebels. Known as the Clark Amendment, the ban was adopted in 1976
and inaugurated a series of efforts by Congress in subsequent years to restrict
the Administration's foreign policy flexibility.

Henry J. Hyde, an Illinois Republican, said that canceling the amendment was
''like taking a cast off a broken leg.'' He added: ''It shows we're no longer
paralyzed by Vietnam-guilt legislation.''

Many liberals were deeply distressed by the repeal of the amendment, which is
named for former Senator Dick Clark, Democrat of Iowa. They saw it as part of a
''dangerous trend,'' in the words of Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of Long Island,
that is leading toward a more aggressive foreign policy.

''What this bill says is that the threat to use force is part and parcel of our
diplomacy, and I think that's a mistake,'' Mr. Downey said.  A number of
liberals supported the bill, however, because it contained $4.5 billion for
Israel that Howard L. Berman, a California Democrat, described as ''critical
assistance.'' Mr. Barnes noted that the bill also would renew restrictions on
aid to El Salvador by requiring regular reports on its willingness to negotiate
with guerrilla forces and protect human rights.

The bill would provide about $6 billion in military assistance, almost $500
million less than the Administration requested. Economic aid would be almost $4
billion, with the rest going for development projects and international
organizations. The bill includes these provisions:

* Israel would receive $4.5 billion, including an emergency infusion of $1.5
billion to help it survive its financial crisis; Egypt is in line for $2.1
billion.

* A ban on recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization until it
recognizes Israel would be reaffirmed.

* Anti-Communist rebels in Cambodia would get $5 million, and another $15
million would aid Afghans resisting Soviet control.

* American aid for international family planning programs that promote abortion
would be barred.

* Suspension of trade with Ethiopia would be allowed if the President determined
that the Ethiopian Government was deliberately starving its people, and if
Congress passed a joint resolution.

The Administration argued that under the House bill, deep cuts would be
necessary in some of its Central American programs. It also denounced the
requirements for reporting on El Salvador's progress as ''onerous and contrary
to U.S. interests.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. REPORTS MOBILE INCINERATOR DESTROYED DIOXIN WASTES IN TEST

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


The Environmental Protection Agency announced today that it had successfully
destroyed dioxin-contaminated wastes with a new mobile incinerator.

A trial burning at a site in Missouri contaminated with the most toxic form of
dioxin, 2,3,7,8-TCDD, destroyed 99.9999 percent of the contaminated waste, the
agency said.

Dr. Bernard D. Goldstein, the environmental agency's assistant administrator for
research and development, called the test results ''a major breakthrough in our
efforts to deal with a serious environmental concern.''

Before now, he said in a telephone interview, there was no demonstrated field
technology for treating and destroying dioxin in the soil. The soil either had
to be left where it was or hauled away with the danger of possible accidents on
the way to disposal.

An Hour to Burn a Ton

However, the new technology ''is no panacea'' for dioxin contamination, Dr.
Goldstein said. It cost $200 to $1,200 a ton to destroy the dioxin waste using
the agency's incinerator, he noted. It took an hour to burn a ton, he said.

In a situation such as occurred at Times Beach, Mo., where there is estimated to
be 400,000 tons of dioxin-contaminated soil, the mobile incinerator would take
much too long and cost far too much, Dr. Goldstein said. A permanent incinerator
might be the best solution in such a place, he said.

Times Beach, with a population of 800 people, was rendered uninhabitable by
dioxin that was spread in waste oil used on roads and the environmental agency
spent $24 million to buy out homes and businesses.

Dioxin is an unwanted byproduct of the manufacture of chemical products.
Although there is some evidence that dioxin can cause cancer in humans, there is
disagreement about its impact on human health, other than that it causes a
severe form of skin acne.

Dr. Goldstein, who is leaving the Government next month to return to Rutgers
University, said there were many sites around the country with more limited
amounts of dioxin contamination for which the new mobile incinerator would be
the proper solution. He said sites in New Jersey that had been contaminated by
the manufacture of the herbicide Agent Organge, used as a defoliant in the
Vietnam War, were examples of places where the new technology would be suitable.

Sites in New Jersey that the agency has listed as being contaminated with low
levels of dioxin include the Diamond Shamrock plant at Newark; the now-defunct
Chemical Insecticide Corporation plant at Metuchen, and the Givaudan plant at
Clifton.

Dr. Goldstein said that several commercial waste disposal companies were already
developing mobile incinerators based on the environmental agency's model, and he
said he expected the agency to soon be out of the incineration business.

He and other agency officials said there were no data for the extent of dioxin
contamination throughout the country. They said there were 45 known sites in
Missouri and probably dozens more around the country. The agency has a study
under way to examine sites around the country that have possibly been
contaminated with dioxin.

Robert Percival of the Environmental Defense Fund, an environmental group that
has been active on the dioxin issue, said he had not seen the results of the
agency's incineration tests but added: ''It is possible that this may be the
best way to deal with dioxin. It is better than the cement bunker approach of
just paving it over.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ ASSURES SOUTHEAST ASIANS

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 12


Secretary of State George P. Shultz indicated today that the United States is
resuming a more active role in Southeast Asia, with increased military,
political and economic support for its friends in the region.

Speaking to Foreign Ministers of the six members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, Mr. Shultz said the United States will increase military
assistance to Thailand, that it is willing to increase humanitarian and
political aid to the Cambodian rebels, and that is prepared to provide
antiterrorism training in the region.

Mr. Shultz expressed ''deep concern'' for the security of the six nations,
especially the Philippines and Thailand, and said the strengthening of United
States naval and air power in Asia and the Pacific demonstrates ''our intention
and our will to remain of paramount importance'' in the area.

He did not respond, however, to the urging of some association members nations
that the United States assert more leadership toward bringing about a withdrawal
of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia. He said the United States wants a Cambodian
settlement in a regional framework, led by the countries in the association.

Support for Cambodia Talks

Mr. Shultz gave American support, with some hesitation, to the association
members' proposal for ''proximity talks'' about Cambodia between Vietnam and the
Heng Samrin Government that it installed, on the one hand, and the three rebel
groups - the Khmer Rouge and the two non-Communist groups supported by the
United States - on the other. He expressed concern that the proposal might help
legitimize the Heng Samrin regime, but said the United States supports it
anyway. A senior official accompanying Mr. Shultz has said the United States
does not want to miss the opportunity to probe the possibilities of Vietnamese
flexibility about Cambodia.

Mr. Shultz expressed gratitude for Vietnam's expression of willingness to speed
up efforts to determine the fate of Americans still listed as missing in the
Vietnam War and said the United States is ''prepared to send our technical
people to Vietnam on a full-time basis if the Vietnamese are prepared to agree
to a work program that would warrant such a step.'' But he said that this
''would in no way constitute a diplomatic presence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIAN EASES U.S.-VIETNAM TALKS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 11


''I'm a pretty persuasive fellow, don't you think?'' Mochtar Kusumaatmadja asks,
interrupting one of his characteristic monologues with one of his characteristic
asides.

Mr. Mochtar, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, likes a challenge, and right now he
has a big one on his agenda. This lawyer and diplomat, a Yale Law School
graduate, has taken on the job of trying to improve relations between the United
States and Vietnam.

A former law professor and Justice Minister before becoming Foreign Minister,
the 56-year-old Mr. Mochtar never has fewer than two or three projects in
progress. Acquaintances say he recently wrote two law books at the same time
while having a hand in the development of a new Indonesian cuisine that is
featured at a local hotel's best dining room.

Gratitude From Shultz

This morning, Mr. Mochtar had breakfast with Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, who is in Malaysia for a meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations. Mr. Shultz urged the group to continue its efforts to draft a peace
plan for Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia. At breakfast, he thanked Mr. Mochtar for
''supporting our concerns'' about the issue of American servicemen missing in
Indochina since the Vietnam War.

The Foreign Minister was born in Jakarta on Feb. 17, 1929. He is devoted to the
music of West Java, and has just created a foundation to promote Indonesian
culture abroad.

Energetic, sometimes noisy, and always expressive, he bounds from one
appointment to another. Careful to stay within the bounds of what President
Suharto describes as his nonaligned and nonconfrontational foreign policy, Mr.
Mochtar is always in touch with the Presidential Palace while abroad. He seems,
diplomats say, to have the Foreign Minister's job for as long as he wants it.

Mr. Mochtar's role as mediator between Hanoi and Washington is one he created
for himself while serving as a go-between in Hanoi for the non-Communist nations
of Southeast Asia in their efforts to end the Cambodian war. He says he
concluded that a ''new element'' had to be added to the stalemated efforts to
solve the problem, and that that element was more American contact with Vietnam,
whose troops are now occupying Cambodia.

Urging a Vietnamese Move

Mr. Mochtar, who is in Kuala Lumpur for a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of
the six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, followed by
consultations with Mr. Shultz, said in a recent interview in his Jakarta office
that he has been urging the Vietnamese to make some meaningful gesture to the
United States ''fairly quickly.''

Last week, Hanoi passed a message through Mr. Mochtar asking Washington to
consider high-level talks on resolving the issue of Americans still missing in
action in Vietnam, 12 years after the withdrawal of United States forces.

Foreign Minister Mochtar (his name is pronounced to rhyme with ''doctor'') says
he understands Americans - whom he calls ''a very fair people'' - and their
institutions. Beneath the understanding, he says, is a deep sense of gratitude
for personal help he got from the United States at the lowest point in his life.

''I will never forget those years,'' he said. ''I will never forget what you
Americans did for me.''

The time was 1964, when Mr. Mochtar, a graduate of the University of Indonesia
and the law school at Pajajaran University in Bandung, was summarily dismissed
from his post as head of the law faculty at Pajajaran by President Sukarno.

Mr. Mochtar, who had been lecturing to army officers on human rights and
humanitarian law, said it was his ''independence of mind'' that got him in
trouble.

''Indoctrination was the order of the day,'' he said of the last Sukarno years.
''I was dean of the law school, and I could not accept that. So I got on the
wrong side of the Government.''

Aid of Former Professor

Without a job and unsure of the Government's next move, Mr. Mochtar was helped
by Myres S. McDougal, a former professor of Mr. Mochtar's at Yale, where he had
studied in the mid-1950's.

''He was determined to come to Bandung and look me up, against the advice of the
American Embassy,'' Mr. Mochtar said. ''I was persona non grata, you see. I was
an outcast. In a hostile environment like that anything could happen.''

Professor McDougal helped Mr. Mochtar get a private foundation scholarship to
come to the United States. A year at Harvard Law School and another as a
research fellow at the University of Chicago followed.

Mr. Mochtar took his wife, Ida, and their young children - Emir, who is now a
lawyer; Armida, an economist, and Askari, who is now in high school - to the
United States. He recalls family conferences around American kitchen tables as
they anguished over what the future might bring.

''I know what it feels to be an exile,'' he said. By the time Mr. Mochtar
returned to Indonesia two years later, after the fall of President Sukarno, he
had acquired a background in economic and developmental law. He is a leading
expert on the law of the sea.

Offered reinstatement at Pajajaran University Law School, he agreed, but
insisted on the right to set up his own law firm at the same time. ''I had
learned my lesson about a government job,'' he said.

Mr. Mochtar said it is his concern for law and human rights for which he would
like to be known. He said that he was instrumental in smoothing the way for the
International Committee of the Red Cross to work in Indonesia after a rebellion
was put down in Sumatra, and that he was critical of reported armed forces
abuses later in East Timor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mochtar Kusumaatmadja

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Mancuso in 'Stingray,' Crime Drama on NBC

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


You can do a lot worse than ''Stingray.'' The NBC movie doesn't make an awful
lot of sense, but it does have style. It is a mystery, sort of, and sometimes it
looks like outtakes from ''Miami Vice,'' with leftovers from MTV. At the same
time, there's no gore and the mysterious hero is meant to be a sweet guy. The
movie - written by Stephen J. Cannell and directed by Richard Colla - will be
shown Sunday night at 9 on Channel 4.

The hero, Stingray, played by Nick Mancuso, is approached by the beautiful
deputy district attorney of Los Angeles (Robyn Douglass) because her boss, the
chief prosecutor, has been kidnapped and then operated on by a fiendish doctor
(Lee Richardson). The doctor did something to his cerebral cortex. The chief
prosecutor now watches television cartoons and seems to be giggling himself to
death.

The doctor, meanwhile, is associated with Mendosa (Gregory Sierra), who controls
''organized crime in Mexico, Brazil and parts of Peru.'' Now he wants to take
over Los Angeles. Other characters tumble in and out, although we're not always
sure what they're doing.

In fact, we're never sure about Stingray, either, which is meant to be part of
his charm. The beautiful deputy district attorney calls him ''arrogant,
conceited and high-handed'' when they meet, but that just means she's
interested.

And who can blame her for that? Stingray's car is registered to 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue. He likes little kids. He has a swell house on the beach.
Moreover, he is one of the new breed of television heroes. Like Magnum and the
guys on the A-Team, he put in time in Vietnam. Indeed, when the doctor tries to
monkey around with his cerebral cortex, he resists by remembering how the
Vietcong tried to do the same thing.

On the other hand, it's still possible that Stingray is a crook. Certainly he
doesn't much like authority or staying put. That's part of the new breed, too.
At the end, Stingray zooms away down the highway. The beautiful deputy district
attorney sits pensively on the beach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Grant at the Front

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 989 words


THE PAPERS OF ULYSSES S. GRANT.

Edited by John Y. Simon. Vol. 13: 599 pages. Volume 14: 548 pages. Southern
Illinois University Press. Each volume, $45. Reading, in the nuclear age, the
wartime dispatches of Lieut. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, the thought insinuates
itself that the battles fought on foot and on beasts only 120 years ago were
closer to those described in Caesar's ''Gallic Wars'' than to 20th-century
conflicts. It was the time of the horse, not the helicopter. What Caesar called
''impedimenta'' over 2,000 years ago - the supplies and transport for his
legions - call up the logistics of the American Civil War. In one dispatch
concerning Maj. Gen. Philip H. Sheridan, the Union's beau sabreur, General Grant
informs a corps commander: ''General Sheridan will remain for several days to
shoe up his animals and then join the armies here. If you deem a little infantry
necessary for the support of your cavalry you may send it.''

However, another statement - on black troops - does bear a direct relationship
to the American armed forces in modern wars. In General Grant's testimony before
the Joint Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War, while the war was
still in progress, he is asked why a black division was removed from a position
ahead of white divisions in the battle for Petersburg. General Grant sensitively
replies: ''If we put the colored troops in front - we had only that one division
- and it should prove a failure, it would then be said, and very properly, that
we were shoving those people ahead to get killed because we did not care
anything about them. But that could not be said if we put white troops in
front.''

During both world wars, the combat role of black soldiers was questioned at the
top. Blacks volunteered to risk their lives in the front lines, not just serve
in supporting positions. Later, in Korea and Vietnam, the integration of
fighting units finally proved that everyone's blood was the same color. In
several dispatches, General Grant praises the black men who wore Union blue. He
tells his division commanders to enlist runaway and freed slaves. He orders that
white soldiers be court-martialed if they abuse black soldiers. He makes sure
that black soldiers are paid on time for their service.

One of the unpublished letters -among a number of discoveries in the latest
volumes of Grant's papers - is addressed to his wife in the last dark winter of
the war. ''I know how much there is dependent on me and will prove myself equal
to the task,'' he writes. ''I believe determination can do a great deal to
sustain one and I have that quality certainly to its fullest extent.'' In all
the letters to Julia Dent Grant, he signs off, ''Love and kisses for you and the
children. Good night. Ulys.''

In the most famous known letter in these papers - answering President Lincoln's
request to have his 22-year-old son, Robert, join General Grant's ''military
family'' so that he can see ''something of the war before it ends'' - Grant
graciously replies, ''I will be most happy to have him'' with the rank of
captain, and he adds, ''please excuse my writing on a half sheet. I had no
resource but to take the blank half of your letter.''

Most of the handwritten letters (with terrible spelling) are impressive because
of their forthright language and military wisdom. Even informed Civil War
readers will discover that he was more than a battering-ram. Grant emerged as a
great commander, able to balance three separate Union armies from the
Mississippi to the Atlantic.

Like Gen. George C. Marshall, the Army Chief of Staff during World War II, Grant
seemed to know the abilities and flaws of every officer almost down to the
regimental level. He knew which were attacking generals and which were preparing
generals. He dismissed or pushed aside those who were too political or too
unwilling to take the offensive. Although he had a deserved reputation as
tenacious in the field, it may come as a surprise to read that he ordered some
of his generals not to engage the enemy if too many Union soldiers might be
sacrificed. This goes against the conventional view that has come down in Civil
War annals that Grant was totally ruthless.

The mutual respect between the Commander in Chief in the White House and the
Lieutenant General he designated comes through again and again. Grant believed
in civilian rule; at the same time he and the President were frank in their
dealings. They were on the same wavelength about the constitutional reasons
behind the Union. Lincoln deferred to Grant on military strategy; Grant to
Lincoln on a multitude of other issues that crossed his writing desk, including
foreign affairs and the extent of Abolition sentiment.

Next to those written to his wife, the warmest letters are addressed to Maj.
Gen. William T. Sherman, the conquerer of the South on the march to the sea.
Grant worried about Sherman's well-being, saying he did not want a stray ball to
strike down his boldest general, trusting him when he disappeared behind enemy
lines for weeks at a time, complimenting him for his guerrilla tactics.

These two volumes, under the immaculate editorship of John Y. Simon, with David
L. Wilson as associate editor, appear this month on the centenary of Grant's
death. They fill out the details of his own memoirs with many nuggets and
nuances, covering the last six months of the Civil War. Still to come in future
volumes from Southern Illinois University Press are Reconstruction, the two
terms in the White House and his final days.

General Grant is popularly viewed as one of the best generals and worst
Presidents in American history. Will the documentary evidence in future Grant
papers help to explain why and possibly result in a more favorable appraisal of
his Presidency? Or will the eagerly anticipated documentary evidence prove that
leadership in war is not the ideal preparation for a President in a democracy?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ulysses S. Grant

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS SAID TO RETURN 'BOAT PEOPLE' TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, July 12


Thirty-seven Vietnamese, believed to be ''boat people'' fleeing their homeland,
have been returned to Vietnam by a Soviet freighter that plucked them from the
South China Sea, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said today.

Officials of the United Nations commission said it was the first time to their
knowledge that Vietnamese refugees had been returned home in all the years since
the end of the Vietnam War 10 years ago began a mass exodus from the Southeast
Asian nation.

More than 555,000 Vietnamese have fled since the fall of Saigon, many of them in
rickety, often unseaworthy craft or private boats. Thousands have died in the
South China Sea of starvation, dehydration, accidents and pirate attacks.

A commission spokesman, Leon Davico, said a Western embassy, which had
apparently been in touch with the Russians, had told the Geneva-based refugee
agency about the return, carried out by the Soviet freighter Poisk, which picked
the refugees up near the Philippines around June 17.

Russians Asked for Guidance

Mr. Davico said the United Nations commission originally received word of the
pickup from the Manila office of the Soviet shipping agency, which got in touch
with commission officials in the Philippines at the time and requested guidance
on what to do with the Vietnamese.

Although the circumstances of the sea pickup and the exact status of the 37
Vietnamese is not known, Mr. Davico said there was only a ''1 percent chance''
that they were fishermen and not refugees.

Western diplomatic sources in Geneva said it was difficult to tell if the
Russians on the freighter had returned the Vietnamese to Vietnam because they
had no instructions on what to do with them, or because the Soviet Union wanted
to avoid any possible political friction with its ally, Vietnam.

Mr. Davico said that the commission had asked that the Vietnamese be taken off
the boat in Manila and that two countries, which he refused to name, had offered
to accept the refugees.

''But since then, we had no news until yesterday, when the Western embassy
contacted us,'' he said.

Mr. Davico said it was not clear what fate awaited the Vietnamese, although he
said as a policy Vietnam is believed to wash its hands of the boat people once
they have decided to leave.

Refugees Not Readmitted

''As a rule,'' he said, ''the Vietnamese Government has informed us that it does
not wish at present to accept any former boat people who left the country,
because of all kinds of problems, including economic difficulties. But they do
examine returnees case by case.''

The commission has been in touch with the Russians through its United
Nations-attached mission here and plans to get in touch with Vietnam for more
information on the fate of the 37 people and possibly their emigration, he said.

So far this year, some 13,000 people have reportedly left Vietnam without the
Government's permission. At the same time, about 2,600 people each month leave
Vietnam under the ''orderly departure program'' of the United Nations High
Commission for Refugees and the Vietnamese Government. Departures under that
program began to surpass those of the boat people last year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JAPAN ASSURES U.S. ON TRADE MATTERS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 969 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, July 12


Japan told the United States today that by the end of the month the Government
would have a plan of action to deal with trade problems between the two
countries, a senior State Department official said.

The outline of the plan was presented to Secretary of State George P. Shultz
today by Japan's Foreign Minister, Shintaro Abe, at a private meeting. Both men
were in Kuala Lumpur for three days of annual consultations with Southeast Asian
and Pacific leaders. Mr. Shultz left tonight for Australia. The Secretary of
State met today with the Foreign Ministers of the six members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei
and the Philippines - and with a delegation from New Zealand. Mr. Shultz also
took part in wider talks, involving Australia and Canada, on trade and security
issues in the Pacific.

Proposal for Talks Supported

Mr. Shultz gave his support to an association proposal to convene talks on
Cambodia among, on the one hand, the Vietnamese and the Vietnam-backed
Government headed by Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh, and, on the other hand, the
opposition coalition fighting to oust Hanoi's troops from Cambodia. But Vietnam
appears to have ruled out any talks based on the regional group's formula.

In the hour-and-a-half private meeting between Mr. Abe and Mr. Shultz, the
Administration official said, the Japanese Foreign Minister outlined six areas
in which Japan would propose ideas for joint action.

These would cover tariff issues left unresolved by the June 25 Japanese
statement on changes in trade policy, certification procedures, import
restrictions and impediments, procurement policies, access for service
industries and capital market measures.

The American official who briefed reporters said the Japanese Foreign Minister
had provided the most detail in his outline of possible changes in certification
procedures. He said the Japanese appeared to be prepared to curtail bureaucracy
and allow more self-certification by importers.

Mr. Abe was also reported to have said that Tokyo was considering ways to open
the regulatory process, giving affected parties the right to comment on rules
and decisions.

Fears About Soviet Power

In their discussions with Mr. Shultz this week, several regional nations
expressed fears about what they regard as Soviet penetration into the Pacific,
American officials said. The Soviet Union, which has naval facilities in Vietnam
and Cambodia, has also been seeking closer ties with small island nations. The
official said Indonesia and New Zealand pointed in particular to a fishing
agreement negotiated recently between Moscow and Kiribati, which lies about
2,200 miles northeast of Australia.

Mr. Shultz told Asian leaders that he was in favor of holding discussions with
Moscow on regional problems, a course endorsed by President Reagan last fall.
The American official said that it was possible that Asian topics would be
raised when the Secretary of State meets the new Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard
A. Shevardnadze, in two weeks, but that no specific plans had been made for such
talks.

Plan for 'Proximity Talks'

Mr. Shultz's statement of support for the Asean ministers' call for talks on
Cambodia was inserted this morning into a prepared speech that Mr. Shultz
decided at the last minute not to deliver, so that more time could be spent on
discussions.

The plan is for discussions that have become known here as ''proximity talks''
because representatives of warring sides would communicate through an
intermediary and would not meet face to face.

Before it was formally announced here Tuesday, the plan was rejected by Vietnam
on the ground that the Southeast Asian group, under pressure from Thailand, had
proposed that Vietnam take part as the de facto power in Cambodia. Hanoi holds
that only the Heng Samrin Government should make decisions on Cambodia's future.

Today, the Vietnamese Embassy in Kuala Lumpur expressed its ''surprise'' that
Asean should still be pursuing the proposal. One minister from the association
remarked that by his count this was the association's 13th proposal on talks,
all of which had been rejected by the Vietnamese.

Interest in a 'Safety Zone'

Mr. Shultz was reported to have expressed interest today in a proposal made to
him by Singapore that an internationally supervised ''safety zone'' be created
inside Cambodia that would allow the more than 230,000 Cambodians displaced by a
Vietnamese offensive to return to the country from their refuges in Thailand.

The Secretary of State, who has referred several times this week to the deep
impression made on him by the plight of the Cambodians in camps along the
Thai-Cambodian border, which he visited Tuesday, told the Southeast Asian
leaders that the United States would turn its attention toward ways of providing
them more assistance, the American official said.

Mr. Shultz appears to prefer to limit the aid to humanitarian programs,
technical training and education, according to the official. A team from the
United States Agency for International Development has just completed a study of
border needs, the official said.

The House and the Senate have approved legislation that would give the
Administration the option of granting military assistance.

In the past, Vietnam has not opposed the creation of a security zone in the
border area, but it has said such a zone should straddle the frontier. Southeast
Asian leaders say Thailand would never accept a loss of complete control over
its own territory.

Regional officials also question whether Hanoi, having driven the Cambodian
guerrillas into Thailand in a large offensive last winter, would be prepared to
see them return under any circumstances short of complete disarmament and
surrender.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Secretary of State Shultz and Philippines Foreign Minister
Pacifico Castro before start of ASEAN meeting (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 13, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATIONAL GUARD AND COOLER WEATHER AID IN FIGHTING FIRES

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


Cooler weather and National Guard troops aided firefighters battling wildfires
across the West yesterday as napalm dropped on a persistent northern California
blaze eased a threat to key mountaintop communication towers.

Firefighters in helicopters dropped flaming blobs of napalm, left over from the
Vietnam War, on the fire near Los Gatos in a gamble that had paid off Thursday
night.

The napalm started a controlled burning to head off the main blaze and stopped
flames from reaching the towers atop Mount Loma Prieta, said Ken Gilbert, the
fire captain. The communication towers are vital to the coordination of
firefighting efforts.

Blazes Reported in 8 States

Fires that have scorched more than 1.1 million acres across more than a dozen
Western states were still burning yesterday in at least eight states, but cooler
temperatures and moist air brought some relief. Firefighters were also working
on blazes in Arizona, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Wyoming, Nebraska and in
several Canadian provinces.

Arnold Hartigan, of the Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, said 268 fires
had burned 7,812 acres, nationwide in the 24 hours ended yesterday afternoon. In
the previous 24 hours, 392 fires burned 43,000 acres, he said.

New fires included a small blaze that suddenly flared to 1,000 acres in Wyoming,
just west of South Dakota's Black Hills National Forest, and a 600-acre fire in
the McKelvey Forest in Nebraska. In British Columbia, about 20,000 people in
mountain valleys still faced possible evacuation as fires raged on in the
southeastern part of the province.

The fire in Los Gatos, south of San Francisco, was 60 percent contained,
officials said. The blaze, believed to have been set, had consumed 13,800 acres
of the Santa Cruz Mountains and at least 20 homes and cabins since it began
Sunday. Most of the 4,500 evacuees have been permitted to return.

National Guard Joins Efforts

In Washington, the Pentagon announced that more than 650 Army and Air National
Guard members had joined the firefighting effort. And the Federal Emergency
Management Agency pledged to make money available to help California pay for
fighting fires near populated areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A YANKEE REVOLUTION IN ENGLAND

BYLINE: By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2365 words

DATELINE: LONDON


They say that wars consist of long stretches of boredom interspersed with sudden
flurries of terrifying violence. For the English extras slouched in their
18th-century American uniforms behind period ramparts, vast wicker baskets
filled with earth, that was clearly true of making movies about wars, too. They
put on dark glasses, they chatted, they smoked. One studied the Devonshire
bird-life through binoculars, while others desultorily amused themselves in less
constructive ways.

''Play fair, you gentlemen in the firing line,'' came the assistant director's
voice over the amplifier. ''Don't keep throwing at the black-smoke man, he's
just doing his job.''

Two, three, four rehearsals, and then it was time to shoot the scene. ''Start
psyching yourselves up,'' blared the amplifier. ''Remember where you are, you're
in Yorktown, about the only time the Americans managed to beat the Brits.''
Suddenly,the dark glasses and the binoculars were back in the ammunition cases,
smoke began to rise from the redoubts on the hill opposite, and all was
well-orchestrated hurlyburly. Some raced about with muskets, others urged on
horses with cannons dragging behind them, another lurched along with a dying
comrade on his shoulders; and there, scuttling through the explosions and the
murk, was Al Pacino in a frontiersman's shirt and homespun leggings. Ten,
fifteen, twenty seconds, and the scene was in the can.

Even in these days of international movie-making there seemed something
incongruous about it all: the War of Independence shot on British soil, the
decisive battle of Yorktown waged a few miles from the great naval city of
Plymouth, Washington's army peopled almost entirely by the subjects of George
III's great-great-great-great-granddaughter, and the whole enterprise financed
in London and directed by Hugh Hudson, himself a scion of the English landed
gentry.

And yet ''Revolution,'' as the film is provisionally called, beats with an
American heart and derives from an American imagination. Mr. Pacino plays the
leading role, a New York boatman reluctantly drawn into the fray after his
teen-age son enlists in the American army; Irwin Winkler, whose credits include
''The Right Stuff,'' ''They Shoot Horses, Don't They?'' and the three-part
''Rocky'' saga, was the moving force behind the project and is its producer.

The idea for a movie about the War of Independence first hit Mr. Winkler in an
improbable place: the bedroom of the man who had just finished directing
''Raging Bull'' for him. That's where Martin Scorsese likes to do some of his
editing, and that's where he keeps the fruits of his hobby, which is painting
toy soldiers. In between snatches of ''Raging Bull,'' Mr. Winkler's eye caught a
tiny redcoat and his mind began to wander. Why had the historic enemy been seen
so seldom on the screen? About the same time, his 17-year-old son started asking
him questions about the American Revolution; Mr. Winkler realized how little he
knew about it, and the question in his mind became more specific and personal.
Why didn't he make a movie about the subject?

He took armfuls of relevant books out of the Beverly Hills public library; the
more he read, the better the idea seemed. There was an abundance of lively
events. There were, he thought, interesting parallels with the guerrilla war in
Vietnam. And as far as he could discover, the only movie to have dealt with the
subject, apart from the musical ''1776'' and a screen adaptation of Shaw's
''Devil's Disciple,'' was one traditionally considered a spectacular failure: D.
W. Griffith's ''America,'' way back in 1924. ''Maybe people thought there was no
market, or maybe they were afraid it was too expensive,'' mused Mr. Winkler,
''Or nobody thought of it maybe.''

He quickly decided, though, that he didn't want to make a grand historical
documentary, peopled with the likes of Thomas Jefferson and Benedict Arnold. The
Revolution must be the background of a more personal story.

''A lot of the films I've made have been about what happens to people under
pressure, and I wanted that to be the case here, too,'' he said. ''I decided on
an adventure story, but a different sort of adventure, not a romance or a film
about buddies, about Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid going to war. I thought,
why not a film about a father and a son? I hadn't really treated that
relationship before, and the Revolution seemed a natural setting for it. Also,
I'm very close to my own children, which may be an inadvertent reason.''

By now it was 1983. Mr. Winkler enlisted the help of Robert Dillon, whose script
for ''The River'' he had admired, and after months of joint research, they were
able to send a screenplay to the studios, only to see it rejected one by one.

''I suppose because it was different, it wasn't 'Police Academy' or 'Bachelor
Party,' '' Mr. Winkler said. But eventually, it found its way to Hugh Hudson,
who was looking for a writer for quite another project, and he was sufficiently
impressed to make a few inquiries through his agent. Had Mr. Winkler a director
for ''Revolution''? No? Then would he be interested in a meeting with the man
who had made such a success of his first two feature films, ''Chariots of Fire''
and the Tarzan epic, ''Greystoke''?

''Obviously, I liked Hugh's work,'' recalled Mr. Winkler, ''and when we met over
dinner, he said several things that got to me. He said he didn't see it as a big
costume drama but as a street film, and he wanted Al Pacino, who was very much a
man of the people, a man of the street. I felt he was a guy I could trust, and
he seemed to like me and I'm an enormous sucker for people who like me.''

Mr. Hudson suggested that Mr. Winkler should approach Goldcrest Films, which had
raised the money for ''Chariots.'' He also suggested there should be more
conflict between the film's fictional father and son, and Mr. Pacino, who had at
first found the story a bit flat, agreed to take the main part. Mr. Winkler had
his financing, his star, his director.

Mr. Hudson himself was attracted by a script he found at once realistic, poetic
and resonant, a tale of fathers and sons on the grand, geopolitical level as
well as the personal one.

''Every man and woman has a revolution when they reach a certain age against the
authority figures in their lives,'' he explained, ''and I see England as being
just such a parent figure, with Lord North and Farmer George wielding the big
sticks, saying tax 'em, almost like the father telling the young teen-age son or
daughter they can't go out in the evening. It's everyone's struggle, everyone's
problem, to break away. And a revolutionary war is exactly that, an Oedipal
situation on a collective scale.''

They didn't decide to shoot the film in England only because the $18 million
bill was roughly half what it would have been in the United States. Valley Forge
turned out to be off-limits to big, messy movies. Williamsburg was too well
preserved to be credible as a setting. New York 1985 was, well, rather different
from New York 1776. But in England there were 18th-century streets, thatched
cottages, and an endless supply of extras from the same stock as the earlier
American settlers.

''I thought I'd get the right faces and the right architecture,'' said Mr.
Hudson. ''There are places here more American than America.''

The quays of King's Lynn in Norfolk became the docks of New York City.
Philadelphia was the cathedral city of Ely. And bits of Yorktown were recreated
above a remote and secluded valley that Mr. Hudson happened to see in the
distance when he was looking for locations a little further down the Devon
coast.

Pedants may complain that the original valley was less sheer and spectacular
than this, but they're unlikely to find fault with the solid-looking cut-outs of
houses perched on the top of the hill or the three-dimensional redoubts on its
slopes. Asheton Gorton, the production designer, set himself the task of looking
at every known picture of Yorktown; he went through scores of others, from
romanticized paintings of the Revolution to smudgy photos of the British in the
Crimea, illustrating the techniques of war that prevailed from the 18th century
into the 19th; and he had alongside him John Mollo, an internationally
recognized expert on military history and military uniforms. Hence, the
bewilderingly but authentically diverse look of those extras on that Devon
location: the blue-and-buff of New York, the red-and-blue of Pennsylvania, the
green-and-white of the Marines, and the brown-and-red worn by many Revolutionary
soldiers because those were the colors of the material commandeered in bulk by
the Americans at the beginning of the war.

Changes that occurred as the war progressed - the white cockades the Americans
inserted into their hats after Valley Forge as a mark of friendship with the
French - were scrupulously incorporated into the movie. So were even smaller and
more obscure historical details. Among the row of American officers watching the
smoke rise over Yorktown was the extra playing the German mercenary Baron von
Steuben, wearing not only the white plume that indicated he had the rank of
brigadier general, but the Order of Fidelity of Baden-Baden on his chest. That
appears in portraits, but is unlikely to be seen at all in the movie.

''You've got to be absolutely truthful, or the film reeks of your failure to be
so,'' explained Mr. Winkler. ''If you cut corners, somehow the audience knows.''

Part of Mr. Hudson's own hope is not merely to make the movie historically
accurate but to give it the immediacy of a newsreel.

''I feel I'm in Northern Ireland or Lebanon or Nicaragua,'' he said. ''I'm
trying to feel I'm a soldier under fire, or a war correspondent in a conflict of
200 years ago. You get that in modern war films, of course, but I'm trying to do
it in a period film, which tends to be more spectacular, more a matter of
closed-off tableaux.'' That's one reason why his director of photography is the
Frenchman Bernard Lutic, known for the gritty realism of his work and an expert
with the hand-held camera.

''I believe, I'm not making movies, I'm making reality,'' went on Mr. Hudson,
acknowledging in passing his debt to two great documentary film makers, John
Grierson and Robert Flaherty. ''The Grierson school worked out their intentions,
decided what they wanted and went out and found it. I'm influenced by that, but
much more by the other way, which is to go out with a vague idea of what you
want and adapt to what happens. The Flaherty school embraces unexpected light or
terrain or faces. We've 500 extras in this film, and among them there happen to
be some absolute gems. You grab them and put them on the screen. You embrace
accident and even mistakes and errors and try to make magic moments of them.''

Not that the movie hasn't still a firm, fixed story. On the contrary, it follows
the fortunes of the boatman played by Mr. Pacino from 1776 through Valley Forge
and Yorktown to the end of the war in 1783.

''It's a sort of 'Pilgrim's Progress,' '' explained Mr. Hudson. ''It's about a
working man who gets unwillingly involved in all the trials and tribulations of
the war and finds a reason for the Revolution and an ideal for himself. It's
about someone who at first remains silent, which virtually brings about the
death of his only son, and realizes he's got to speak up, he's got to take
risks, he's got to stand up and be counted. In the end, it's about passion, the
passion of belief.''

It was because he seemed so completely to combine street smartness with that
capacity for passion that Mr. Hudson was anxious from the first to cast Mr.
Pacino in the role. ''It was a period role, a sort he'd never played before, and
some people said to me, 'You're mad, his background is Italian.' But he's from
the South Bronx, and I wanted someone from the back streets of Glasgow, and it
fitted. He's from a deprived background, 10 years ago he hadn't two pennies to
rub together, and that quality comes off him still. You know he's really been
through it. Also, he's a wonderfully comic actor, and there's quite a lot of
humor in the film.''

There are two other starring parts. Donald Sutherland - ''a powerful,
commanding, dangerous actor,'' according to Mr. Hudson, ''with a deep humanity
in his eyes'' - plays the British sergeant with whom the boatman and his son
have more than one alarming confrontation. Nastassja Kinski - ''I wanted her
because there's a vulnerability about her, but also a certain madness, a
wildness,'' says the director - is the rebellious daughter of a Loyalist
politician and the principal woman in Mr. Pacino's life.

Did Mr. Hudson, the blue-blooded Englishman, feel uncomfortable directing a
movie about the transformation of the American colonies into the egalitarian
United States? Quite the opposite. He pointed across the valley to the Union
Jacks provocatively waving over the Yorktown redoubts.

''It's my story, too. I'm over there,'' he said. ''I had a military upbringing,
I was expected to continue the old order. And if you think about it, this was
the first big dent in that hierarchy, the first serious blow to the divine right
of kings and courtiers, the nail in the coffin of the upper classes, because it
was the first major defeat in war Britain had experienced since 1066 and the
beginning of the end of empire.''

But this movie, even more than his first two, is likely to show that Mr.
Hudson's feelings about the English establishment range from the ambivalent to
the mistrustful to the downright hostile. His heart is with those who rebel
against what's stifling and oppressive about it, as he himself did by rejecting
the life of a country gentleman for a career in the movies. It was with Tarzan
in ''Greystoke,'' who made a similar renunciation in favor of a rather more
literal jungle, and it is clearly with the infant American in ''Revolution.''

''You have to identify with the Americans when you consider that they came in
their thousands from persecution and poverty, only to find the profits taxed
from them to pay for an occupying militia,'' he said. ''I think the Revolution
was terrific.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Al Pacino and Nastassja Kinski

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT VACATIONING EXECUTIVES ARE READING

BYLINE: By Beth Sherman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


It's summer - time for most people to settle back in a favorite easy chair or
hammock with a good book. For those who head huge companies, the usual fare of
reports, newspapers and trade journals must be read. But sandwiched between this
required reading is some lighter fare: spy stories, autobiographies and a
melange of fictional passions and intrigues.

A number of executives agreed to share their summer reading plans with The
Times. (And nearly double that number declined, saying they did not have time to
read).

At the Chrysler Corporation, a spokesman said that the books its chairman, Lee
A. Iacocca, will be reading are classified as ''private information.'' But many
of his peers in the business world were not so reticent and quite a few, in
fact, have put ''Iacocca'' at the top of their reading lists. Donald Frey,
chairman of Bell & Howell, said he is especially interested in the book because
he worked under Mr. Iacocca in the 1950's and 1960's. ''I'm mentioned three
times,'' notes Mr. Frey, ''if you want to use a body count.''

Mr. Frey, like several others, plans to re-read a classic or two. On a recent
trip to Yorkshire, England, he picked up a copy of ''Jane Eyre'' and ''Wuthering
Heights.''

''Having seen the moors, you understand the books,'' Mr. Frey said. ''But in
high school I thought they were dull.''

On the management front, the two hottest summer reads seem to be ''Innovation
and Entrepreneurship,'' by Peter F. Drucker, and ''A Passion for Excellence,''
by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. George Ball, president of Prudential-Bache, is
reading the Peters book, a sequel to the best seller, ''A Search for
Excellence,'' because ''everyone else is going to read it and I should be able
to talk about it too.''

Another popular page-turner is Tom Clancy's ''The Hunt for Red October,'' the
tale of a Lithuanian submarine driver who defects to the United States with
nuclear secrets from the Soviet Union. John C. Bierworth, chairman of the
Grumman Corporation, said he is reading the book ''just for the fun of it.''
Donald H. Trautlein, chairman of Bethlehem Steel, said he ''likes a good yarn.''

On the whole, most corporate executives say their reading tends to be lighter
and breezier during the summer. Mitchell D. Kapor, chairman of the Lotus
Development Corporation, is heading for Martha's Vineyard and taking along
Elmore Leonard's crime novel, ''Glitz.'' But he's also packing ''Your Baby and
Child,'' by Penelope Leach, to help prepare for the arrival of a newborn in the
fall. HOLD IN TECH BIN FOR GUTIS rrxh GEORGE L. BALL, president and chief
executive, Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. rrxhA Passion for Excellence by Tom
Peters and Nancy Austin A Catskill Eagle by Robert B. Parker Confessions of an
Advertising Man by David Ogilvy Hard Money by Michael Thomas rrxhJOHN C.
BIERWIRTH, chairman, Grumman Corp. rrxhThe Hunt for Red October by Tom Clancy
The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco The Seven Pillars of Wisdom by T.E. Lawrence
rrxhJOHN F. BOOKOUT, president, Shell Oil Co. xhrrInnovation and
Entrepreneurship by Peter F. Drucker rrxhFRANK BORMAN, chairman, president and
chief executive, Eastern Airlines xhrrInside, Outside by Herman Wouk rrxhWILLARD
C. BUTCHER chairman and chief executive, The Chase Manhattan Corp. xhrrNo More
Vietnams by Richard M. Nixon rrxhFRANK CONSIDINE, chairman, president and chief
executive, American Can Co. rrxhIacocca: An Autobiography by Lee Iacocca with
William Novak rrxhNELSON DOUBLEDAY, president, Doubleday & Co. xhrrGood Enough
to Dream by Roger Kahn The Book of Phoebe by Mary-Ann Tirone Smith rrxhDONALD N.
FREY, chairman and chief executive, Bell & Howell Co. xhrrInnovation and
Entrepreneurship by Peter F. Drucker Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte Wuthering
Heights by Emily Bronte The Americans by Daniel Boorstin Iacocca: An
Autobiography by Lee Iacocca with William Novak rrxhDIANE VON FURSTENBURG,
chairman, Diane Von Furstenburg Inc. rrxhMountbatten by Philip Ziegler The Idiot
by Fyodor Dostoyevsky Carignani Square by Alain Elkann rrxhLEONARD GOLDENSOHN,
chairman and chief executive, American Broadcasting Companies rrxhModern Times
by Paul Johnson Weapons and Hope by Freeman Dyson Inside, Outside by Herman Wouk
Hard Money by Michael Thomas Geneen by Robert J. Schoenberg Real Peace by
Richard M. Nixon Double Vision by Ze'ev Chafets Iacocca: An Autobiography by Lee
Iacocca with William Novak If Tomorrow Comes by Sidney Sheldon rrxhT. MARSHALL
HAHN JR., chairman and chief executive, Georgia-Pacific Corp. xhrrAmerican
Hostages in Iran: The Conduct of a Crisis by Warren Christopher Merger Mania by
Ivan F. Boesky The Lonely Silver Rain by John D. McDonald rrxhJEREMIAH KAPLAN,
chairman, Macmillan Publishing Co. rrxhMountbatten by Philip Ziegler
Balanchine's Tchaikovsky by Solomon Volkov The Essays, Articles and Reviews of
Evelyn Waugh edited by Donat Gallagher rrxhMITCHELL D. KAPOR, chairman, Lotus
Development Corporation xhrrA Passion for Excellence by Tom Peters and Nancy
Austin Metamagical Themas by Douglas R. Hofstadter Your Baby and Child by
Penelope Leach On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen by
Harold McGee God and the New Physics by Paul Davies Glitz by Elmore Leonard
Footfall by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle rrxhMARY WELLS LAWRENCE, chairman,
Wells, Rich, Greene Inc. rrxhThe Cider House Rules by John Irving A History of
Architecture by Spiro Kostof Love Medicine by Louise Erdrich rrxhLEWIS W. LEHR,
chairman and chief executive 3M xhrrLincoln by Gore Vidal xhrrARTHUR LEVITT,
chairman, American Stock Exchange rrxhThe Hunt for Red October by Tom Clancy
Fall from Grace by Larry Collins The Cider House Rules by John Irving The
Discoverers by Daniel Boorstin rrxhWILLIAM C. McGOWAN, chairman and chief
executive, MCI Communications Corp. rrxhThe World After Oil: The Shifting Axis
of Power and Wealth by Bruce Nussbaum Modern Times: The World from the Twenties
to the Eighties by Paul Johnson rrxhEDWARD NEY, chairman, Young & Rubicam Inc.
rrxhThe Kennedys: An American Dream by Peter Collier and David Horowitz 20th
Century Journey: A Memoir of a Life and the Times. Volume Two: The Nightmare
Years. 1930-1940 by William L. Shirer Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark
Twain rrxhNELLE NUGENT, partner in McCann & Nugent Productions Inc.
xhrrFortune's Daughter by Alice Hoffman Love Always by Anne Beatty Light in
August by William Faulkner The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner The Name
of the Rose by Umberto Eco rrxhDONALD E. PETERSEN, chairman and chief executive,
Ford Motor Co. xhrrThe Good War by Studs Terkel Inside, Outside by Herman Wouk
Stick by Elmore Leonard Glitz by Elmore Leonard Innovation and Entrepreneurship
by Peter F. Drucker rrxhFELIX ROHATYN, partner in Lazard Freres & Co. xhrrProof
by Dick Francis The Soong Dynasty by Sterling Seagrave American Caesar by
William Manchester Thomas More by Richard Marius Fall from Grace by Larry
Collins rrxhDONALD RUMSFELD, president and chief executive, G.D. Searle & Co.
rrxhHow Democracies Perish by Jean-Francois Revel Modern Times by Paul Johnson
Lake Wobegon Days by Garrison Keillor The Haj by Leon Uris Reflections of a
Neo-Conservative by Irving Kristol Staying on Top by Kevin Phillips
rrxhFREDERICK W. SMITH, chairman, president and chief executive, Federal Express
Corp. rrxhThree Degrees Above Zero: Bell Labs in the Information Age by Jeremy
Bernstein The Pentagon and the Art of War: The Question of Military Reform by
Edward N. Luttwak From Alexander to Cleopatra by Michael Grant Comeback by Ezra
Vogel rrxhROGER STRAUS JR., president, Farrar Straus & Giroux rrxhDiane Arbus by
Patricia Bosworth Collected Letters 1911-1925 by Bernard Shaw rrxhDONALD H.
TRAUTLEIN, chairman and chief executive, Bethlehem Steel Corp. xhrrThe Hunt for
Red October by Tom Clancy The Reagan Phenomenon by Jeanne Kirkpatrick rrxhAN
WANG, chairman, Wang Laboratories Inc. rrxhMountbatten Philip Ziegler
Chinabound: A Fifty-Year Memoir by John King Fairbank A Catskill Eagle by Robert
B. Parker Iacocca: An Autobiography by Lee Iacocca with William Novak
rrxhSTEPHEN A. WYNN, chairman and president, Golden Nugget Inc. xhrrComeback by
Ezra Vogel A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Following hard on the heels of ''In Search of Excellence,'' Tom
Peters's best seller, which sold over one million copies, ''A Passion for
Excellence'' is a sort of ''Management: Part II.'' In ''Passion,'' Mr. Peters
once again turns the spotlight on corporate America, examining the innovative
and not-so-innovative policies of Fortune 500 companies such as I.B.M., Ford and
Procter & Gamble. The book offers tips on cost cutting and customer relations
and supports top-drawer tenets of managerial savvy with anecdotes. HARD MONEY by
Michael M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) In his account of a fictional takeover in
the broadcasting industry, Michael Thomas chronicles the wheelings and dealings
of a father and son who own America's fourth-largest television network. Along
the way, the takeovers and countertakeovers come to involve the President of the
United States, otherwise known as ''the Great Smoothie,'' and a host of bankers,
politicians and corporate bigwigs. The action is never far removed from the
glittering world of New York society. THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBERby Tom Clancy.
(Naval Institute Press, $14.95.) This book has attracted the sort of attention
that eludes most first-time novelists. Since its publication earlier this year,
the thriller has been passed around the White House and read by President and
Mrs. Reagan and national security adviser Robert C. McFarlane, among others. The
spy story revolves around the defection of a Soviet submarine captain who
intends to sail his submarine to Norfolk, Va., with both superpowers in hot
pursuit. Mr. Clancy, a Maryland insurance agent, loaded the book with authentic
technical information, obtained largely from unclassified naval manuals and
through interviews with former submarine officials. IACOCCA: AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY by
Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam Books, $17.95) Lee Iacocca traces his
meteoric climb up the corporate ladder. Beginning with his upbringing by Italian
immigrant parents in Allentown, Pa., the book follows his rise from an
engineering trainee to the presidency of Ford and then through his turnaround at
Chrysler. He also holds forth on management, unions, auto safety and meeting the
competition from Japan and South Korea. MODERN TIMES: THE WORLD FROM THE
TWENTIES TO THE EIGHTIES by Paul Johnson. (Harper & Row, $9.95.) This chronicle
of the history of the world during the last 60 years encompasses all major
countries, focusing on the events, people and historical changes that shaped the
modern age. Mr. Johnson, a former editor of The New Statesman, a conservative
British magazine, filters his world view through what Nietzsche called the
''will to power.'' The cast of characters includes Lenin, Mussolini, Hitler,
Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover. Among the 20 chapters in the book are
sections devoted to the Holocaust, Africa's liberation from Europe and the
impact of the Vietnam War on America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'MACHISMO' ON CAPITOL HILL

BYLINE: By Steven V. Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 430 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Members of Congress have been feeling the same frustration as many other
Americans over the country's apparent inability to combat international
terrorists and Communist expansionism. Last week the image of Rambo, the movie
hero who overcomes great odds to rescue American prisoners in Vietnam, was
invoked a dozen times on the House floor as the lawmakers adopted a $12.6
billion foreign aid bill. Included in the legislation was aid to insurgents in
Afghanistan and Cambodia and the resumption, after a nine-year ban, of American
help to guerrilla forces fighting the Cuban-backed Government in Angola.

Before the July 4th recess, the House voted to enact the death penalty for
peacetime espionage, and on Thursday the lawmakers overwhelmingly reaffirmed
that position. In the last month, the House has also reversed longstanding
opposition to aid for the rebel forces in Nicaragua, although it restricted it
to nonmilitary supplies.

All these events signaled a new tough-minded attitude on Capitol Hill toward
foreign problems. Conservatives declared it the advent of a ''Reagan doctrine.''
As Representative Vin Weber, a Minnesota Republican, defined it, the doctrine
primarily involves a willingness to ''support resistance movements around the
world.'' Reagan doctrine or not, the White House was talking of a veto because
of the interference it saw with executive power over foreign policy.

''The House is attempting to assert its machismo through the foreign aid bill,''
Thomas J. Downey, a Long Island Democrat, said. ''It's bizarre.''

This mood started gathering strength in the spring, when many lawmakers felt
betrayed and embarrassed by the highly visible visit to Moscow by President
Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua. Then came the murder of four American
servicemen in El Salvador, the spy charges against the Walker family and most of
all, the agony of the T.W.A. hostages in Beirut.

Mr. Weber said that ''psychologically, there was an important connection''
between the T.W.A. hijacking and the final shape of the foreign aid legislation.
Bill Alexander, an Arkansas Democrat, added: ''There is an emotional need in
America that has not been satisfied - to strike back, to revenge the hostages.''

One exception to the conservative swing came on the subject of South Africa.
Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican, staged a brief filibuster
against a bill imposing economic sanctions on South Africa to protest its policy
of racial separation. But he was brushed aside by an overwhelming majority that
passed the legislation, 80 to 12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME ACTION AT LAST ON THE MISSING IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Bill Keller

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THERE was optimism last week among many Government officials - and among
surviving family members - that the mystery of 2,464 Americans still unaccounted
for after the war in Indochina may be closer to resolution.

A United States-sponsored research group that completed a three-day mission in
Hanoi early this month reported that the Vietnamese had promised to return the
remains of 26 American servicemen and ''material evidence'' regarding the fate
of six others. It would be the largest such turnover in the 10 years since the
fighting ended.

Potentially more significant, members of the group reported, the Vietnamese took
them to a B-52 crash site outside of Hanoi, and left the impression they may be
willing, after years of entreaties, to permit a search of the wreckage of other
downed aircraft.

The Pentagon believes there are ''several hundred'' such crash sites in Vietnam
that may contain enough evidence to close the books on many of the 1,820 missing
in that country.

A week earlier, another American team completed its first excavation in Laos,
where 556 Americans remain on the missing list. A two-week sifting of a nearly
obliterated AC-130 gunship shot down in 1972 produced 13 identifiable sets of
remains.

Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for international security
affairs, said that so far the Vietnamese had made no commitment to allow
American teams in, but he regarded the B-52 visit as ''an indication that
they're certainly leaning in that direction.''

Signal of a Policy Decision

The developments came after a Vietnamese proposal to open talks aimed at
resolving questions about the missing Americans within two years.

''We've never before had this large a turnover, or any kind of a time
commitment,'' said Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the National
League of P.O.W.-M.I.A. Families. ''It signals a policy decision on their part,
and we obviously welcome that.'' ''That doesn't mean we're near the end,'' she
added.

Nor does it touch on the matter of whether any Americans are still in captivity
in Vietnam. A special House committee concluded in 1976 that ''no Americans are
still being held alive as prisoners in Indochina, or elsewhere, as a result of
the war in Indochina.''

The chairman of the panel, Representative G. V. Montgomery, Democrat of
Mississippi, still gets periodic briefings from Pentagon intelligence
specialists.

''They can't give me a name,'' Mr. Montgomery said last week. ''They can't give
me strong evidence.'' A panel appointed by President Carter also concluded that
there were no captives.

The Nature of the 'Evidence'

The Administration has been less inclined to rule out that possibility. The
official view today, Mr. Armitage said, is: ''We act under the assumption that
there is at least one American held against his will in Indochina.''

The ''evidence'' regarding captives appears to consist almost entirely of
reports from Vietnamese refugees who say they once saw what they thought were
Americans. The Pentagon has recorded 774 such reported sightings; so far, most
of the eyewitness accounts either have involved Americans who returned or have
been discounted, sometimes with the assistance of lie-detector tests, as
fabrications.

That leaves 123 sightings still being examined, according to officials.

Col. Gerald S. Venanzi, a former prisoner of the Vietnamese who is the
Pentagon's senior adviser on P.O.W. and M.I.A. affairs, said there is little
even in those active files to raise hopes.

Very few of the witnesses mention talking to the alleged American captives. Half
are sightings of white men not under guard - possibly Russian advisers, European
diplomats or reporters. Only two of the reported sightings have taken place
since 1980, and 18 were before the fall of Saigon.

''A lot among that 123 are just so vague that there is no place to go with
them,'' Colonel Venanzi said. ''There's nothing I'd want to take to the store
and say, 'This is it, boss.' ''

Still, he is convinced ''there's a lot to investigate.'' The M.I.A. search
office told Congress last month it has ''a virtually unlimited budget'' for the
cause.

Some critics feel the Administration has exploited the missing Americans. Every
year, families of the missing servicemen have been airlifted to Washington for
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Recognition Day - some 800 are expected to fly in at Government
expense for a gathering on Friday. On such occasions, the hope has been
encouraged that some of the missing will emerge alive.

To those who say such displays raise false hope or smack too much of political
showmanship, Mr. Armitage replies that they have paid off, perhaps convincing
Hanoi that any hope of normal diplomatic relations depends on as full a
reckoning as possible.

No one expects that all of the missing Americans will ever be accounted for.
Many are presumed to have crashed into the sea or dense jungle, and the tropical
climate quickly destroys evidence.

About 8,100 Americans still remain unaccounted for from the Korean war, and more
than 78,000 from World War II, where the United States had the victor's
advantage of unimpeded access to former battlefields and crash sites.

At what point will the Administration be satisfied?

Said Mr. Armitage: ''It's kind of like enlightenment. You know when you're
there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of remains of an Air Force man shot down in Laos in 1972 being
transferred to hearse (United Press International)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Big Daddy' Back in Cockpit

BYLINE: By STEVE POTTER

SECTION: Section 5; Page 9, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 635 words


Don (Big Daddy) Garlits is slim, fit and full of energy at the age of 53. A. J.
Foyt and Richard Petty, Garlits's counterparts in Indy Car and stock-car racing,
are finding it hard getting into the winner's circle these days. But after four
years of virtual retirement, the biggest name in the history of drag racing is
back - and winning. Today Garlits is going for one of the few races that have
eluded him in his 30 years as a professional drag racer, the Budweiser
Summernationals, in Old Bridge, N.J.

In qualifying Friday for today's final, Garlits set a track record of 5.43
seconds for the quarter-mile run, the fastest he has ever gone on any track. He
was clocked at the finish line at 260 miles per hour.

As Garlits works on his Swamp Rat Top Fuel dragster in the pits at Raceway Park,
he is frequently interrupted by fans. He folds his bifocal glasses and puts them
in his pocket as the fans tell him how happy they are that he is back racing or
sometimes, if they are young, how their fathers watched ''Big Daddy'' win one
epic race or another.

Despite his small, wiry build, almost everyone calls Garlits ''Big Daddy.'' The
name was registered as a trademark, and that's how President Nixon addressed him
at a White House reception in 1969. (Garlits shocked the conservative racing
community by asking the President to bring American troops back from Vietnam.)
Garlits won his first major drag-racing title in 1955, driving the first Swamp
Rat, built from Ford Model T frame rails and equipped with a modified Mercury
engine.

A Major Innovator

Over the years, Garlits has been responsible for most of the speed and safety
innovations in the dragster class, including moving the driver from behind the
massive super-charged engine to a safer position in the front of the car. He
built the first successful rear-engine dragster in 1972 after a clutch explosion
on the starting line sawed his conventional car in half and sheared off half of
his right foot.

Garlits's name was the biggest in the sport from the mid-60's until 1980, when
he virtually stopped driving and concentrated on building a drag-racing museum
in Ocala, Fla. It was one of his oldest competitors that brought him back to
racing last year.

''I asked Don if he was going to Indy,'' to the U.S. Nationals, said Art Malone,
who grew up with Garlits in Tampa and began his own drag-racing career in 1959,
substituting in the Swamp Rat for a severely burned Garlits. ''He said he wasn't
because he didn't have the money or the right parts for his car. I asked him if
he'd go if I bought the parts, and he agreed.'' But even with adequate parts,
Garlits's car was four years old and a better candidate for the museum than the
race track.

Won Twice Last Year

Garlits won the U.S. Nationals anyway, and Malone, a successful contractor and
dragstrip owner since retiring from the cockpit, agreed to continue his help.
Garlits won the Winston World Finals, the last race of 1984, and then built a
new car for this season.

In these days of big-buck sponsorships and half-million-dollar transporters,
Garlits seems like a throwback. His car travels to races in a modest trailer
towed by a pickup truck. And while he still has the reaction time of a
shortstop, Garlits would rather win his races with brains than brawn.

''A lot of guys lean on their parts to go fast,'' Garlits said, referring to the
practice of burning up an engine to get a fast run. ''I've won a lot of races by
de-tuning the engine for the final run, so it gets a better grip when the track
gets slippery.''

Garlits has won three of the six National Hot Rod Association championship races
so far this season. He leads the point standing over the defending champion, Joe
Amato, who was just 6 years old when Garlits drove in his first drag race.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RABBI EDWARD KLEIN, ACTIVIST

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


Rabbi Edward E. Klein, the longtime spiritual leader of the Stephen Wise Free
Synagogue and a community activist on the West Side of Manhattan, died Saturday
at his home in Manhattan. He was 72 years old.

Rabbi Klein served as senior rabbi of the Free Synagogue from 1949 to 1981, when
he became rabbi emeritus. Across those decades, his voice resounded on issues
ranging from civil rights to the war in Vietnam, from nuclear testing to urban
redevelopment.

In 1952, he helped found the League of West Side Organizations, an interfaith
group of more than 40 West Side institutions that tried to stem urban blight and
improve the area. After the league dissolved, Rabbi Klein became active in the
Lincoln Square Community Council.

Community Activist

He supported the establishment of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts and
the adjoining downtown campus of Fordham University ''because I felt they would
immeasurably enrich the community, and they have,'' he recalled in a 1981
interview.

When friends and admirers organized a testimonial dinner for him in 1981, they
held it at the Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center.

Rabbi Klein was also active in the civil rights movement and became an early
supporter of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Rabbi Klein later recalled that
his synagogue was ''the first New York City religious institution'' to invite
Dr. King to its pulpit.

Rabbi Klein, who was a native of Newark, graduated Phi Beta Kappa from New York
University. He was ordained in 1940, and in 1949 became senior rabbi at the Free
Synagogue, one of the city's centers of Reform Judaism. He took that position
after the death of the synagogue's founder, Rabbi Stephen Wise.

In his career, Rabbi Klein was honored by groups that included the American
Jewish Congress, the Jewish War Veterans and the National Conference of
Christians and Jews.

He is survived by his wife, Ruth; a son, Rabbi Stephen, of Scarsdale, N.Y.; a
daughter, Barbara Hillman of Green Township, N.J.; a sister, Ruth Bass of
Verona, N.J., and four grandchildren.

Services are to be Tuesday at 11:30 A.M. at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rabbi Edward Klein

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL DENIES HE TOOK MONEY FROM SPY FUND FOR PERSONAL USE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 0; National Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., July 15


A retired Air Force major general who is charged with embezzling Government
funds testified today that he never took money for his own personal use from a
secret espionage fund that he controlled.

The defendant, Maj. Gen. Richard B. Collins, told the jury that all the money he
withdrew from the spy fund went for travel expenses and ''payment to individuals
for covert intelligence operations.''

General Collins is accused of diverting $450,000 from secret accounts and
embezzling $19,000 in interest.

The defense attorney, Stephen Bronis, rested his case late today and for the
second time, sought a directed verdict of acquittal on the ground that the
Government failed to prove charges that General Collins diverted money.

To prove wrongdoing, Mr. Bronis said, the prosecution had to show that the
general made unauthorized withdrawals. ''And what witness has testified to
that?'' he asked.

Federal District Judge James C. Paine reserved ruling on the motion. Several
times today the judge instructed General Collins not to go into specifics, in an
apparent effort not to divulge sensitive information about United States
intelligence operations.

'I'm Not a Thief'

The General, who took the stand as the trial entered its second week, was
questioned earlier today by Mr. Bronis.

''General Collins, are you a thief?'' Mr. Bronis asked. ''No, I'm not a thief,''
responded General Collins.

''Were you ever a thief?'' the attorney asked. ''No,'' said the general.
General Collins, 55 years old, testified that he made two withdrawals from
accounts established in 1968 to finance spy operations in North Vietnam, North
Korea and China.

He said that he once withdrew an unspecified amount to go to ''location A,''
which he described as a secret base in the United States that ''maintains
technical and electronic evaluation of permanent Eastern Bloc aircraft, radar
and submarines.'' He said he also withdrew $8,654 to pay ''an individual for
covert intelligence information.''

Judge Paine ordered the defendant not to answer further questions on that
subject.

The general said he twice transferred money from his personal account at the
Swiss Bank in Geneva to the secret account to maintain a $450,000 balance in the
Government account and avoid suspicion from auditors.

Closing Out the Account

The general testified that he asked to close the account because ''Watergate was
still reverberating around Washington.''

He said Gen. George S. Brown, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
authorized him to close it, but General Collins said the Air Force was unwilling
to take the money back. He said he had to ''take another route'' to return it.
Earlier testimony indicated the Central Intelligence Agency helped close out the
account.

The general said he retired in April 1978, a few days after President Carter
appointed Gen. David C. Jones to succeed General Brown as Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs. General Brown has since died.

One of the final defense witnesses was Arthur Gene Otsea, an executive of the
international division of Lockheed Aircraft Inc., who said he also had access to
the spy fund and made two withdrawals.

Mr. Otsea did not say where the withdrawn money went, but Mr. Bronis indicated
earlier that it was used to bribe unidentified foreign officials to allow the
United States to launch spy missions over North Vietnam, North Korea and China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

40 YEARS AGO, THE BOMB: THE QUESTIONS CAME LATER

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1814 words


TRINITY SITE, N.M., July 15 - For an event that would change history, the dawn
of the atomic age came with little ceremony and scant thought to what it meant
for mankind. That would come later.

The burst of light in the sky over Trinity, the name given the site where the
first atomic bomb was detonated, came at 5:29:45 A.M., mountain war time, July
16, 1945. In that flash the major technical questions about atomic fission were
instantly resolved, only to be replaced by moral and ethical questions that have
proved to be infinitely harder.

Was the development of the bomb necessary in the first place? Did America have
to use it to devastate Hiroshima and Nagasaki? Have nuclear weapons kept the
peace for 40 years, as is often asserted, or have they only raised the level of
fear and insecurity? And can weapon research today be said to command the same
moral urgency that was ascribed to it in the final convulsions of World War II?

In the stormy darkness that preceded that first test, those thoughts were far
from the minds of the participants.

''Look, we were at war, and far too busy to worry,'' said Norris Bradbury, a
Navy scientist at Trinity who went on to direct the Los Alamos National
Laboratory, 150 miles north of the test site, where the first bombs had been
built.

Dr. Bradbury was one of several principal scientists and engineers who helped
design and build the first nuclear bombs who were interviewed last week about
the development of the bomb and its aftermath.

''There was no wringing of hands,'' Dr. Bradbury said of the success of the test
bomb. ''The damned thing worked, that's all. The handwringing and so on turned
up afterward, when people started saying, 'Gee, what have we done?' ''

Hans Bethe, head of the theoretical group at Los Alamos and dean of the
surviving atomic pioneers, made the same point in an interview: ''The focus was
entirely on the work. Of course, we were somewhat more relaxed after Trinity,
and we did begin to think about these matters.''

''To win a war one has to give himself up to war,'' said Robert Wilson, head of
the bomb project's nuclear physics division. ''You can't play Hamlet and fight a
war at the same time.''

Yet years later Dr. Bethe and Dr. Wilson would join others, including J. Robert
Oppenheimer, director of the bomb project, in questioning the justification for
escalations in weapon research.

The new arguments divided some of the scientists who, before the success of the
Trinity test and the end of the war, had been bound together in the most intense
of comradeships and communal efforts.

Edward Teller, who later led the development of the hydrogen, or thermonuclear
bomb, recalled in an interview how some scientists hoped to persuade Oppenheimer
to urge President Truman not to bomb Japan without first demonstrating the
bomb's dreadful power.

''I supported that view,'' Dr. Teller said in a telephone interview from his
offices at the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace on the campus of
Stanford University in California, ''and the man who dissuaded me from
supporting it was Robert Oppenheimer, and one of the things for which I reproach
myself was that, at that time, I let myself be persuaded by Oppenheimer.''

The tension that arose between Dr. Teller and Oppenheimer became public in the
early 1950's when Oppenheimer opposed the development of the hydrogen bomb, and
Dr. Teller responded by questioning his former leader's loyalty to the United
States.

The dispute has its echoes today in the debate over President Reagan's Strategic
Defense Initiative, the so-called ''star wars'' shield against intercontinental
missiles. Dr. Teller is a driving force behind the effort, while many of the
scientists who took sides with Oppenheimer against the H-bomb years ago oppose
the missile shield today.

''I ask you,'' Dr. Teller went on, making his case for a nuclear demonstration
over Japan, ''if we had dropped the bomb over Tokyo Bay at 30,000 feet where it
would have made no damage, but it would have made daylight for several seconds
over many miles, it would have ended this horrible affair.''

Dr. Bethe believes not. ''The Emperor was told about the terrible suffering of
the people of Hiroshima,'' he said, ''but he would not have been told, nor would
he have been impressed, if someone had reported to him that there had been a
demonstration of a tremendous explosion. It would not have sunk in. Only the
destruction of Hiroshima would have made that lesson clear.''

But far from delving into philosphical questions, Dr. Bethe and others in July
1945 were immersed in the technical maze of nuclear bomb building. Amid the
frenzied work there was also an element of joy.

''It was terribly exciting,'' Dr. Bethe recalled, sitting in his hotel room at
Los Alamos, where he continues to do consulting work for the national
laboratory. ''It was extremely satisfying in that we were helping the war
effort, which we wanted to do very much.''

Dr. Wilson said, in a telephone interview from the Aspen Institute in Colorado:
''I must emphasize a point that is rather hard to make in the context of Vietnam
and post-Vietnam, and that is the extreme patriotism that we felt. There was an
idealism that what we were doing had to be done, to save the world.''

The first bomb was named Fat Man. By the time it was hoisted into its square
sheet-metal container at the top of the test tower most of these scientists'
work had been completed. There was little to do then but ''sit around and chew
our nails,'' as Dr. Raemer Schreiber, who had helped assemble the core of the
bomb, recalled at his home in Los Alamos.

He was at the base camp, 12 miles south of ground zero, on the day of the test.
So were Dr. Teller, who warned against sunburn from the atomic flash and passed
suntan lotion around, and Dr. Bethe.

Dr. Bradbury, who lives in Los Alamos, waited in a drizzle with some other
military men in one of the canyons of the Sierra Oscura, the ''Dark Mountains''
that rose to form the blast area's eastern border.

''Sunday, July 15, all day:'' read his personal countdown log, ''Look for
rabbits' feet and four leaf clovers. Should we have the chaplain down there?''
''Monday, July 16, 0400: BANG!'' But 4 A.M. came and passed without a bang. A
thunderstorm had scudded over the test site, raising fears among the scientists
that a bolt of lightning might upset the delicate timing and control wires that
led to some 50 experiments placed in bunkers at increasing distances from the
bomb to measure its power.

At 4 A.M. Oppenheimer decided that the weather had cleared enough to allow the
test - it was always the test, not the shot, the blast, the explosion - to take
place at 5:30.

In the command bunker five and a half miles from the test tower, as the
countdown ticked by some men prayed. Dr. Oppenheimer steadied himself against a
wooden post. Outside, men following instructions lay face down on the ground,
feet toward the blast.

At minus 45 seconds Dr. McKibben threw the automatic timer that took over the
firing sequence, and at 5:29:45 the atomic age was born.

''My first feeling was one of accomplishment,'' Dr. Bethe recalled, echoing the
recollections of many. ''And my second one was, what an awful thing we have
done!''

The bomb exploded with the power of 18,000 tons of TNT, more than any of the
scientists had foretold.

By his own account, Oppenheimer was stunned by the magnitude of the blast, which
provoked him to utter his now famous quotation from a Sanskrit poem, ''I am
become death, destroyer of worlds.' '

Dr. Wilson, then only 30 years old -few of the men who built the bomb were over
40 - watched the cloud rise, break through a thermal inversion at 17,000 feet
and climb to 40,000 feet, and questions began to intrude on him and on the
others.

''My whole philosophical and political viewpoint changed instantly when it went
off,'' he said in an interview. ''You couldn't see a big desert made small
without thinking.''

Dr. Teller, seeming impatient with this line of questioning about his reaction,
said only, ''I was worried, very worried.''

Days later, as the euphoria waned and the the questions came faster, Dr.
Bainbridge seemed to sum up a dawning awareness that the men who had built the
bomb had, somehow, marked themselves. He told Dr. Oppenheimer, ''Now we're all
sons of bitches.''

Yet today young scientists at Los Alamos and at the Lawrence Livermore
Laboratory in California are devoting similar energy to research on antimissile
shields and other new weapons and defense systems.

Dr. Bethe has questioned this work. He is often asked why he could once do
similar work, but contend that today's scientists should not.

''Well,'' he replied, his face breaking into one of its frequent smiles, ''I got
just that question in a letter that was transmitted to me from a young lady
scientist at Livermore. 'How can you deny us the satisfaction of creating these
weapons, when you old fogies, during the Second World War, you didn't pay any
attention to the old fogies, some of whom are saying exactly what you are saying
now?' ''

Dr. Bethe, who opposes the new research because he believes such an antimissile
defense is technically impossible, said his first response was that he did not
know of any important scientists in the 1940's who said the atomic bomb could
not be built.

''Today,'' he went on, giving his second response, ''the context is completely
different. Then there were Nazis and they were bent on world domination; not
world domination in a century or so as the Russians may be, but world domination
by way of the second World War, and that simply had to be prevented.

''We are not at war today, and the Russians do not intend to start a war, and
that is a very big difference.''

Trinity's epilogue was being written as Fat Man's towering cloud began to
dissipate. By then the components of another bomb had been hoisted aboard the
heavy cruiser Indianapolis at San Francisco.

Ten days later the ship arrived at Tinian in the Marianas Islands in the Western
Pacific, where Dr. Schreiber, technical courier for the missions over Japan, had
flown to meet it. On Aug. 6 Hiroshima was destroyed. Nagasaki suffered the same
fate three days later. Japan, broken at last, gave up five days later.

Allied officials have estimated that a million American casualties were avoided
when the bombs made an invasion of Japan unnecessary. Perhaps more than that
number of Japanese survived the war because that final convulsion was avoided.

''One of the mornings before the first drop I saw, off the lee side of Tinian,
hundreds of amphibious craft loaded with thousands of G.I.'s, working their way
up the Marianas toward the invasion of Japan,'' Dr. Schreiber recalled. ''I
talked to several of the men on those boats afterward and they said, 'I'm sure
glad you guys set off that bomb.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of trinity counsel

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Advertising;
Creative Management

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words


AS a creative leader at Dancer Fitzgerald Sample, Jack Keil recognized a need
among newcomers to account management for a greater understanding of the
creative product - advertising - and the people who produce it.

That led to a series of lectures at Dartmouth's Amos Tuck School.

They caused a marketing professor there to say, ''You know Jack, there is a book
in this.''

That just recently led to the publication of ''The Creative Mystique,'' with the
subtitle ''How to Manage It, Nurture It and Make It Pay.''

And now John M. Keil, age 62 (as he is known to his drivers license), is going
to pull enough out of the book to make a two-day seminar and already has a
couple of Ivy League universities interested in hearing it.

In his Chrysler Building office yesterday (surrounded by furniture crafted by
his carpenter son) as he began musing about the possibilities of adopting the
seminar to a video cassette, one got the feeling that a long-running TV series
entitled ''The Creative Mystique'' might not be entirely out of the question.
After all, he acknowledges that he planned the book to be not only instructional
but also ''fun reading.''

Barbara Monteiro of the public relations department of John Wiley & Sons, the
publisher, seems excited about the book because, she said, ''It talks to both
the creative people and those who have to manage them.'' All for a low, low
$16.95. And the book is intentionally not restricted only to the adgame but
includes everyone that has dealings with creative people of all kinds.

There is a chapter on hiring, evaluating and firing. And there is even a chapter
on research and the use of same.

And despite the possibility of losing a few sales, Mr. Keil yesterday showed
himself willing to reveal the three most important qualities of creative
leadership, which he should know since he is, after all, an executive creative
director. They are: an understanding of the management of time, the ability to
inspire and objectivity.

''And the biggest single difficulty,'' he said, ''is time. If managers of
creative people could only understand what time means and how important it is to
the creative process. The quality of the product is directly related to the
amount of time that goes into it.''

Mr. Keil, executive vice president of Dancer, took his time with the book, too.
Two years, and, he insists, none of it company time. It was weekends, vacations
and on the plane during the thrice weekly trips to and from the Torrance,
Calif., office to supervise the Toyota advertising.

One of the facts of life in managing agency creative departments certainly is
job hopping. And when asked, Mr. Keil has some thoughts about the phenomenon. He
believes that the anti-establishment attitudes rife during the Vietnam War kept
many bright young people out of business, including the agency business. They
were the lost generation. The jobs they would have filled were taken by some of
the older talent and also the bright young people who came along behind them.
Because of the personnel shortages they moved frequently, and for big money.

Mr. Keil did not hesitate to blame some of the situation on those
''headhunters,'' or personnel firms, that though supposedly working for agencies
are managing creative careers and picking up fees for every engineered move.

''At Dancer we said we're not going to play that game,'' he said. ''We are not
going to pay exorbitant salaries for average or slightly above average talent.
We are going to train our own.''

And that is what the agency now does, inviting interested students on the
campuses to take a test to become copywriters. The latest, taken by about 300,
yielded eight or nine trainees, he said, adding that if the atmosphere is right,
the challenges are right and the pay is right, they may not join the other
hoppers.

A test is not the way Jack Keil, author, found his way to D.F.S. As a matter of
fact, after getting an engineering degree from the University of Rochester in
his hometown what he really wanted to do was become an actor. Nobody offered
such employment. But he could have been a cartoonist on an Albany newspaper. As
fate would have it, however, he took a job as a script editor in the advertising
department of Armstrong Cork. He learned plenty.  Three years later, acting
still in mind, he hit Broadway, where the most memorable thing that happened was
auditioning for but not getting a part in ''Mr. Roberts.''

He had better luck with the Wendell P. Colton agency and later at Needham &
Grohamann, both specialists in travel advertising. This early jumping cooled 21
years ago when he landed at Dancer.

Are you wondering about his acting ambition?

Then guess who supplies the voice of McGruff the policeman dog in the ''Take a
bite out of crime'' Advertising Council campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John M. Keil

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL IS ACQUITTED IN EMBEZZLEMENT CASE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., July 16


A retired two-star Air Force general was acquitted today of Federal charges that
he embezzled money from a Swiss bank account that he administered for the Air
Force to finance spy missions in the 1970's.

''In a bombing raid you can lose your life,'' the defendant, Maj. Gen. Richard
B. Collins, a highly decorated fighter pilot who flew 104 combat missions in
Vietnam, said after the jury returned its verdict. ''All you can lose in this
courtroom is your reputation.''

The prosecutor, Barbara Nicastro of the Justice Department's fraud section,
said, ''When you're a prosecutor you have to be careful not to judge someone as
a possible defendant by what his title is or isn't, how much they stole or how
little.''

Jurors, who deliberated two hours and 15 minutes, said they thought the
Government had failed to show that General Collins had misused money withdrawn
from the account. They also said the general had made a convincing witness.

General Collins was indicted in January 1983 on six counts of embezzling $19,000
in interest from the secret bank account.

The 55-year-old general, who served in the Pentagon and in Western Europe as
deputy director of plans and policy from 1974 until his retirement in 1978, said
all the money in the account had been used to finance covert activities by the
Central Intelligence Agency.

Steven Bronis, a defense attorney, said in his closing arguments that the
Government had not proved that General Collins made unauthorized withdrawals
from the spy account and told the jurors, ''The Government is trying to steal
his honor and they are trying to make you their accomplices.''

'Hand in the Cookie Jar'

Government lawyers said in their closing arguments that their case was based
almost entirely on circumstantial evidence and could not prove exactly where the
$19,000 was spent.

Morris Silverstein, a prosecutor, told the jurors, ''You didn't see him put his
hand in the cookie jar and take that cookie, but that's exactly what he did.''

Aside from the criminal charges, the case raised the question of whether a man
described as the Air Force's top spy in Europe could receive a fair trial
without disclosing classified information.

Government attorneys frequently clashed with the defense in an effort to
preserve secrets involving national security, and Federal District Judge James
C. Paine consistently refused to allow the general to discuss issues the
Government regarded as sensitive.

Some secrets did come out in court, however.

Jurors learned that an Air Force officer, traveling in civilian clothes with
$300,000 in cash hidden in pouches, set up the Swiss account in 1965 to finance
an agreement between the Air Force and Lockheed Aircraft Corporation.

Lockheed agreed to offer bribes to foreign officials in exchange for permission
to use their countries as bases for surveillance flights over unfriendly Asian
countries.

Throughout its existence, the account was never audited and withdrawals were
never accounted for. At its peak in 1971 the account reached $1,295,807. Only a
limited number of Air Force people knew about the account.

General Collins suggested that the account be dissolved when he learned about it
in 1974, according to defense attorneys. The general said Gen. George S. Brown
of the Air Force, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, ordered him to
keep it open for future uses.

According to prosecutors, however, General Collins put the money in
interest-bearing funds that earned more than $56,000 in interest from 1975 to
1978 and used the interest to enrich himself. They did not explain why the
charges were limited to $19,000 in interest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Maj. Gen. Richard Collins (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 17, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT REBEL GROUP SAYS IT WOULD RULE WITH HANOI BACKERS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 300 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 16


The Communist rebels in Cambodia have announced for the first time that they
would be willing to share power in Cambodia with officials of the present
Vietnamese-backed Government.

But the rebels, known as the Khmer Rouge, defended Pol Pot, the former Cambodian
ruler, as the only person who could prevent Hanoi from ''swallowing Cambodia
forever.''

A Khmer Rouge broadcast on the Voice of Democratic Kampuchea, monitored in
Bangkok on Monday, outlined a future Cambodia that would be politically
pluralistic, economically capitalistic and diplomatically neutral, with special
ties of friendship to Vietnam once its troops had left.

That was followed today by a Khmer Rouge National Army Radio broadcast
supporting the military role of Mr. Pol Pot and mentioning him by name for what
is believed to be the first time since 1979. The second broadcast was
interpreted here as a rejection of Vietnamese calls for Mr. Pol Pot's exile.

Diplomats Are Skeptical

The statements by the usually secretive Khmer Rouge were treated skeptically by
diplomats in Bangkok, who said the three-faction guerrilla coalition in Cambodia
might be anticipating problems in retaining its United Nations seat in the fall.

The Khmer Rouge, under Mr. Pol Pot, seized power in Cambodia in 1975 and were
overthrown by the Vietnamese in 1979. Some two million of Cambodia's seven
million people died under the Khmer Rouge's brutal rule.

There are fears that the Khmer Rouge, if returned to power, would push aside its
coalition partners - the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, led by Son
Sann, and the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Non-Communist guerrillas, who publicly welcomed the Khmer Rouge statements, said
privately that the messages appeared to be intended for consumption outside
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Bethesda: A Place of Healing For Elite and Non-Elite

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 17


Franklin D. Roosevelt was enchanted by the site of a small, run-down farm with a
small pond, in suburban Maryland. On automobile trips into the countryside, the
President often asked his chauffeur to drive by the pond, which reminded him of
the biblical Pool of Bethesda, a place of healing.

It was Roosevelt, a former Assistant Secretary of the Navy, who overrode other
recommendations and personally selected this spot as the 240-acre site of what
is known today as the Bethesda Naval Medical Center. It was also Roosevelt who
chose the design of the main hospital building, an 18-story tower that now
dominates the surrounding landscape and is the architectural centerpiece of a
facility that offers a full spectrum of medical services.

On a cross-country trip in 1937, the President had been impressed by the state
capitol building in Lincoln, Neb., a high, narrow tower flanked by vast
two-story wings. ''Someday I will build a Government building like that,'' he
reportedly remarked.

A Sketch on White House Paper

Subsequently, using White House stationery, he sketched the design that became
the architect's guide for the new center. Five years later, on Aug. 31, 1942, he
dedicated a 1,200-bed facility.

Since then, the hospital has played a leading role in the treatment of the
nation's political elites, up to and including President Reagan, whose surgery
for colon cancer last Saturday has again brought the hospital into the
headlines. While most of its patients have military connections, by law Bethesda
hospital must provide space for top Government officials -the President, Vice
President, Cabinet officers, members of the House and Senate, Supreme Court and
certain others. Members of the diplomatic corps are also treated.

Most nonmilitary patients are charged a flat fee of $454 a day by the hospital,
a lot for a bad cold but a bargain for open heart surgery or a V.I.P. suite.
Protective of the security of its most illustrious present patient, the medical
center refuses to divulge either the location or dimensions of the Presidential
suite.

The hospital is rich in medical history. It was there that the body of President
Kennedy was taken for an autopsy on the night of Nov. 22, 1963. It was there too
that former Defense Secretary James V. Forrestal committed suicide by jumping
out of a 16th-story window, in 1949.

And while President Truman got most of his medical care at the Navy hospital's
rival, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, in northwest Washngton, as did President
Eisenhower and Justice William O. Douglas of the Supreme Court, every President
since Lyndon B. Johnson has used the Bethesda naval hospital for at least minor
treatment and checkups. Johnson was hospitalized there three times, including
one stay for abdominal and throat surgery. President Nixon was hospitalized with
viral pneumonia. Presidents Ford and Carter received medical checkups there.

The hospital also has been favored by members of Congress. Representative Major
R. Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn, was hospitalized June 25 for 14 days with
pneumonia.

''I received very good attention,'' Mr. Owens said. ''It's a very efficient
hospital. Beyond that, it's warm and friendly.''

But the hospital has suffered recent accusations of malpractice. The most
publicized involved Dr. Donal M. Billig, the former top heart surgeon at the
hospital, who is accused by the Navy of killing four patients last year by
bungling their surgery. Several doctors who formerly held top positions at the
hospital, including the former hospital commander, are also facing disciplinary
hearings for allowing the problems to occur. In addition, the hospital was
judged negligent for failing to diagnose signs of cancer in tissues cut from a
woman in 1981. The woman won a $1 million judgment against the Government in
April.

The hospital's capacity has fluctuated over the years. Its wards, augmented by
temporary construction, housed 2,464 beds at the end of World War II. In the
Korean war, the peak number of patients was 1,167, in July 1951. And in the
Vietnam war, the peak was 1,122, in November 1968.

When it was completed, Bethesda was the seventh Navy medical hospital dedicated
since 1802. The tower was itself replaced, in 1980, with a new, state-of-the-art
500-bed hospital, with rooms instead of wards. In addition, there are 38 clinics
that treat more than 2,500 patients daily.

Gone also is a nine-hole golf course, part of the Officers Club, that stretched
out along the Rockville Pike. But the Bethesda Pool remains, the site of annual
Easter sunrise services.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bethesda Medical Hospital

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Khmer Rouge's Pledge Welcomed by China

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 17


China today welcomed the Khmer Rouge's announcement that it would be willing to
share power in Cambodia. But Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of the coalition
fighting the Vietnam-supported regime in Cambodia, cast doubt on the word of his
Communist allies.

Yu Zhizhong, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, praised the ''good faith'' of
the Peking-backed Khmer Rouge in seeking a settlement of the six-year-old war
against Vietnamese occupation forces in Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge said Monday that it would abide by the results of elections in
Cambodia, even if it loses, once Vietnamese occupation troops withdrew.

But Prince Sihanouk, in a letter made public to the press, said of the partners
in the three-way coalition, ''I absolutely cannot foretell whether they shall
keep their promises or not.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS MAY BAR VIETNAMESE BOAT PEOPLE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 671 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 18


A Thai official said today that Vietnamese boat people might lose their right to
asylum in Thailand because resettlement in third countries was proceeding too
slowly.

The official, Prasong Soonsiri, who is secretary general of the National
Security Council, said in a speech to a conference of international refugee
agencies marking 10 years of Indochinese refugee arrivals that Thailand ''may be
unable to cooperate in allowing their illegal entry any further.''

Mr. Prasong was particularly critical of Western European nations that, he said,
tended to leave the refugee burden to poorer countries of first asylum. He said
the Europeans wanted to settle refugees in developing countries ''as a durable
way to keep them from entering Europe.''

He called on Laos to establish an orderly emigration program modeled on
Vietnam's to reduce the flow of illegal emigrants. In an interview after his
speech, he added that the Thai Embassy in Vientiane had approached the Laotian
Government with the idea and that discussions had been encouraging. Screening on
Mekong River On July 1, the Thai authorities, working with the Bangkok office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, began screening Laotian
refugees crossing the Mekong River border. The Thais are preparing to send back
Laotians who, in Thailand's view, do not qualify as refugees. Laotians have now
become the largest refugee group in Thailand.

Mr. Prasong said in the interview that Thailand was beginning a similar
screening process for Vietnamese. He said discussions with United Nations
refugee officials would determine where the rejected Vietnamese would be sent.
Despite the monsoon season and pirate attacks, Vietnamese boat people continue
to arrive in Thailand at the rate of 300 a month.

Thailand has held that emigration from the Indochinese countries has been
motivated increasingly by economic rather than political factors. There has also
been an influx of young men who are resisting military service in their
homelands.

In the decade since Vietnam was unified and Communist governments took power in
Cambodia and Laos, 637,000 Indochinese refugees have come to Thailand. Over half
a million of them have been resettled abroad, mostly in in the United States.

The pace of resettlement has now slowed while the number of arrivals appears to
be rising again after a decline.

Mr. Prasong said that in the first six months of this year, 11,781 refugees
arrived, compared with 8,952 in the same period last year. In the same six
months, 16,064 people were resettled abroad, he added, compared with 21,038 last
year. He described this as ''a sign of forthcoming troubles.''

Piracy Remains a Problem

The harder line that Thailand appears taking worries refugee officials because
of the signal it might send to pirates in the Gulf of Siam who have not ceased
to prey on refugee vessels despite an international antipiracy program. The
program has just been extended for a year on the promise of $2.69 million in
international grants.

Eric Morris of the United Nations High Commissioner's Office here today
described an attack in March in which 116 people are believed to have died when
pirates rammed a refugee vessel from Vietnam. A survivor who reached Indonesia
has been able to confirm the account of the attack, Mr. Morris said.

More Vietnamese are now heading toward Malaysia and Indonesia, officials say.
They do this not so much because they fear pirates but because they have heard
that resettlement from these countries is proceeding more rapidly.

Vietnam's orderly emigration program, administered by United Nations officials
who work with American and other Western embassy immigration officials here, has
continued to operate successfully, officials say. There is, however, a recurrent
concern that the program is being used to expel ethnic Chinese from the Ho Chi
Minh City area.

Large numbers of ethnic Chinese were forced out of Vietnam at the end of the
last decade. Many of them have since settled in China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 20, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

RECOGNITION FOR THOSE STILL MISSING

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


The music of the Army Band was punctuated by the firing of the four cannon.
Minutes later, the helicopters were seen in the distance.

They came in low, their 10 sets of propellers beating furiously. As they climbed
the small hill and prepared to fly over the Pentagon, one suddenly peeled off,
trailing a plume of purple smoke. The crowd below saw, heard, felt the other
nine streak overhead.

It was yet another episode in a war that President Reagan has said has never
ended, at least for the families and friends of the 2,464 Americans still
officially listed as unaccounted for, most of them in Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia. Today, by the President's declaration, was National P.O.W./M.I.A.
Recognition Day.

'A Special Duty'

Here in the capital, the band and the helicopters were part of a Recognition Day
ceremony at the Pentagon. More than 1,000 families and friends of prisoners of
war and those missing in action waited on the shadeless lawn to hear Gen. John
W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reassure them that the
Administration has not forgotten their loved ones.

''We in the military services have a special duty to those who served with us in
combat,'' he said. Then, echoing the President, the general said: ''We write no
last chapters. We close no books.'' America's involvement will not end, he said,
until there has been a full accounting for those still missing.

The Pentagon ceremony, opened by Deputy Defense Secretary William H. Taft 4th
with a 19-gun salute and closed by the helicopters in a ''Missing Man''
formation, was part of remembrances all across the country. It also coincided
with the 16th annual national convention of the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, meeting in suburban
Alexandria, Va.

Vice President Bush spoke to the group in the afternoon, but his was not the
name on everybody's lips. ''Rambo,'' it seems, was the favorite topic of
speculation and discussion. Taken from the current motion picture about a
Vietnam veteran who returns to rescue American P.O.W.'s, the name is also
associated with a faction of the League of Families that wants the league, and
the Government, to take more decisive action toward recovering the missing.

Mr. Bush did his part to fuel the hopes and answer the prayers of the
convention-goers, announcing that the Laotian Government agreed this week to
excavate the site of a United States jet crash in an effort to recover the
remains of the fliers. It was reported earlier this month that a joint
Laotian-United States excavation of another crash site, in Pakse, in eastern
Laos, had produced 13 identifiable sets of remains.

One unifying element among those attending the convention is the feeling that
Washington is not being honest with the families of the missing.

Two sisters from the West Coast, in their first trip to the national convention,
thought for one hopeful moment that they had learned something about the
whereabouts of their father, a Navy aviator shot down in the war zone more than
10 years ago. The sisters saw a Defense Department file today that indicated the
father had survived and had been taken prisoner, but hours later they were told
by Pentagon officials that the notification was merely a form letter that did
not refer to their father and had made its way into his file by mistake.

Even the efforts the Administration is making to recover the missing in Laos are
met with skepticism. The Government says the remains of an Air Force crew
member, George MacDonald, shot down in a AC-130 gunship over Laos in 1972, were
among those recovered in the Pakse excavation and were returned to Travis Air
Force Base in California earlier this month. His brother Gregory is not so sure.
''I'm just distrustful of the Government's position,'' he said.

The suspicion stems from a lawsuit filed in the case of another Air Force man,
Lieut. Col. Thomas T. Hart, that says the Air Force does not actually know
whether the identities assigned to the recovered Pakse remains are accurate. A
declaration filed in the suit by a forensic expert says it is impossible to
determine whether the remains identified as Colonel Hart's are, in fact, his or
whether they are even from the same person.

It is evidence like this that leaves people like Gregory MacDonald wondering.
''I don't know what the Government's motivation is,'' he said. ''There are so
many upset people out there who feel there's been a fraud perpetrated.''

Debbie Stein of St. Louis says her brother, Cpl. Larry Green, has been missing
since 1968. Her attitude might be indicative of the attitude of most of the
crowd at the convention. She feels that ceremonies, like today's at the
Pentagon, are too little, too late, but she is heartened by recent developments
in talks with the Vietnamese and the Laotians, and she intends to give her
support at next year's convention.

Still, she mused, ''It would be nice if there wasn't a next year.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President Bush addressing the National League of Families
of American Prisoners and Missing in South Asia (United Press International)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos to Help U.S. In Search for M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 20


Laos said today that it would send a team of officials to Hawaii to join the
United States in preparing for a search for servicemen missing in action from
the war in Indochina.

Laos told the United States Embassy in Vientiane Thursday that it had accepted
an American invitation to send a delegation to the Joint Casualty Resolution
Center in Honolulu late this year, the Laotian press agency said in a broadcast
monitored in Bangkok.

The agency said Laos was preparing for a joint excavation of the crash site of a
United States aircraft during the next November-to-May dry season.

It said Laos pledged further cooperation in the search for missing servicemen
and expressed hope ''the U.S. Government will take concrete, reasonable steps
responding to this humanitarian and good-will attitude.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISS STEVENSON PLANS TO BE MARRIED AUG. 10

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


Bruffey Trent Stevenson and Christopher Stradley Colbert plan to be married Aug.
10. The future bride is a daughter of Lauralee Trent Stevenson of New York and
Southampton, L.I., and Maj. Gen. John D. Stevenson, U.S.A.F., retired, of
Augusta, Ga., who have announced her engagement to the son of the late Lee Gable
Ericson of Radnor, Pa., and Nantucket, Mass.

Miss Stevenson, a chef at Maitland's in Morgantown, Pa., attended the Dominican
Convent in San Rafael, Calif., and the SHAPE International School in Paris and
graduated from Sweet Briar College.

Mr. Colbert, a real-estate developer in Morgantown, graduated from the Solebury
School in New Hope, Pa., attended the University of Hawaii and served with the
Navy during the Vietnam War. His marriage ended in divorce.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
OFF THE HOOK

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 118 words


What was stolen: $19,000 in interest from a secret Swiss bank account or a
retired two-star Air Force general's honor? A jury in West Palm Beach, Fla.,
decided last week that it was the latter, and it acquitted Maj. Gen. Richard B.
Collins of embezzlement. General Collins, a highly decorated fighter pilot in
Vietnam, oversaw the secret account while serving as the Air Force's deputy
director of plans and policy in Western Europe during the 1970's. Government
lawyers contended that he had misused money he withdrew from the account, but
the general said it had been used to finance covert activities by the Central
Intelligence Agency. Some of the money was used to offer bribes to foreign
officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Maj. Gen. Richard B. Collins

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EVEN MINOR PERSONALITIES CAN SPAWN MAJOR CULTS

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the Soviet Union, where the first ''cult of personality'' was created for
Lenin more than 60 years ago, the practice of exaggerated veneration is in
disuse, on orders from on high. Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the new Soviet leader, has
discouraged ''automatically laudatory phrases,'' says Paul K. Cook, the State
Department's senior expert on Soviet affairs. Mr. Gorbachev has barred the use
of ''head of the Politburo'' - not a legally valid title, but frequently used in
the past, Mr. Cook continued, as ''an early step on the path to the cult.''

But the kind of cult that Stalin built for Lenin and later for himself is alive
and well along the edges of what Stalin used to call the ''socialist camp,''
fostering smaller avatars in the persons of Cuba's Fidel Castro, North Korea's
Kim Il Sung, Bulgaria's Todor Zhivkov and Rumania's Nicolae Ceausescu. Each
presents himself more or less as a deity in his national firmament, and Mr. Kim
and Mr. Ceausescu seem to be entertaining the idea of keeping it in the family.
President Kim is evidently bent on passing the torch to his son, Kim Jong Il,
and President Ceausescu seems similarly inclined toward his son, Nicu.

In Eastern Europe since 1956, when Nikita Khrusuchev unveiled some of Stalin's
worst deeds, the cult of personality has been officially denigrated. An East
German dictionary defined it in 1967 as ''an overvaluation of the role of the
personality in history that is alien to Marxism-Leninism, consisting of the
glorification of certain persons and their achievements and the diminishing of
the role of the popular masses and the party.''

Face on the Peso

But in North Korea, Mr. Kim, 73 years old, is routinely described as ''great
leader''; his birthplace, Mangyongdee, is a national shrine and giant statues of
him dominate the countryside. He is described in the 25 volumes of his collected
works as the ''ingenious thinker and theoretician'' who inspired nearly every
mental or physical accomplishment of his country for 40 years.

Biran, the birthplace of Fidel Castro 57 years ago, is not a pilgrims' shrine,
but the stations of his revolutionary march to Havana, such as the Moncada
barracks in Santiago, are. The Maximo Lider appears on the 1, 10 and 20 peso
notes. Only he gives the five- and seven-hour speeches that are the subject of
mandatory discussion in factory study groups the next day.

Nicolae Ceausescu, who is 67 years old, has a shrine at his birthplace in the
town of Scornicesti, inaugurated since he came to power two decades ago. His
cult was slow in building, having to displace the incipient cult of his
predecessor, Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej. In Mr. Ceausescu's first year in power,
many rural Rumanians did not know that Mr. Gheorghiu-Dej had died, much less the
name of the successor. But in time, he published 25 volumes (entitled ''Rumania
on the Road to Building the Multilaterally Developed Socialist Society'') and
could count on party agitators to see to it that his speeches were interlarded
with cheers of ''Ceausescu-Peace!'' ''Long Live Ceausescu!'' ''Ceausescu and the
People!'' and ''Ceausescu Triumphs!'' Having covered himself with other honors,
he was inducted on July 12 into the nation's most prestigious scientific body,
the Academy of the Socialist Republic of Rumania.

In Bulgaria, President Zhivkov, who is 73 years old, has governed for more than
three decades, one of the longest tenures in 13 centuries of Bulgarian history.
The country's newest superhighway leads from the capital to his hometown of
Pravets in the Balkan mountains, where his family home is reverently visited by
every grade-school class. A Zhivkov statue dominates the main square and a
museum depicts scenes of his life. His sayings are being collected in a set of
volumes that now numbers 29. Songs are sung in his praise.

To be sure, there have been other notable cults in Communist countries. Mao in
China with his little red book, Tito in Yugoslavia and Enver Hoxha in Albania,
whose collected works numbered 40 volumes before he died in April. Walter
Ulbricht had a crack at it in East Germany before he was deposed in 1971, as did
Hungary's Matyas Rakosi, Czechoslovakia's Klement Gottwald and Vietnam's Ho Chi
Minh. But none of these cults of living personalities surpassed the model set by
Stalin, who rewrote official Soviet history, had a city renamed Stalingrad (now
Volgograd) and other ''Stalin'' cities in Poland, East Germany, Hungary and
Bulgaria.

Nor would it seem that heretical remarks about the current personalities bring
the stern retribution common in Stalin's time - execution or slow death in the
penal colonies.

Still, personality of the cult type can command unusual fealty, as when Todor
Zhivkov recently visited Pravets and told the local collective farm manager that
he was remiss in not planting sour cherry trees. A young plantation of cherry
trees is now bearing fruit on a slope within sight of the Zhivkov homestead, and
the President of Bulgaria will soon be enjoying its jellies and jams.

It has usually taken at least a dozen years in power to promote a personality
cult. Leonid I. Brezhnev had been at it for only a few years when he died in
1982 and little remains of that venture. His successors, Yuri Andropov and
Konstantin Chernenko, died before they could get started. So it is early to tell
if the overweening personality cult is a permanent thing of the past in Moscow
and merely a passing phenomenon of the insignificant fringes of the Communist
world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of North Korea's Kim II Sung, Bulgaria's Todor Zhivkov,
Rumania's Nicolae Ceausescu and Cuba's Fidel Castro (Camera Press; Gama-Laison/
Gaby Sommer; Sygma/Alan Nogues)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


July 21, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 5 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 3 18 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 3 2 9 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine
orphanage earlier in this century.

* 4 0 1 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 5 4 4 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 6 6 9 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner to
the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century American
wilderness.

* 7* 5 10 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 8 7 26 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 9 8 21 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this pseudonymous
novel by Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously wasting away.

* 10 12 5 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence,
$14.95.) In his 12th case, the private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal
agents to bring down a powerful scoundrel.

* 11* 13 18 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 12 0 1 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.

* 13 0 1 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 14 11 14 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A new desert
world rises from the ashes of the Old Empire in the latest volume of the science
fiction series.

* 15 0 3 FOOTFALL, by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle. (Del Rey/Ballantine,
$17.95.) Aliens from Saturn arrive on Planet Earth; science fiction. Nonfiction

* 1 2 2 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to first man
to fly faster than sound.

* 2 1 38 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 11 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 16 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 0 1 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis star.

* 6 6 47 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 7 15 3 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 8 7 8 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British nobleman, diplomat and naval hero.

* 9 5 10 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 10 0 1 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
previously unpublished chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 11 12 14 THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The
tangled lives of Charlie Soong and his six children, who shaped much of China's
modern history.

* 12 8 21 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 13 9 7 THE HEART OF THE DRAGON, by Alasdair Clayre. (Houghton Mifflin,
$29.95.) Companion volume to the PBS television series on China.

* 14 11 10 MY MOTHER'S KEEPER, by B. D. Hyman. (Morrow, $16.95.) A portrait of
the actress Bette Davis by her daughter.

* 15 10 46 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for a true love.
ADVICE AND SELF-HELP

* 1 1 6 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to lose weight while improving health and increasing
energy.

* 2 2 16 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 3 4 33 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 4 5 2 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives.

* 5 3 40 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above. AND BEAR IN MIND (Editors' choices of other recent
books of particular interest) THE OXFORD COMPANION TO ENGLISH LITERATURE: Fifth
Edition, edited by Margaret Drabble. (Oxford University, $35.) This whopping
latest version (1,155 pages) of the famous compilation concisely and usefully
describes almost everything and everybody, though some recent developments
-Deconstructionism, for example - are slighted. AN OMELETTE AND A GLASS OF WINE,
by Elizabeth David. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $18.95.) A collection of splendid
food journalism by a writer whose recipes stand as metaphors of a way of life as
much as instructions for making dinner. THE BOOK OF PHOEBE, by Mary-Ann Tirone
Smith. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A very funny first novel about a self-confident and
precocious adolescent who seizes Grant's Tomb at 13 and at 19, knowing her own
mind, goes to Paris to bear her illegitimate child.

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC, by William Gaddis. (Elisabeth Sifton/

Viking, $16.95.) A mazy, mercilessly adroit carnival of frauds and cynics,
thieves and liars, redeemed (if at all) by outrageous humor and a suggestion
that the world may not be as bad as it is painted. A SHORT HISTORY OF A SMALL
PLACE, by T. R. Pearson. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A melancholy family
and its goofy neighbors populate this fine first novel in a Southern vein.

NOTES OF AN ANATOMIST, by F. Gonzalez-Crussi. (Harcourt

Brace Jovanovich, $12.95.) A pathologist's elegant and humane essays on
everything from embalming to male genital anatomy. THE IMAGE and Other Stories,
by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) ''It's quite
possible,'' says one of Mr. Singer's characters, ''that hell is made up of
yearning.'' Unruly lusts and uncontrollable passions dominate the inhabitants of
this latest collection of the Yiddish writer's short stories.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW WERE WE IN VIETNAM?

BYLINE: By Eliot A. Cohen; Eliot A. Cohen is an assistant professor of
government at Harvard University. His latest book is ''Citizens and Soldiers:
The Dilemmas of Military Service.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


THE RISE AND FALL OF AN AMERICAN ARMY U.S. Ground Forces in Vietnam, 1965-1973.
By Shelby L. Stanton. Illustrated. 411 pp. Novato, Calif.: Presidio Press.
$22.50.

THE 25-YEAR WAR America's Military Role in Vietnam. By Bruce Palmer Jr.
Illustrated. 236 pp. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. $24.

THE national Vietnam War memorial in Washington, a sunken black gash scored with
the names of our dead and guarded by the statues of three weary and apprehensive
soldiers, mutely tells Americans that they lost the war. For any American over
25, the memorial's silent but irrefutable testimony shatters the patriotic myth
which has it that America always wins its wars. Unfortunately, the resulting
anger and self-doubt obstruct coherent thinking about American conventional
strategy and the use of force. For too many Americans, all along the political
spectrum, ''no more Vietnams!'' substitutes for a more dispassionate analysis of
why we lost the Vietnam War.

''The Rise and Fall of an American Army'' by Shelby L. Stanton supplies some of
the raw data for such an evaluation, but fails to give one. The book purports to
be an overview of American military participation in the Vietnam War, but is
really two books - an order-of-battle history describing the stories of the
units arriving in Vietnam, and a chronological description of Vietnam fire
fights. Mr. Stanton, who served with the United States Army during the Vietnam
War and now writes military history, further narrows his account by
concentrating on the years between 1965 and 1970 (the period 1970-1973 is
covered in two chapters, versus 20 for those preceding it).

Mr. Stanton's writing varies widely in quality. At its worst it reminds one of
feature articles in Soldier of Fortune magazine; at its best, however, it gives
the reader a terrifyingly graphic description of combat in the many
mini-environments of Vietnam, as when he describes paratroopers of the 173d
Airborne Brigade stumbling upon the skeletons of Special Forces soldiers in the
mist-shrouded mountains around the town of Dak To in central Kontum Province.
Similarly, his history -really a lengthy collection of anecdotes - contains
nuggets of information and observation useful to a serious student of the war.
His fascination with unit history (each chapter contains long footnotes tracing
the genealogy of every American battalion, regiment and division that he
discusses) reminds the reader that organizations have personalities, that
military units are not interchangeable chess pieces but unique organisms. This
is particularly clear when Mr. Stanton contrasts the tough, canny First Cavalry
Division with the demoralized and undisciplined Americal Division, the unit
whose troops committed the massacre at My Lai.

His discussion of the gradual deterioration of the American army, and such
troubling phenomena as the pervasive undermanning of combat units in a
manpower-rich force, raises important issues. Despite his industrious study of
official records (particularly after-action reports), however, his history
remains superficial and distorted. The Vietnamese, both friend and foe, are
ciphers. Mr. Stanton seems to lose interest in the war once the burden of its
conduct shifted in 1970 to the South Vietnamese. As for the enemy, they appear
as two-dimensional figures who launch suicidal, human-wave at-tacks or surprise
jungle ambushes, who fight tenaciously from camouflaged bunkers yet succumb in
every battle to American bullets, rockets and bombs. What motivated them, how
they formulated and modified their strategy, what they thought of us - on all
these Mr. Stanton chooses to be silent. The author's constricted point of view
(although acceptable for an order-of-battle history) tends to recreate that of
America's military and civilian leaders at the time, and therein, perhaps, lies
the reason we lost the war.

That view - that our strategic self-absorption contributed to defeat in Vietnam
- is reinforced by the explicit and implicit testimony of Gen. Bruce Palmer
Jr.'s fascinating book, ''The 25-Year War.'' General Palmer commanded a
corps-size force in Vietnam, then served as Gen. William C. Westmoreland's
deputy before returning to the United States as the army's vice chief of staff
and finally commander of land and air forces in the continental United States.
His book combines a memoir with a brief account of the war and an extended
discussion of the lessons to be derived from it. He writes with a clarity and
candor remarkable in any military memoir, offering severe (but not rancorous)
judgments on himself and his colleagues.

''Faultlessly attired, Westmoreland constantly worried about his public image
and assiduously courted the press,'' he writes. [His successor, Gen. Creighton
Abrams] on the other hand, usually looked rumpled, as though he might have slept
in his uniform, and was indifferent about his appearance, acting as though he
could care less about the press. The sharply differing results were startling;
Abrams rarely receiving a bad press report, Westmoreland struggling to get a
favorable one.''

General Palmer does not, as do so many apologists for our strategy in Vietman,
make the absurd argument that the United States won the war militarily but lost
it politically (as if war could make sense in anything but a political context).
He criticizes the politicians for their mismanagement of the war, but is, if
anything, harder on the military leadership for their conduct of it.

He holds that the Joint Chiefs of Staff should have -but never did - inform the
President that they could not win the war with the force levels given them and
the strategy they were pursuing. He describes with dismay the fragmented command
structure of American forces (General Westmoreland's superior was a Navy admiral
in Honolulu, not the Joint Chiefs in Washington) and the American failures in
intelligence analysis and counterintelligence. He excoriates America's
commanders for failing to devise a coherent strategy, and for allowing personnel
practices (one-year individual rotation, for example) and logistical excesses
that sapped American fighting efficiency in Vietnam and crippled American forces
worldwide.

In what will probably prove the most controversial part of the book, General
Palmer attacks America's current system of central defense organization,
including that of the Joint Chiefs. Although some of his solutions do not appeal
to this reviewer (making the chairman of the Joint Chiefs a member of the
National Security Council, for example), his diagnosis of the command system's
ailments makes eminent sense. He reminds us that the current Joint Chiefs of
Staff system moderates interservice disputes by excessive compromise and warns
that the consequent failure to confront civilian superiors with service disputes
is a grave disservice to the national defense. He adds yet more weight to the
view that our central defense organization, including the Joint Chiefs and the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, needs thorough re-examination and reform.

Despite its many merits - and this book will stand for years to come as an
indispensable resource for students of the war and the American defense
establishment that has survived it - ''The 25-Year War'' fails to answer some of
the many important questions it raises. General Palmer's alternative strategy to
that of attrition would have required the creation of a barrier zone between the
sea and Thailand, occupied by American troops and supplemented by the threat
(though not the reality) of amphibious assaults on North Vietnam. One can infer
from his presentation of this strategy that he, like Mr. Stanton, thinks of the
war as a conventional one, in which the insurgency in the south was a mere
diversion, a view only partially supported by the evidence. He fails to explore
possible North Vietnamese responses to his strategy, or to consider the
consequences it would have had for American military and civilian morale.

This drawback aside, ''The 25-Year War'' should be read, and not merely for
historical interest. Unless the United States is willing to permanently forgo
the use of force in defense of its interests overseas, Americans must think
through the military lessons of Vietnam. They must ask not only under what
conditions they should use force but how to use it, should that prove necessary.
One need not think that most or even many foreign policy problems will yield to
the application of military power to know that slogans cannot substitute for
careful thinking, and that past mistakes cannot be avoided simply by damning
them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY OPINION;
DESERVE JOB AID

BYLINE: By James J. Florio; James J. Florio, Democrat of Pine Hill, represents
the Firt Congressional District (Gloucester County and part of Camden County) in
the House of Representatives.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 22, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


AN IMPORTANT responsibility of Congress is not just to pass legislation, but
also to make sure that new laws, once they are signed by the President, are
properly carried out. There is little point in enacting good laws or creating
needed programs if they are not enforced.

This oversight responsibility guarantees that our constituents back home are
really helped by what we do in Congress. Without vigilant oversigh, our efforts
to help people who legitimtely need assistance will be frustrated by
bureaucratic indifference or incompetince.

One area tht has been of particular oncern to me is implementation of the
Emergency Veterans job TRining Act, a $150 million program begun in December
1983 to give veterans of the Korean and Vietnam conflicts career oriented jobs
in the private sector.

This landmark program - it is the larges imployment and trining effort to be
aimed at the Korean and Vietnam veteran - has been a success in nearly every
state. It provides employers 50 percent of a veteran's first yer salary up to
$10,000.

As an original co-sponsor of legislation creating the program, I am proud that
nearly 30,000 veterans have found jobs nationally through this effort. More than
$110 million of the $150 million originally allocated has been spent to put
veterans to work. many states have taken excellent advantage of the program. For
example, more than 1,650 veterans in Pennsylvania and 1,300 in New York State
have found jobs through the act.

Unfortunately, New Jersey cannot boast the same success. The state has had a
relatively poor performnce in finding veterans private sector jobs through this
progrm. In fact, New Jersey ranks next to last among the 50 states in matching
unemployed Koren and Vietnam veterans with available jobs.

As of April 30, a total of 339 veterans had been matched with positions. This
low success rate is set against the facts that the Veterans administration has
certified nearly 4,500 unemployed New Jersey veterans as eligible to participate
in the progrm and that there are 1,600 jobs at 729 different companies waiting
for them.

In human terms, the failure by officials in New Jersey implement this program
properly is tragic. At a jobs fair for veterans that I sponsored in Camden
County last March, I saw the faces of the more than 750 unemployed veterans who
came to find work. They wanted jobs.

Preliminary results showed that 33 veterans found jobs during the eight hour
event; this was 10 percent of New Jersey's entire total during a 16 month
period.

It is a shame tht the state's failure to properly implement this program has
denied veterans the jobs they deserve and need. Obviously, much needs to be
done. There is no reason why officials in New Jersey have matched only 339
veterans with jobs when our two neighboring states have put more than four times
that number to work. Only $1.2 million, or about 1 percent of the total amount
expended for the program nationwide, has been spent in New Jersey.

And it is hard to understand the state's low success rate when states like
Delaware, Kansas and Rhode Island, which have unemployment rates similar to New
Jersey's met their goals of placing veterans in jobs that were set by the
Veterns Administration.

FAced with these problems, a hearing by the House Veterans Affairs Subcommittee
on Education, Training and Employment, of which I am a member, was held in
newark in may to determine why state officials had not taken greater advantage
of the progrm. It became apparent during testimony at the hering tht the progrm
was mired in bureaucratic confusion.

There was insufficient ''outreach'' o veterans to let them know that this
program was abailable to them. Officials also testified taht, although they were
aware there were problems with implementing the program in New Jersey, the had
done nothint to correct them.

They tesitfied that they had only recentl;y begun to take steps to improve the
program, although it is set o expire in September.

Legislation sponsored by Representative Thomas A. DAschle, Democrt of South
Dakota and charman of the subcommittee, and myself has passed the House. It
would extend the program until next July 1 and provide an additional $75 million
to put more veterans to work.

Based on information from the subcommittee's hearing in Newark, officials now
know what they must do in New Jersey to find jobs for the thousands of
unemployed veterans in our state. Hopefully, once this legislation passes the
Senate and is signed into law by the President, these officials will have a
second opportunity to place unemployed veterans in good jobs.

The subcommittee, its chairman and I will continue to monitor this program in
new Jersey to make sure tht veterns are assisted. Our veterans need our fullest
support, and this program provides them that help.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE BIOGRAPHER AS DETECTIVE: WHAT WALTER LIPPMANN PREFERED TO FORGET

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel; Ronald Steel, whose book ''Walter Lippmann and the
American Century'' (1980) won the Bancroft Prize and the National Book Critics
Circle award, is a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, in
Washington.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3050 words


MY life with Walter Lippmann began casually enough and initially came about more
by accident than design.

It turned into an involvement that lasted for a decade. In 1969, I was working
as a political journalist in New York, having returned from several years in
Europe where I had written two books on American foreign policy. One morning I
got a phone call from Richard Rovere, the well-known political columnist for The
New Yorker, a man I knew only by reputation. He surprised me by asking whether I
might be interested in working with him on a book about Walter Lippmann. Of
course I knew Lippmann as the nation's most eminent journalist, almost an
institution in himself. But Rovere also revealed to me how deeply Lippmann had
delved into politics - far more so than any of his readers had realized.

Rovere, once he had hooked me, happily withdrew from the project completely. He
much preferred to write his magazine column than to get bogged down in what he
feared might be a very long project. There were times when I realized how wise
he had been. Lippmann was then 80, and his life was a panorama of virtually
everything that had happened to America in the 20th century - Bull Moose
progressivism, Greenwich Village modernism, saving the world for democracy, the
Jazz Age and ''normalcy,'' Teapot Dome and the Lindbergh baby, the New Deal,
Stalin and Hitler, the cold war, Kennedy's Camelot and, topping it all, the
current crisis, the Vietnam War, which Lippmann now so passionately opposed.

After several conversations with Lippmann, whom I had met only briefly a few
years before, he generously agreed to give me full and exclusive access to his
voluminous papers. He also offered to let me use them in virtually any way I
pleased within the confines of biography. Now that the preliminaries were out of
the way, all I had to do was to learn everything there was to know about the
life of Walter Lippmann. I settled down at Yale University, deep in the
neo-Gothic bowels of the manuscripts and archives collection where the papers
were housed. With the help of a friendly staff, I slowly began working my way
through the immense collection. In addition to some 100,000 personal and
business letters, it included nearly everything Lippmann had ever written for
publication, including his editorials over the years for The New Republic and
The World (the New York daily he edited through most of the 1920's), hundreds of
magazine articles, more than a score of books, and of course the newspaper
columns he wrote for 36 years.

Robert O. Anthony, a retired businessman who had made an avocation of collecting
Lippmann's published works, was the curator of the Lippmann papers and saved me
from a great many perils. He also knew what I only gradually learned: that
Lippmann had led a far more complex life than anyone like myself, who had become
aware of him only in the 1960's, could ever have imagined.

Here was a man, I later discovered, who was not quite so comfortable as it
seemed with who he was; a man who had been born to privilege and who won almost
every honor, but was long denied happiness; and a man who, in middle age, had
his emotional life turned upside down when he ran off with his best friend's
wife. What had begun as an exercise in exposition increasingly became a
detective story with the subject both my client and my quarry. As I went through
the yellowing articles and columns, I was sometimes surprised or puzzled by the
views he took. Why, for example, did the young man who served Woodrow Wilson
enthusiastically and drafted most of the Fourteen Points so vehemently denounce
the Treaty of Versailles in 1919? Why did the former Fabian Socialist become so
conservative in the 1920's and 1930's - but then less conservative as he grew
older? Why did he excitedly support Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 and then turn
violently against the New Deal only three years later? Why was he so out of step
with the new cold war consensus in the late 1940's? And why did such a
Washington insider and team player become such an impassioned critic of the
Vietnam War and the intellectual elite who prosecuted it?

If certain things perplexed me, why didn't I just ask him? Sometimes I did, but
the answers were not always illuminating. Though he had volunteered to cooperate
fully with me, he had not anticipated that I would ask anything ''personal.'' I
soon learned that his definition of personal was quite broad. One day I asked
him, in all innocence, what it was that his father had done for a living. I knew
the family had been wealthy and that the wealth was connected to real estate,
but I wasn't sure how. He looked at me with his slightly bulging, heavy-hooded
eyes for what seemed like minutes, and then said solemnly: ''I wouldn't want you
to make a novel of this.''

Naturally my curiosity was aroused, and my perfunctory question began to assume
considerable significance. What could Lippmann's father have been? I asked
myself. A drunkard, a gangster, a convict? The truth, as I later learned, was
quite prosaic. He amassed rents and clipped coupons. But the incident had been
revealing. It had shown Lippmann's extreme sense of privacy and also his
sensitivity regarding his parents.

The episode made me realize that I would have to become a detective. I could not
simply rely on Lippmann's recollections to understand what and who had been
important in his life. I put increasing importance on what other people could
tell me about him. Unsurprisingly, the person I most wanted to talk to was the
one he least wanted me to see. This was the woman he had married as a young man
and then divorced 20 years later in a messy scandal. He would not discuss her,
nor would he tell me where I could find her. In fact, he claimed not to know
whether she was still alive. After much sleuthing, I located her in what had
once been their summer home on Long Island. Elated at my discovery, I felt that
at last I would learn about Lippmann's life during those shadowy years between
the end of the First World War and the beginning of the second.

But locating her was only the beginning. At first she would not see me. It took
me months to persuade her to do so, and only with the promise that I would ask
nothing ''personal.'' Then she insisted that I obtain Lippmann's written
permission. Somewhat sheepishly I approached him with the news that his first
wife was indeed alive and living not far away. He seemed neither particularly
surprised nor interested. Then I told him of the condition she had imposed. He
sat down and wrote a short note, not addressed to her, but To Whom It May
Concern, stating that he had no objection to her speaking to me.

Note in hand I drove out to an unfashionable village on the North Shore of Long
Island. There I found a modest wooden house that had seen better days and a
sprightly woman in her late 70's with a hearty laugh and an unaffected manner.
She was - with her sequined glasses - not at all what I had expected. Yet I
liked her and we had a nice time together. The first Mrs. Lippmann seemed to
bear no grudges at all, but neither did she appear to have much insight into the
man with whom she had lived for so long. I was not surprised that, when the
opportunity came, he left her. Also I came away feeling that I had established a
connection with his life quite independent of the parameters he had set out for
me. Increasingly, I realized that I could not merely tell his story. Rather, I
would have to tell my story about him. Inevitably that would put us into
competition and even into conflict. He would want his story told in a certain
way, although he would never have said so directly. That is what he had meant by
his admonition that I not get too personal.

Although Faye (to myself, though not to them, I had come to call all the people
in his life by their first names) had been discreet, two things she mentioned
intrigued me. One was that Walter Lippmann disliked his mother (perhaps for that
worldly woman's lack of interest in him during his childhood), and felt
contemptuous of his acquiescent father, from whom he had refused to accept money
once he discovered that part of the family fortune came from tenements. The
other was that he made it a point to avoid resort hotels that discriminated
against Jews. U NTIL that time I had no indication that he had any particular
feelings about being Jewish. His grandparents had come from Germany in the
1840's, and he had grown up at a time when it was fashionable to be
''cosmopolitan'' and eschew parochial loyalties. Judge Louis Brandeis of the
Supreme Court, before his conversion to Zionism, expressed his disapproval of
the ''hyphenated American.'' Among many in Lippmann's social class in New York
at the turn of the century, to be ''ethnic'' was to be narrow-minded. Lippmann
was neither religious nor did he take any part in what could be called Jewish
affairs. Only rarely did he write about the Jews as such. Most of his readers
probably did not think of him as Jewish. Indeed, as one of his gentile friends
once said to me, ''Walter simply decided that he wasn't Jewish, and that was
that.''

But that, as it turned out, wasn't that. It rarely is. Lippmann had a
complicated attitude toward his own Jewishness. This I learned not from him but
from others. First, with the help of an enterprising student at Yale, I
discovered a lost manuscript and a series of letters between him and the editor
of a Jew-ish magazine. In the 1920's, he had written several articles - one so
intemperate that he withdrew it before publication - criticizing Jews for being
clannish and vulgar. Second, a colleague who was writing a biography of one of
Lippmann's contemporaries sent me an exchange of letters with Felix Frankfurter,
who later also sat on the Supreme Court, that left little question as to
Lippmann's sensitivity to the issue. HE and Frankfurter had been close friends
for nearly two decades. Suddenly in 1933, both their correspondence and their
friendship came to an end. When I asked Lippmann why, he professed not to
remember. However, from the material my colleague had sent me, I discovered that
Frankfurter had taken bitter exception to a column Lippmann wrote in 1933,
shortly after Hitler came to power, in which he called for tolerance toward the
German ''revolution,'' despite its abuses. Frankfurter saw it as an apology for
Hitler and a lack of sympathy for the Jews. He was so angry that he broke all
connection with Lippmann. Regardless of the circumstances of the case or the
merits of his action, this was a significant event. Lippmann could hardly not
have remembered it. With a little trepidation I confronted him with
Frankfurter's own account of the episode. He seemed a bit annoyed, though not
surprised, and said that Frankfurter always dramatized things. He would pursue
the subject no further.

I now realized that though this was a subject he might not want to confront, I
had to. This went beyond the realm of the ''personal.'' I had to write about the
Jewish issue not because Lippmann was Jewish, but because - as I learned from
this and other episodes - it aroused his deepest feelings. It affected the kind
of person he became, and even his approach to political issues. There was no way
I could not deal with it. In doing so, I hoped only that I did him no injustice.

If Lippmann was not a confiding man by nature, neither was he an outgoing one.
While cordial, he was not easily approachable, especially as he grew older, and
we kept a polite but friendly distance from one another. Perhaps that is the
only way it could have been. I was, after all, prying into his life, evoking
people and events long forgotten and emotions long repressed. We were colleagues
in a mutual endeavor, and also adversaries. Any closer relationship would have
made it hard for me to be objective. I might have been tempted to make excuses
for him, fill in blanks, give too many benefits of the doubt.

It might seem that it is a wonderful break for a biographer to know the subject
of his work. In a way it is. But in another way it complicates things. An
intruder steps between the writer and his work, an intruder who can't easily be
chased away because he, as subject, has every right to be there. There were
times when I actually tried to avoid Lippmann so that I could see him as someone
other than the person across the table. This was not always easy, for once he
retired from doing his column, time hung heavy on his hands. He no longer had
the energy to write another book, and the people who used to besiege him with
invitations or requests had stopped calling. From his office where the telephone
now rarely rang, Lippmann would call me often to lunch with him. It gave a shape
to the day of a man who had once thought that each day was too short.

Although I spent a considerable amount of time with him, there was much he would
not tell me. Often these were the things that mattered most. Not what he thought
about ''issues,'' but how he felt about the most important choices he had made:
to marry his first wife, to leave her 20 years later for another woman, to use
the greater part of his remarkable talents analyzing the headlines of the day
and the antics of the momentarily mighty. He did not want to talk about
questions like that. I am not sure that he even wanted to think about them. If
so, he did not want to share those thoughts with me or anyone else. I can
understand that, but I am sorry he did not put them to paper.

There was another man behind the self-confident monument the world knew. But to
find him I would need the help of others. The interviews I held with his friends
and associates were sometimes illuminating, more often frustrating. Some
sincerely wanted to help me understand him, others seemed to think they were
doing him a favor by being obtuse. There were some people I wanted to shake and
say: ''You know what really happened. Tell me.''

From the beginning I knew I must talk to his second wife, Helen. For a long time
I held off, not wanting to give him the impression that I was going behind his
back. Then as his health began to fail quickly and markedly, I felt I should no
longer delay. But it was she who made the first move. As he languished in his
nursing home, she told me that the time had come for us to talk. ''I know you've
heard about how Walter and I came to love each other, of our double divorces and
the scandal that ensued,'' she said to me one afternoon over tea at their
apartment in Manhattan. ''And I know that you must write about it. That is why
it is important that you understand exactly how it all happened.''

She then proceeded to relate the dramatic story of how these two old friends
fell in love, left their spouses, fled from New York to Washington and embarked
upon a new life together. I realized not only from her but from his own writings
how that second marriage restored his belief in his own emotions and in a real
sense saved his life. From the love letters she let me read - letters he had
written her during the exuberant, anxious months of their affair and in the
interval while waiting for their divorces - I saw a different Walter Lippmann
from the one he had shown to the world, or that I was even sure existed. Here
was a Lippmann who could be lyrical, passionate, awkward and even a little bit
absurd. Here was a man who, at the age of 48, wrote love letters as rapturous
and repetitive as those of any teen-ager. The excitement he felt infused even
his writings about politics during that period. Helen Lippmann helped me glimpse
a man no one but she really knew. I felt a deep gratitude to this complex, often
difficult woman for her confidence in letting me use this intensely personal
material in the way I thought best.

If I never grew really close to Walter Lippmann, I nonetheless came to respect
him enormously for his intelligence, his integrity and his decency. He was a man
who, in his 80's, could still be outraged by folly, and who, despite all the
public idiocies he had witnessed, did not become cynical. Even when I grew
exasperated with him for a judgment made or an action taken, I could not forget
that he never stopped trying to make men listen to reason or believing that they
could be made better.

I had hoped that he would not ask to see the drafts of my book. And he did not,
except once, just a few months before he died. Surprisingly, he was not
interested in what I thought of his opinions of the great political issues he
had been involved in, or of the monumental egos he had observed. The only thing
he cared to see was what I had written about his time at Harvard. He wanted, in
those last days, to evoke the moments of his own spring - when William James
came knocking on his door to introduce himself to the Yard's brightest
sophomore, when the fearsome Santayana invited him to dinner and made him blush
with terrible gossip of the philosophy faculty, when he himself hovered between
the pre-Raphaelite estheticism of the Circolo Italiano and the earnest moral
endeavor of the Socialist Club. B Y the time he died in 1974 Lippmann had, I
think, long since made his peace with himself and was willing to let others make
their judgments as they would. He did not seem particularly concerned with
posterity. He had done the best he could, and beyond that no one could ask more.

What he taught me is that one can be a part of one's time without surrendering
to it, that even accomplishments such as his are three parts hard work to one
part genius, and that the greatest pitfall is not worldly fame but ceasing to
care about making a difference. He was very much like his youthful hero, H. G.
Wells, of whom he once wrote, he ''seemed to win by a constant renewal of effort
in which he refused to sink either into placid acceptance of the world, or into
self-contained satisfaction with his vision.'' That was the Walter Lippmann I
came most to admire, a man who made a very long journey -one of endless
discoveries.

''The Biographer as Detective,'' an essay by Ronald Steel in the July 21 Book
Review, was not properly credited. It was adapted from a lecture in a series on
the art and craft of American biography, held at the New York Public Library and
sponsored by the Book-of-the-Month Club.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

''The Biographer as Detective,'' an essay by Ronald Steel in the

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter Lippmann in 1969 (NYT/George Tames); Photo of Walter
and Helen Lippmann in 1940 (Page 16)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUSES' ROLE IN ARMS DEBATED AS 'STAR WARS' FUNDS ARE SOUGHT

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 3477 words


Spurred by the Reagan Administration's project to develop a shield against
nuclear missiles, military research is returning in force to top universities,
reviving a heated debate over the universities' proper role in developing
weapons systems.

But even as the debate is waged, hundreds of researchers are racing to claim a
share of more than $600 million that the Strategic Defense Initiative,
informally called ''Star Wars,'' is expected to spend at American universities
over the next five years. At the downtown Washington headquarters for the
project, proposals from campus scientists seeking research money are piled high
against a back wall - more than 1,000 applications in all.

'Everyone Wants to Get Involved'

''Virtually everyone, on every campus, wants to get involved,'' said James A.
Ionson, the ebullient Administration official in charge of organizing
universities into about a dozen research consortiums to tackle specific problems
for the project. ''There will be many, many Manhattan projects in this.''

Comparisons with the supersecret Manhattan Project that developed the atomic
bomb 40 years ago have only fueled the debate on many campuses. At the
University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, one of the nation's top research
centers, 57 professors in the physics department signed a petition last week to
boycott the program, calling it ''deeply misguided, dangerous, and enormously
expensive.'' Similar movements are afoot at the University of California at
Berkeley, Cornell University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Concerns on Academic Freedom

Some academics concede that their opposition to the project is primarily
political. But even scientists and university officials who say they have no
ideological objections to the Administration's plan wonder whether, over the
long term, participating in the project and other military programs could
jeopardize their academic freedom and ultimately harm basic research efforts.

Among the concerns are these:

* Researchers are increasingly worried that key elements of their work for the
antimissile project will ultimately be classified, thus threatening their rights
to publish research findings and exchange those findings with colleagues around
the world. Reagan Administration officials dismiss those worries as unfounded,
insisting that little of the work will be subject to publication controls and
that sensitive projects will be quickly moved off campus.

* Several top academic officials have accused Administration officials of
misrepresenting university participation in an effort to sell the project to
Congress. The strongest attack came last month, when Paul E. Gray, president of
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, charged that the involvement of some
M.I.T. professors in the research, though limited, was being cited by the
Administration in a ''manipulative effort to garner implicit institutional
endorsement'' of the project.

* Other academics are afraid that drawing such a large part of the nation's
leading scientific talent into a single military project could lead to neglect
of other important research. ''The infusion of such a large amount of money,''
said Marvin L. Goldberger, president of the California Institute of Technology,
''can distort activities within the university. It can draw people into research
areas they might not otherwise pursue.'' Others worry that universities will
overcommit resources to the project, only to find themselves in trouble as
support for it waxes and wanes on Capitol Hill.

Legacy of Vietnam War

Military research, of course, is hardly new to university laboratories. But much
of it, including nearly all classified work, was chased off many campuses during
the Vietnam War. Pentagon officials say that in the years since, research in
critical military technologies suffered.

Now, they say, the Pentagon is again a welcome research sponsor. Officials of
the antimissile project have already formed a half-dozen research consortiums,
pooling academic talents in the design of super-fast computers, the development
of enormously complex battle management software and the construction of
compact, lightweight power supplies for laser stations in space.

But academia's embrace of military research is hardly limited to the antimissile
project. Scores of universities have delved into a variety of other key Pentagon
projects. In the shield research and the other programs, scientists say they are
drawn partly by the availability of funds, but also by the chance to tackle some
of the most pressing scientific projects of the decade.

At Carnegie-Mellon University, the computer science faculty is deeply involved
in the $100 million Software Engineering Institute, being financed by the Air
Force to solve critical problems in the writing of computer programs. And at the
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, one of the few major research
institutions still willing to perform classified work on campus, Department of
Defense financing for a number of projects accelerated so fast that researchers
moved into a six-story laboratory that was still under construction.

''There are still people at some universities who will tell you that the
presence of a D.O.D. dollar is evil,'' said George A. Keyworth 2d, President
Reagan's science adviser, who is a strong advocate of a tighter link between the
military and academia, adding, ''You still see vestiges of that in anachronistic
corners of the country, like Cambridge,'' the Massachusetts city, home to
Harvard and M.I.T., where citizens tried unsuccessfully two years ago to ban all
nuclear research.

''But,'' he said, ''I don't think that the majority feels that way.''
Classification of Work And Effect on Discourse If the current debate about
campus military research had a starting place, it was a large hotel ballroom in
New Carrollton, Md., a suburb of Washington, on a warm day at the end of March.
Almost 300 college deans and scientists gathered for the first formal
description of the remarkably varied antimissile research projects open to
university laboratories.

Dr. Keyworth remembers the day as a turning point in government-university
relations. ''I was astonished when I went out to talk to those people,'' he
recalled in a recent interview. ''I was not prepared for the size and breadth of
the representation, or for the enthusiasm and depth of interest those deans
brought to the project.''

Some participants, however, recall emerging with more questions than answers,
particularly on classified research. On most campuses, classified work is either
banned or relegated to off-campus institutes, like M.I.T.'s Lincoln
Laboratories. Most of the work the Defense Department has traditionally
sponsored on campuses is for basic research: fundamental work in pure or
theoretical science that has no direct relationship to the development of
weapons systems. Almost none of it carries restrictions on publication of
results or discussion of ideas with colleagues and students, considered a
cornerstone of academic freedom.

Would these freedoms apply to the shield project's ''mission oriented'' research
on campus? ''We are treating this just like basic research,'' Mr. Ionson said in
an interview soon after the meeting. ''There is no intent for any of this work
to be classified.''

But other statements made by Mr. Ionson and his colleagues have left academics
unsure. Project officials have urged scientists involved in the research
consortiums, who are called ''principal investigators,'' to hold security
clearances, so that they understand what research areas are classified and
should be avoided, particularly by graduate students. In April, Mr. Ionson said
that in some cases the Government might restrict the publication of such details
on performance as descriptions of the exact accuracy or power of a laser beam
used to destroy an enemy missile.

''Any principal investigator knows how to slant a paper to make it
unclassified,'' Mr. Ionson said, explaining how university researchers could
avoid running afoul of Defense Department censors. ''Anyone can publish on how
something works,'' he added. ''How well it works, that's the only classified
part.'' He said scientists would not object to those ground rules.

But he said in an interview last week that university work would be limited to
fundamental research and that performance details would go ''beyond their
contract.''

Many scientists argue that basic findings and performance details are often
inseparable. Some of those applying for the research grants, who insisted on
anonymity so as not to jeopardize their chances of getting them, express fear
that the project officials may be enticing them into the research with promises
of complete academic freedom that the officials will later be unable to fulfill.

''It may be unclassified right now,'' said Dorothy Nelkin, a professor of
science, technology and society at Cornell who has examined the rush for
Pentagon funds. ''But when the work becomes interesting, I can't imagine
classification won't be imposed. And then it is too late for the institutions to
back out.'' Others cite the Pentagon's recent efforts to bar some unclassified
papers from presentation at a Washington conference.

''This all has the potential of becoming exceedingly awkward for the
universities,'' said Kenneth A. Smith, the associate provost and vice president
for research at M.I.T. ''Unfortunately, so far the Pentagon and the S.D.I.
office has done nothing to allay our fears.''

Reagan Administration officials counter that university researchers
misunderstand their role in the project. ''The vast majority of S.D.I. in toto
is not classified,'' said Dr. Keyworth. ''In any case, the components that we
look to universities to provide are new ideas, new concepts, fundamental
research.'' As soon as the work takes a sensitive turn, he said, it will be
turned over to a private contractor or a Federal laboratory. Universities, with
their tradition of openness and a plethora of foreign students, ''are hardly an
appropriate environment'' for classified work, he said.

University officials question whether researchers can be changed midstream so
easily.

Administration officials point to a Pentagon directive issued last summer
instructing that ''no restrictions may be placed upon the conduct or reporting
of fundamental research that has not received national security
classification.'' Some academics note, however, that this does not prevent the
Defense Department from classifying research once it begins to yield results.

The Pentagon has been treading lightly in other fields, however. ''I think the
Defense Department understands that it cannot develop a history of marching in
on successful research and classifying after the fact,'' said Donald Kennedy,
president of Stanford University, who is co-chairman of a panel of Pentagon and
academic officials that deals with such issues. ''Obviously, if that happened,
we would quickly develop antibodies to that kind of research.'' Some See a
Threat To Other Research Another fear is that universities will quickly grow
overdependent on research funds provided through the project.

''The problem is that it throws the balance of science research all out of
whack,'' said Mr. Kennedy, who has also voiced similar concerns about university
ties to industry. The danger with the relatively abundant Defense Department
grants is twofold, he and others maintain, in that they can lure scientists away
from both basic research and research in other fields.

The largest underwriter of university research is the Department of Health and
Human Services, which accounts for nearly half the Government-sponsored research
and development at universities. Its work includes all research financed by the
National Institutes of Health.

But statistics from the National Science Foundation appear to support assertions
that universities are growing increasingly dependent on the Defense Department.
Financing from other agencies that were mainstays of scientific research in the
1970's - the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and the Department of Agriculture - has leveled off or declined.
Meanwhile, Pentagon spending on campuses has grown to $930 million in the 1985
fiscal year, an 89 percent increase over the $495 million the Pentagon spent in
1980, while Health and Human Services' increase over that period was 34 percent.

Counting approximately $230 million spent off-campus at M.I.T.'s Lincoln
Laboratories, Pentagon university spending now exceeds that of the National
Science Foundation, traditionally the largest underwriter for nonmedical
research.

Most of the Pentagon's research and development money goes to the development of
specific weapons systems, mostly done by industry, and this year it expects to
spend about $2.7 billion, more than triple the $898 million of 1983. By the
Pentagon's own estimate, basic research, which was 6 percent of the total
research and development budget two decades ago, accounts for less than 3
percent today. Thus, scientists say it is clear that their projects have a far
better chance of Pentagon contracts if the work is likely to lead to a specific
weapons system.

''Is it worrisome?'' asked Leo Young, who directs the Pentagon's campus
spending. ''Absolutely. But we need weapons, and it is hardly surprising that at
a time you are building up for weapons systems, basic research gets short
shrift.''

Already, Mr. Young added, the Defense Department is moving to counter the trend.
In its current budget, it has proposed a ''University Research Initiative,''
totaling $175 million over three years, to pay for special fellowships and
strengthen fundamental research. But academics say the program will be swamped
by the huge influx of Strategic Defense Initiative funds.

The project's funds for university research fall under the budget category for
highly applied research. But Mr. Ionson say that it is really ''mission-oriented
basic research,'' which is close to pure basic research.

''The difference is this,'' he said recently. ''A basic researcher can get in
his car and drive wherever he wants. A mission-oriented researcher gets in his
car and goes to Florida - because we need to get to Florida. Whether he takes
Interstate 95 or U.S. 1 is his choice.'' Universities' Worries On Politics of
Plan Even before Congress began serious deliberations on the budget for the
antimissile project this spring, project officials were already seeking
proposals from scientists, reversing the usual sequence of events. ''It's
probably something that's never been done,'' Mr. Ionson was quoted as saying in
the journal Science, which is widely read in academia. ''But this office is
trying to sell something to Congress. If we can say that this fellow at M.I.T.
will get money to do such and such research, it's something real to sell. That
in and of itself is innovative.''

That comment, officials on several campuses say, touched off perhaps the hottest
debate surrounding university participation in the project: whether doing
antimissile research constitutes an endorsement of the project.

Universities ''have been entrusted with certain resources by society, and we
should not be using them to influence social policy,'' Mr. Gray, the M.I.T.
president, said recently. He said Mr. Ionson's comments showed that the
Administration was ''trying to nudge us out of the middle.''

Mr. Ionson, who is an astrophysicist, said last week, ''I could care less about
institutional endorsement,'' explaining that he was simply trying to show
Congress that many researchers had ''good ideas for good science'' that deserved
financial support.

In announcing the first university consortiums in April, the Defense Department
listed a host of ''participating institutions,'' although only one or two
researchers were involved on many campuses. That led to the charges that the
universities were being manipulated for political purposes. ''It was a case of
poor wording on our part,'' said Col. Lee De Lorme, a project spokesman. ''It
gave the impression that the consortium was larger than it was. But that has
been corrected.''

University officials say their decisions whether to accept money for any
research are made on scientific grounds, regardless of the sponsor. But both
academics and project officials admit privately that politics may play a large
role in the shield project. Scientists on several campuses say that the shield
is essentially a weapons system, with offensive capabilities as well as
defensive ones, and assert that universities are no place to design instruments
of destruction. Mr. Ionson counters that the shield is different because it
seeks to eliminate the threat of nuclear weaponry, and that scientists who share
that goal will embrace the project.

''This whole bit that university scientists are against S.D.I. is a lot of
propaganda,'' he said. Much of the opposition, he said, has come from ''Nobel
laureates who say S.D.I. is impossible.'' But, he said, ''a Nobel laureate in
molecular genetics knows nothing about problems of plasma physics. Nothing.
Nothing at all.'' The Union of Concerned Scientists, long a critic of the
defensive shield project, asserts that universities are not critical enough.
Howard Riss, the group's executive director, said ''you can basically see the
universities becoming another Congressional district'' as the Administration
seeks support for the program. ''When scientists discover that S.D.I. is not
such a good idea,'' he said, ''it will be difficult to turn off the faucet.''
Campus-Pentagon Ties Beyond Antimissile Plan The shield project is the biggest
but hardly the only example of the Pentagon's tightening link with university
researchers. The Georgia Tech Research Institute, on the campus of the Georgia
Institute of Technology, is to carry out about $60 million in sponsored research
this year, 80 percent of it Government financed. The flow of Defense Department
research funds to the campus has increased ninefold since 1976, spurred greatly
by the institute's willingness to take on classified work. Unlike most
universities, it even lets students obtain security clearances to participate in
the work. ''It's just another union card,'' said James C. Wiltse, associate
director of the institute.

The university takes few foreign students, in part, officials say, so that its
classified work is not jeopardized. Joseph M. Pettit, the university president,
says the school's role in academia is unusual. ''We have career-oriented
students here - they tend to be less ivory tower,'' he said, with a ''different
view of the world'' than those in the humanities and social sciences. ''They
don't worry about what is the academy and what is pure research,'' he said. And
in time even classified research will enter the public domain, he said, noting
that radar technology was classified until the end of World War II.

Other schools are pushing harder than ever for Pentagon contracts. Universities
that sought the $100 million Software Engineering Institute hired lobbyists and
made elaborate presentations at the Pentagon.

At Carnegie-Mellon, which won the institute, officials say it will be separate
from the university, but on the central campus. While school officials say they
will do almost no classified work, they say some professors will hold security
clearances ''at the highest levels'' so that they can review the Pentagon's most
pressing software problems.

''It would be nice, of course, if we could avoid all classified data,'' said
Angel Jordan, the school's provost, who himself will hold one of the top
clearances. ''But that would mean not being able to see some of the data that is
on the cutting edge.'' The school took pains to assure that there were no
restrictions on its publication rights, he said.

But a copy of Carnegie-Mellon's contract, made public by the Air Force, raises
question about the extent of that freedom. It specifies that ''distribution will
not be made of technical data'' that either the contractor or the Government
find ''to have classified or potentially classified military end-item
applications.'' In case of doubt, it continues, Carnegie-Mellon must obtain
Pentagon permission for publication.

''That is a very, very dangerous clause,'' said Prof. Lincoln Wolfenstein of
Carnegie-Mellon. ''The general freedom of this campus will not be aided,'' he
said, expressing fears that the Pentagon will be determining the school's
research agenda, while teaching will be neglected.

Professor Jordan responded, ''The majority of the faculty support this, and so
do the students.'' He said Professor Wolfenstein and others really objected to
the institute ''on moral grounds, and this is not a moral issue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Ionson (page A12)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WAR LAW PACT FACES OBJECTION OF JOINT CHIEFS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 21


The Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended against United States ratification of
internationally agreed revisions of the 1949 Geneva Conventions on treatment of
combatants and war victims, according to Administration officials.

The intent of the revisions is to enhance humane treatment of combatants and
civilians during war. But the main concern of the Joint Chiefs is that the
revisions, or protocols, as they are known, would have the effect of
legitimizing national liberation movements and terrorists, granting them
combatant and prisoner-of-war status.

While the matter is still under review elsewhere in the Administration, the
prevailing view among officials is that President Reagan is unlikely to
recommend Senate ratification of the protocols dealing with warfare in the face
of such objections by the military. #40 Nations Ratify Protocols The Carter
Administration signed the two protocols in 1977 with the understanding that a
decision on ratification would await a formal study by the Joint Chiefs. Over
100 nations have signed the protocols, and more than 40 have ratified them.
Signing obligates a nation to act in accordance with the treaty, but only formal
ratification gives the treaty legal force.

State Department officials said that Denmark and Norway had ratified the
protocols and that Britain, West Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands
were moving toward ratification. The officials said they did not expect France
to ratify Protocol I and did not expect Israel to ratify either Protocol I or
Protocol II.

Protocol I deals with international armed conflicts and Protocol II with
noninternational conflicts. The Administrations's problems are with Protocol I,
which would give regional political groups such as the Organization of African
Unity the authority to judge whether liberation movements such as the African
National Congress are legitimate parties to an armed conflict and thus grant
their fighters the same measure of legal protection as a nation's soldiers.

Wording Is Faulted

Critics contend that other provisions in Protocol I defining what is combat and
what is a soldier are worded so vaguely that the distinctions between guerrillas
and regular soldiers would be blurred. As a result, these critics say,
guerrillas could claim the same protection granted regular prisoners of war and
thus avoid prosecution under the criminal laws of a sovereign nation for what
might otherwise be considered terrorist acts.

Officials said the Joint Chiefs had delayed coming to grips with the protocols
because of the lengthy and complicated legal text, the cumbersome military
bureaucracy and the fact that until the most recent encounters with terrorists,
the issue was low on the list of Administration priorities. The question that
Administration officials say they are now wrestling with is whether the concerns
of the Joint Chiefs and others can be eliminated by ratification with
reservations or whether Protocol I in particular is inherently flawed.

To officials involved in the Administration's review of the protocols, the
decision on ratification raises one of the most difficult and basic issues of
the international law of war - the rights of innocent civilians as against the
rights of and pressures from liberation movements. Added to this are the
problems of balancing potentially helpful parts of a treaty against potentially
dangerous precedents and complications.

The Pentagon, State Department and other agencies have yet to take positions on
the protocols. But officials said that the Administration had informed the
International Committee of the Red Cross, under whose auspices the conference to
negotiate the protocols was held from 1974 to 1977, that the decision would be
made ''in a matter of weeks'' and that the Administration had ''grave problems''
with the documents.

'A Proterrorist Treaty'

Perhaps the most powerful argument against ratification on any terms comes from
a commentary to be published soon by Douglas J. Feith, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Negotiations Policy and the key official in the
Pentagon on this issue.

He writes of Protocol I, ''It amounted to an endorsement, in the politically
potent form of a legal instrument, of both the rhetoric and the anticivilian
practices of terrorist organizations that fly the banner of
self-determination.'' He calls it ''a proterrorist treaty masquerading as
humanitarian law.''

His commentary was not formally approved by the Pentagon as an official
statement of its position, but officials there said it did represent the
thinking of senior Pentagon policy makers.

Other Administration officials are said to acknowledge the problems raised by
Mr. Feith, but are looking into the possiblity of fixing them by approving the
protocols with reservations. The reservations would specifically reject the
objectionable provisions.

These officials maintain that the bulk of the protocols are worth salvaging
because of provisions that would strengthen extradition and prosecution of
terrorists, and attach legal teeth and consequences to taking hostages and using
force indiscriminately.

Missing G.I.'s a Factor

One reason the Carter Administration agreed to sign in 1977 before these issues
were fully discussed was that the protocols would also strengthen the right to
search for and be given information about Americans missing in action in
Vietnam. Another was powerful pressure from the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which won approval in the protocols for added protections for its
medical personnel.

The laws of war are generally grouped under the Hague Convention of 1907, which
limited means and methods of warfare such as weapons and targets, and the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949, which mandated humane treatment of the sick and
wounded in the field and at sea, for prisoners of war and for civilians.

Delegates from almost all nations gathered in Geneva in 1974 for what was called
the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflict. Several national liberation
movements such as the African National Congress, which opposes the South African
Government, and the Palestine Liberation Organization also took part but did not
vote.

New Power for Regional Groups

The conference, which lasted nearly four years, produced two protocols, adding
up to 121 pages of text.

Article 1 of Protocol I says that the provisions apply to nations and
''peoples'' who ''are fighting against colonial domination and alien occupation
and against racist regimes in the exercise of their right of
self-determination.'' The protocol also provides that regional political
organizations, such as the League of Arab States and the Organization of African
Unity, will judge which ''peoples'' constitute a legitimate party to armed
struggle.

Mr. Feith, in his commentary, argues that this would abolish the traditional
definition of international conflicts as being between two or more sovereign
nations by giving regional political groups the right to confer on national
liberation movements the trappings of sovereignty.

'Fatal Political Concession'

Some Administration officials say that this defect can be overcome by a
reservation stating that the United States reserves the right to apply or not
apply the provisions to any group.

Mr. Feith counters in his commentary that not applying the provisions would only
weaken international law generally. He further contends that whatever the legal
applicability, the protocol language constitutes a ''fatal political
concession'' to liberation and terrorist groups.

Article 43 also represents a serious problem for critics of Protocol I in that
it could be read as conferring prisoner of war status on irregulars or
terrorists. It says that those covered are governments ''or an authority not
recognized by an adverse party.''

This could exempt terrorists, if captured, from prosecution under criminal law
by a sovereign nation. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 confer prisoner of war
status only on regular uniformed combatants whether or not recognized by an
adverse party.

Article 44, in Mr. Feith's view, further blurs the distinction between regulars
and irregulars or guerrillas and between irregulars and noncombatants. It would
do so by weakening the requirements of the Geneva Conventions for combatants to
have a ''fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance,'' namely a uniform,
to carry ''arms openly'' and to conduct ''their operations in accordance with
the laws and customs of war.''

A Matter of Definition

Article 44 recognizes that there are situations where ''owing to the nature of
the hostilities an armed combatant cannot so distinguish himself.'' In these
circumstances he can retain combatant status if he carries arms ''openly.'' But
openly is defined as ''during each mililtary engagement,'' in other words during
an actual attack, or during ''military deployment,'' a vague phrase.

Irregulars, Mr. Feith argues, would obviously seek to conceal themselves from
regular combatants and civilians until the last moment and still retain prisoner
of war status if captured.

In their 106-page study of the protocols delivered to Defense Secretary Caspar
W. Weinberger two weeks ago, the Joint Chiefs listed other concerns.

One section of Protocol I bars reprisals against civilians, and the Joint Chiefs
were not sure they wanted to abandon this possibility in retaliation against
attacks on American civilians. Another section would prohibit attacks on nuclear
power plants, dikes and dams, and here again the Chiefs hesitated to approve.

The study, officials said, recommends against ratification of Protocol I and
approval of Protocol II with revisions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NIXON SAYS HE CONSIDERED USING ATOMIC WEAPONS ON 4 OCCASIONS

BYLINE: By United Press International

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 419 words


Former President Richard M. Nixon said in an interview published yesterday that
he considered using nuclear weapons four times during his Presidency, including
a ''massive escalation'' to end the Vietnam War.

In the interview on nuclear diplomacy, which marked the 40th anniversary of the
bombing of Hiroshima, Mr. Nixon told Time magazine he believes the world is
safer now than in 1945, and ''the Bomb made us a world power.''

Mr. Nixon, President from 1969 to 1973 and Vice President from 1953 to 1961,
also called Nikita Krushchev, the former Soviet leader, ''the most brilliant
world leader I have ever met.''

Mr. Nixon said the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, when Krushchev backed down in the
face of a superior United States nuclear arsenal, marked a turning point in
atomic diplomacy by prompting a Soviet buildup that gave Moscow nuclear parity.

One of Mr. Nixon's top priorities upon taking office, he said, was bringing an
end to the Vietnam war while seeking improved relations with the Soviet Union.

''One of the options was the nuclear option, in other words, massive escalation:
either bombing the dikes or the nuclear option,'' Mr. Nixon said.

He said he rejected both a nuclear attack and a bombing of the dikes in North
Vietnam, where he estimated a million people would have drowned.

Risks to Escalation

He also said conventional weapons could have accomplished the same military
objectives as nuclear arms, and that ''massive escalation would have destroyed
any chances for moving forward with the Soviets and China.''

Mr. Nixon said he also considered using nuclear weapons when the Soviets
threatened to intervene in the Middle East in the 1973 Arab-Israeli war and that
it was his decision to order Unnited States nuclear forces on alert.

The third consideration of nuclear options came in an intensification of the
Soviet-Chinese border dispute. Mr. Nixon said the United States indicated to
Moscow it ''would not tolerate'' a move to destroy China's nuclear capability.

The fourth time he considered the nuclear option, Mr. Nixon said, was during the
1971 India-Pakistan war, when the United States was concerned that China might
intervene on the side of Pakistan, triggering a Soviet intervention for India.

Mr. Nixon also said he now favors President Reagan's Strategic Defense
Initiative, popularly known as ''Star Wars.'' He added that he thinks the
strategy of mutually assured destruction is ''obsolete'' and the bombing of
civilian populations is ''morally wrong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SILENCE SEPARATES 2 SHORES, 2 WORLDS ALONG THE MEKONG

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: NONG KHAI, Thailand


The din of daily life in an old Thai river town like this one conceals at first
the silence that has fallen over the Mekong.

At the water's edge, spoons and noodle bowls clank and rattle in rickety
restaurants, while children shriek and splash and women in sarongs call to each
other as they bathe. But beyond, the stillness begins. The Mekong, one of Asia's
great rivers, is wide here, hundreds of yards wide. Few venture very far out
into its waters, because across the river is Laos, whose decade-old Communist
Government has closed the country to the world. Between the cacophony of
Thailand and the soundless blue-green Laotian hills on the other shore there is
now a kind of emptiness.

Separated by a Philosophical Gulf

The sweeping, undulating arc drawn by the river as it passes between Thailand
and Laos has become more than a border separating two nations. It is now also a
political barrier, a philosophical gulf, between traditionally entrepreneurial
Southeast Asian countries and the austere Communist societies of
Vietnamese-dominated Indochina.

Refugees arrive almost daily on Thailand's shores, some on homemade rafts.
Smugglers stock Laotian markets. By night - and sometimes by day, not
necessarily out of sight -agents of insurrection move back and forth in the hope
of disrupting each other's countries. On both banks, policemen keep vigil. Ferry
services still run from Nong Khai to Tha Deua on the Laotian side. But though
merchants continue to crisscross the Mekong in limited numbers and though cargo
is still transported by boat, since there are no bridges, tourism has all but
ceased. Foreigners permitted to enter Laos have to go by air.

Towns Touched by Politics

All along the Thai-Laotian border - 600 miles of it defined by the Mekong, from
the village of Chian Khan, west of here, to the town of Khong Chian, downstream
toward Cambodia and the Vietnam delta - towns have been touched by politics.

Pak Chom is one of them. The dusty village of wooden houses and noodle parlors
strung along the river road was a favorite destination of fleeing Laotians until
the local authorities began discouraging landings recently. A visitor wanting to
hear about life across the river could usually find a Laotian family or two
living behind Pak Chom's little police station.

Refugees are eager to turn themselves in to the authorities as quickly as
possible, in the belief that once in police hands - or, even better, in an
official refugee camp or holding center - they will be on their way faster to
new homes in the West. Exiles have been known to pay the police for this
privilege, and the police have been known to turn a blind eye to illegal
immigration as a result.

The Local People Grumble

Many of those who came to Pak Chom in earlier migrations were people from the
hill tribes of Laos, the Hmong predominant among them. More than 50,000
hill-tribe people and their camp-born children live at a sprawling center called
Ban Vinai, south of Pak Chom. Their numbers - and their birth rate - outpace
those in the surrounding Thai countryside, and local people grumble that refugee
life has become too easy.

The Hmong of Ban Vinai - many of whom want to stay in Thailand among Thai hill
tribes because they have heard that life in the West is not all they thought it
might be - are from simple backgrounds, animist in belief and deeply attached to
their traditional terrain.

Histories Sewn Into Cloth

At Ban Vinai, Hmong women embroider the history of their people on colorful
cloth given them by international agencies. For a few dollars, a visitor can
take away a painfully nostalgic portrait in thread of life in a mountain
village. Sometimes the women stitch the creatures of remembered or imagined
forests: tigers, monkeys, elephants and birds.

There are also cloth histories of the flight from Laos: Hmong in their brightly
decorated traditional costumes bobbing in the Mekong's currents, swimming or
clinging to logs. Often in one corner is sewn a Thai police car, cotton lights
flashing.

Just east of Pak Chom, the Mekong is very shallow in the winter and spring dry
season, giving up islands of silt that quickly become meadows if exposed long
enough to airborne seeds. The river's channel shifts from bank to bank, and when
it is far from the Thai shore, people wade or wander onto the spits and islands
to fish or picnic, a practice that has been abandoned as risky in some other
places. The voices of Laotians on the other bank can be heard as they, too, fish
and bathe and relax.

'Same People, Same Culture'

''It is sad, really sad,'' a Thai living along the river said. ''These people
are the same as we are; there are families on both sides.''

Across the river in Vientiane, a visitor to the Laotian capital hears the theme
repeated: ''Same people, same language, same religion, same culture.'' Sometimes
the political twist comes in the afterthought:

''We Thai and Lao are like brothers,'' a Laotian official told a reporter. Then
he added, gesturing toward the river, ''That makes them dangerous.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of boy making rice cakes (NYT/Jim Wilson); photo of shoreline
(NYT/Jim Wilson); photo of fishermen along shoreline (NYT/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IMPACT OF AIDS: PATTERNS OF HOMOSEXUAL LIFE CHANGING

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 2062 words


Four years since the public first became aware of AIDS, the lethal viral disease
has brought profound changes to the lives of homosexual men in New York.

It has had a pervasive effect on homosexual life styles, relationships, sexual
patterns and self-images. Many believe the changes to be permanent, and some
feel that the disease has led to a redefinition of contemporary homosexual life.

Successive stages of panic and apathy about AIDS have seized homosexuals since
1981. The years have taken their toll. ''I think the gay community is still
reeling from the devastation of this disease,'' said Dr. Stuart E. Nichols Jr.,
a psychiatrist at Beth Israel Medical Center who has treated and studied AIDS
patients since 1981. ''It's a personal disease for any gay man, and the ability
to deny is not there anymore for the majority of gays.''

Death at an Early Age

For many, it has entailed the emotional cost of repeatedly coming to terms with
death at an early age. ''A man I know said to me today, 'I know 150 people
who've died of AIDS' - 150 people!'' said Larry Kramer, author of ''The Normal
Heart,'' an Off Broadway play about AIDS.

''Most soldiers in Vietnam didn't know 150 people who died,'' Mr. Kramer said.
''My mother is 86, and she doesn't know 150 people who've died. I counted 50
people I knew who died by 1983, and then I stopped counting.'' Currently AIDS,
acquired immune deficiency syndrome, is the leading cause of death among men
aged 25 to 44 in New York City, supplanting the usual causes in this age group
such as suicide, accident and homicide. According to the City Health Department,
3,926 cases of AIDS have been reported in the city, 59 percent of them among
homosexual or bisexual men; most of the rest come from a variety of risk groups,
including intravenous drug users and the sex partners or children of those who
have AIDS. Since 1978, 2,033 of the AIDS victims in the city have died - 52
percent of the reported cases.

'Best of Times, Worst of Times'

Some of those interviewed, like Mr. Kramer, are despairing when asked for their
overview of attitudes among the city's homosexuals in the wake of AIDS. Other
assessments are more measured. ''To paraphrase Dickens, it's the best of times
and the worst of times,'' said Richard Dunne, executive director of the Gay
Men's Health Crisis, a nonprofit social-service agency in Manhattan that
provides support services for AIDS patients.

He explained: ''It's the worst of times because so many people are dying before
their time, or living in fear of dying. But it's the best of times because so
many people in the gay community have coalesced. I find people touching more and
calling up people they haven't talked to in a long time - sometimes with a sense
of dread, I'll tell you.''

Changes in Sexual Activiy

Many of those interviewed agreed that AIDS has led to change in several areas,
including modifications in sexual activity, a trend toward long-term
relationships and a realignment in relation to the nonhomosexual part of the
community. However, such changes have been complex, said Dr. Emery S. Hetrick,
an assistant professor of clinical psychiatry at New York University Medical
Center. He is a member of the State Task Force on Gay and Lesbian Issues
appointed by Governor Cuomo.

It is hard to generalize about ''extremely diverse'' people, he said, noting
that the impact of AIDS is only one aspect of life among homosexuals of
different ages, social class and ethnicity.

''Many people have limited having sex to one's life partner, or are practicing
'safe sex,' '' said Dr. Hetrick. He was referring to techniques such as limiting
the number of sexual partners; using prophylactics and avoiding exchanges of
body fluids that have been linked with transmission of the virus that is
believed to cause AIDS; getting regular physicians' checkups, and avoiding drugs
that suppress the body's immune system or reduce inhibitions about high-risk
sexual behavior.

Dr. Hetrick emphasized, though, that sexual patterns were varied before the
advent of AIDS. ''A number of men were extremely sexually promiscuous, and a
proportion engaged in acts that could be dangerous,'' he said. ''But a sizable
number had been in stable relationships, and were not at risk at all. Some
others were in primarily stable relationships, with perhaps an occasional trip
to the baths.''

Both public health experts and homosexuals have reported that the level of
casual or promiscuous sex has declined, though few reliable statistics are
available. ''My sense is that fear has been a real stimulus in causing a change
in sexual behavior,'' said Dr. David J. Sencer, the City Health Commissioner. He
added that the rate of sexually transmitted disease in the homosexual population
seems to have declined.

''Three of 12 bathhouses have closed since a year ago - we assume due to lack of
attendance,'' said Marvin Bogner, an assistant health commissioner. Many of the
remaining baths distribute prophylactics and ''safe sex'' guidelines to patrons.

But knowledge of such guidelines has not led to universal compliance. ''Even
with the best of education, we'll still have that group that will say, 'I don't
care,' '' said Dr. Hetrick. ''It's fatalistic, a form of denial. There are some
who have the illness and go to the baths anyway, knowing they're infecting
others. These are people whose emotional investment in sexuality is such an
important part of their identity that they feel hopeless despair about modifying
their behavior.''

Doubts About Promiscuity

Although sexual freedom was an important tenet of homosexual life before AIDS,
promiscuity no longer seems socially acceptable to many of those interviewed.
''I know people who live their lives as if AIDS doesn't exist, and they scare
me,'' said a 36-year-old salesman who lives in Brooklyn and, like some others
who were interviewed, requested anonymity. ''They say, 'I got my motorcycle, my
Batman comic books, I go to the gym and I go to the baths, and that's all I ever
want to do.' ''

''The problem is that safe sex is boring sex,'' said a 32-year-old art director
who lives in Westchester and works on Madison Avenue. ''Sure, lots of people are
re-examining their life style, while at the same time they're wondering, how can
I get away with doing what I used to do?''

Some homosexuals have reacted with resignation. Others have found active ways to
cope with feelings of anxiety. ''It's important for people who are afraid of
AIDS to harness the energy of the fear they feel and direct that energy into
positive community service of some type,'' said Tony Papp, who has been
volunteering for the last year at the Gay Men's Health Crisis office in
Manhattan.

Center Has 1,100 Volunteers

''Volunteering certainly has helped me,'' said Mr. Papp, who is 23 years old,
''although I think there's so much more that I could be doing.''

There are 1,100 volunteers at the agency, which is at 254 West 18th Street.
Financed by private contributions as well by the state and city, the agency has
900 clients now and has had a total of 1,800 since it began. ''That basically
parallels the AIDS fatality numbers,'' Mr. Dunne said.

All those interviewed said that the widely reported panic that crested in 1983
has abated, and that it is no longer common for nonhomosexuals to express fear
that hairdressers or waiters will give them AIDS. But even for many not directly
affected by AIDS or involved in volunteer efforts, the disease has meant a basic
rethinking with respect to people who are not homosexual.

One cause of alienation has been an angry belief among many homosexuals that
government should be devoting more resources to caring for AIDS victims, to
seeking a cure and to educating the public about prevention. This perceived
inaction is variously ascribed to government inertia, hostility toward
homosexuals or outright conspiracy.

Some feel that AIDS has provided a strong motive for a number of homosexuals to
disclose their sexual orientation publicly as a gesture of solidarity with other
homosexuals. But others say it is harder, after AIDS, to admit homosexuality.

''These days you're not just coming out of the closet,'' said a 42-year-old
editor who works in Manhattan, ''but you're dragging a skeleton out of the
closet with you. You're not only asking friends and relatives to accept someone
who is gay, but also to accept someone who may be a carrier.''

''I suppose it's both harder and easier to come out for people my age,'' said
22-year-old Raffi Babakhanian, who works in Manhattan for the Urban Homesteading
Assistance Board. ''It's easier to come out, because there are some more support
groups and social services, but certainly it's harder because people are
frightened of AIDS.''

Not everyone agrees. ''AIDS had no impact on my experience at all,'' said Judge
Richard C. Failla of New York City Criminal Court. He said he first ''went
public'' about his homosexuality two years ago, but there was renewed interest
in May after he mentioned it at his swearing-in ceremony.

''I think society is a heck of a lot more tolerant than most people give it
credit for,'' Judge Failla said of the reaction the May statement. ''I have
gotten more than 200 letters from around the country, and there was not a single
negative piece of mail.''

Many of those interviewed said there has been a new emphasis on deeper, more
long-lasting homosexual relationships. ''I think there are couples who have
stayed together because of AIDS,'' Mr. Dunne said. ''And I think it might be an
incentive to some to work harder to maintain their relationships.''

''Globally,'' Dr. Hetrick said, ''one of the effects has been that now more
people have to learn how to have relationships and how to live together -and
they have to do it sooner.''

Some younger homosexuals have been a part of this trend. ''I feel pressure to
find a stable, caring relationship,'' Mr. Babakhanian said. ''It's pressure from
within, but also I'd feel much more comfortable about the AIDS situation if I
were in a relationship that was monogamous.''

Because of AIDS, young homosexuals are maturing in a different climate than in
previous generations. ''Some teen-agers have had AIDS, and though the numbers
aren't significant yet, it's had an impact,'' said 22-year-old Joseph H. van Es,
who, like Mr. Babakhanian, is a former member of Gay and Lesbian Youth of New
York, a peer-run support group in Manhattan for those under 21.

''Even the hustlers I know are trying to be careful,'' said Michael, an
18-year-old clerk who works in Manhattan. ''O.K., some teen-agers are saying,
'It could never happen to me,' but I'll tell you, I've stopped going to the
piers.''

''Some kids just think they're immortal, and that's why more education about
AIDS among the young is really needed,'' said A. Damien Martin, an associate
professor at the New York University School of Education. He and Dr. Hetrick
founded the Institute for the Protection of Lesbian and Gay Youth, a
three-year-old social service agency in Manhattan.

Efforts to educate young homosexuals about AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases have been a high priority at the institute, which is financed in part
by the State Division for Youth and the City Youth Bureau.

Opinions differ about the lessons that can be drawn from the response to AIDS
and about whether the struggle has transcended traditional divisions among
homosexuals. ''It's a big dark cloud, but there's a real silver lining to it,''
said Judge Failla. ''The community has matured and taken responsibiliity for
itself.''

But Mr. Kramer, a founder of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, said, ''AIDS hasn't
coalesced the gay community one single bit - anyone who claims that is deaf,
dumb and blind.''

He added: ''The gay community is totally and utterly unorganized. We have no
political power in this society, and no lobbying power in Washington. That's
obvious from the response to this horrible disease.''

Mr. Dunne said he found Mr. Kramer's play ''profoundly moving'' but it made him
''profoundly angry.''

''He says there are no heroes,'' Mr. Dunne said. ''But I see them and work with
them all the time - the physicians and nurses and volunteers bearing terrible
burdens, and the people who are dying from AIDS and have been so heroic in the
way they struggle with it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Dunne and volunteer health center workers (NYT/Carl T.
Gossett)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PLANTIFF IN BOSTON LIBEL SUIT DEFENDS 'FLUFF' IN CAMAPAIGN BROCHURE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: DEDHAM, Mass., July 23


John R. Lakian, a former Republican candidate for Governor, testified today in
his libel suit against The Boston Globe that he believed it was ''honest'' for
politicians to exaggerate their credentials.

Mr. Larkian, under cross-examination by a Globe attorney, said he would stand by
his words as quoted in an article in the newspaper about his background in the
1982 primary campaign.

''There's that degree of slight fluff that's put into every candidate's
brochure,'' Mr. Lakian said then. ''The key word there is 'slightly.' You try
and take something that's 100 and make it 102. Now, if you make it 150, you're a
liar.''

With Francis H. Fox, an attorney for The Globe, reading the passage back to him,
Mr. Lakian insisted that he believed ''everybody does it,'' although he had
apologized for his statement at a news conference after the article appeared in
August 1982.

'Some Glitches' in the Article

Mr. Lakian, a 42-year-old businessman, contended in his libel suit that the
article contained ''many false statements of fact'' and ruined his campaign.

Mr. Fox acknowledged in his opening statement July 3 in Norfolk Suprior Court
here that ''there were some glitches, some words were rearranged.'' But he
insisted that the article, written by Walter V. Robinson, regarded as one of the
newspaper's most respected political reporters, was substantially true.

The trial has attracted much attention in Boston, where politics is a local
passion and The Globe has become a dominant voice over the past decade. At the
same time, The Globe is facing its first serious competition in years from The
Boston Herald under the aegis of Rupert Murdoch.

The 1982 article asserted that there was ''a pattern of discrepancies'' between
what Mr. Lakian ''says and what the records show about his upbringing,
schooling, military service and business career.''

Discrepancy Over Father's Death

Mr. Lakian said in his campaign literature, for example, that his father had
been killed in World War II; The Globe article said that, in fact, he died in a
traffic accident after the war.

Mr. Lakian also asserted that he had taken graduate courses at Harvard
University while the news article said he never attended Harvard.

Mr. Lakian said he had been a Republican since 1970, but The Globe said he
became a Republican only in 1980, shortly before his race for the governorship.
The article also said Mr. Lakian had exaggerated the size of his investment
management firm and had falsely claimed to have received a battlefield promotion
in Vietnam.

Mr. Lakian, who was considered to be the front-runner before the article
appeared, finished second in the three-man field, behind John W. Sears. In the
general election, Mr. Sears was defeated by Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic
nominee.

In early testimony, Mr. Robinson conceded that he had made half a dozen minor
errors in quoting from two taped interviews with Mr. Lakian. In one case, Mr.
Robinson inserted a sentence from his own question into Mr. Lakian's response.

Plaintiff's Record Under Scrutiny

Mr. Robinson also said he may have called Mr. Lakian the morning the article
appeared. Mr. Lakian's attorney, Norman Roy Grutman, said Mr. Robinson asked Mr.
Lakian how he liked the article, suggesting that the reporter was ''out to get''
Mr. Lakian.

But Mr. Lakian's record has also come under renewed scrutiny as the trial has
progressed.

For example, Mr. Fox, The Globe's attorney, produced a sworn statement Mr.
Lakian made in 1979 in which he said he had a master's degree from Harvard,
although he had never enrolled in a course there.

''It's a lie!'' the attorney shouted at Mr. Lakian.

''It's a mistake,'' Mr. Lakian responded.

In his early campaign brochures, Mr. Lakian said he received a ''battlefield
promotion'' from second lieutenant to first lieutenant while serving in the Army
after the 1968 Tet offensive in Vietnam. Later, Mr. Lakian told Mr. Robinson
that this was a mistake, that there was no such thing as a battlefield promotion
in Vietnam, and blamed a campaign aide, Roger H. Woodworth, for the error.

But Mr. Woodworth said in court last week that Mr. Lakian had supplied the
information himself.

Under cross-examination today, Mr. Lakian changed his story again and contended
that he had never acknowledged that the claim about a battlefield promotion was
a mistake.

Because of an editing error, a dispatch on Wednesday from Dedham, Mass., about a
libel suit against The Boston Globe, inaccurately described testimony by John R.
Lakian. Mr. Lakian, who sought the Republican nomination for Governor in 1982,
is suing over an article published then by The Globe, which challenged his
assertions about his background. The article quoted him as saying that all
candidates exaggerated their credentials ''slightly.'' Mr. Lakian testified
Tuesday that he had indeed expressed that sentiment in an interview and stood by
it, but he said the quotation and others were not fully or accurately printed by
The Globe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a dispatch on Wednesday from Dedham, Mass., about a
libel suit against The Boston Globe, inaccurately described testimony by John R.
Lakian. Mr. Lakian, who sought the Republican nomination for Governor in 1982,
is suing over an article published then by The Globe, which challenged his
assertions about his background. The article quoted him as saying that all
candidates exaggerated their credentials ''slightly.'' Mr. Lakian testified
Tuesday that he had indeed expressed that sentiment in an interview and stood by
it, but he said the quotation and others were not fully or accurately printed by
The Globe.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET TV GIVES ITS VIEWERS RARE GLIMPSE OF AFGHAN WAR

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 23


For the first time in more than five years of undeclared war, the fighting in
Afghanistan has come into Soviet living rooms on the television evening news.

A two-and-a-half-minute report earlier this month, including what appeared to be
battlefield footage and heroic words from a group of Soviet soldiers, was a far
cry from the daily, detailed and often negative reports from Vietnam that filled
American television screens.

But the fact that the officially controlled television program was showing
burning trucks, explosions and Soviet troops assaulting an unseen enemy raised
eyebrows among Western diplomats here.

A Soviet journalist said he believed that the footage had been filmed in
Afghanistan but that the battle scenes themselves were likely to have been at
least partly staged for the camera.

'Mercenary Bands'

Several days after this report, the evening news again showed Afghanistan, with
a report on a victory by Government forces over ''mercenary bands'' in which
''more than 100 cutthroats were annihilated'' and a large number of Western-made
weapons and much subversive literature seized.

The film footage in this case was limited to a long look at stacks of reportedly
captured weapons.

''This is definitely an escalation of news coverage,'' a Western military
attache said. ''One of the big things the Russians have going for them is that
their own people haven't been seeing the war on television day after day.''

Some Russians attribute the lack of vocal or widespread opposition to the war to
the fact that it remains cloaked in secrecy in Soviet news outlets.

Bad News Rarely Shown

Soviet television programs rarely show negative subjects about the Soviet Union.
But the evening news constantly shows Western film footage of floods, fires and
other disasters outside Soviet borders, as well as demonstrations, riots and
battles in other parts of the world.

Scenes of the conflicts in Central America, taken from Western television
reports, are shown frequently.

A Western diplomat said the Soviet Union's presentation of its own war has been
evolving in the press in a way that acknowledges that Afghanistan has become a
fact of life, though a muted one, in this country.

''There's no way to just pretend it's not there, with more than 100,000 young
men rotating through Afghanistan at any time, and something like 10,000
casualties a year,'' he said.

News Accounts Grow More Frank

Since the fifth anniversary last December of the Soviet sweep into Afghanistan,
the controlled news accounts have grown more frank about the fact that soldiers
are fighting and dying there.

The Soviet forces are invariably referred to as a ''limited contingent'' and
described as fulfilling their ''internationalist duty.''

A few reports of heroism have appeared in recent months in the press, in what
some diplomats see as an indication that the Kremlin does not expect the war to
end soon, and is therefore presenting it as a glorious endeavor.

The three most prominently portrayed Soviet heroes are said to have died on the
battlefield in curiously similar circumstances, by setting off grenades that
killed themselves and their ''bandit'' attackers.

Occasional television reports on Afghanistan have until now focused almost
entirely on Soviet aid projects or on daily life in Kabul.

The new television report, shown early this month, was different.

As automatic weapons rattled, Soviet soldiers dashed from behind armored
vehicles, crouching low, racing past coils of barbed wire to take up positions
on a dry, rocky field.

Soldiers atop an armored personnel carrier fired machine guns. Smoke rose in the
distance. An officer searched the hills with binoculars.

There was no sign of the enemy or of return fire, and it was impossible to tell
if the scene showed a genuine battle or had been staged for television. But the
footage appeared to have been shot in Afghanistan, and its presentation to
Soviet television viewers was that of real battle coverage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 24, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DISEASE IS CITED IN VETERANS' SUIT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


Five Vietnam War veterans from Long Island who say they are suffering from a
parasitic disease endemic to southeast Asia, filed a class-action medical
malpractice suit yesterday against the Veterans Administration.

The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, contended that the
Veterans Administration had failed to properly test, diagnose and treat the
disease, known as filariasis.

The suit seeks to force the Federal agency to provide proper care and treatment
to all Vietnam veterans who are suffering from the disease but does not seek
monetary damages.

Lawyers and doctors for the plaintiffs estimated that anywhere from hundreds to
tens of thousands of Vietnam veterans have the disease, which is caused by worms
carried by infected mosquitoes. The larvae of the worms enter the body's
lymphatic system, causing a chronic swelling of the lymph glands and vessels
that can lead to elephantiasis.

Al Mann, a spokesman for the New York regional office of the Veterans
Administration, would not comment on the case because it was in litigation.

The five plaintiffs are William Hartmann, 39 years old, of Westhampton; Joseph
Bernagozzi, 35, of East Quogue; Joseph Naples, 38, of Babylon; George
Agnostakios, 35, of West Islip, and Charles Arnao, 32, of Selden.

Three of the plaintiffs - Mr. Hartmann, Mr. Bernagozzi and Mr. Naples - are also
seeking $10 million in damages each in malpractice suits filed last March in
Federal District Court in Uniondale, L.I.

Lawyers for the plaintiffs in the new action said it was the first class-action
medical malpractice suit in the nation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnam veterans who filed malpractice suits against the V.A.
(NYT/William E. Sauro)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Many of South Africa's Leaders Were Pro-Nazi

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 369 words


To the Editor:

In denouncing the Senate vote for sanctions against South Africa (page A1, July
12), Senator Barry Goldwater was in error when he stated, ''It is a blight on
the United States for us to take this action against a friend, an ally in every
war we fought.''

Not only was South Africa absent from the Vietnam War, but also hundreds of its
post-World War II leaders in the apartheid government and administration had to
be interned during that war as a threat to the Allied effort. Much information
on the subject may be found in ''The Rise of the South African Reich'' by Brian
Bunting (Penguin African Library, London, 1969) and ''White Laager'' by W. H.
Vatcher (Praeger, New York, 1965).

For instance, H. F. Verwoerd, who was Prime Minister 1958-66, as wartime editor
of Die Transvaler, cheered American defeats and Nazi victories in his newspaper.
On July 13, 1943, Justice Millin stated in South Africa's Supreme Court, ''he
did make his paper a tool of the Nazis in South Africa, and he knew it.''

Verwoerd's successor as prime minister, B. J. Vorster, was a wartime ''general''
in the pro-Nazi terrorist group Die Ossewabrandwag and said in 1942, ''We stand
for Christian Nationalism, which is an ally of German Nazism.'' President P. W.
Botha was during the war a senior official of the Afrikaner National Party,
which South Africa's wartime Prime Minister, Jan Christiaan Smuts, denounced on
March 12, 1942, for its ''deplorable attacks on the Allied powers, including the
U.S.A.''

This is the apartheid party that has ruled South Africa since 1948, and an
examination of the war service of its many hundreds of elected members to the
present day reveals that not more than one or two ever served with the Allies in
World War II, most of them instead either actively or passively supporting
America's Nazi enemies.

The brave South Africans (both white and black) who did loyally serve the Allied
cause in the war are today largely absent from positions of power in their own
country. Senator Goldwater's claim is thus grossly misleading, and can be
directly traced to disinformation by the South African Government in the United
States. LEN CLARKE Uxbridge, England, July 12, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RAIDS REDUCE CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA PLANTING 40%

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: GARBERVILLE, Calif., July 20


Illegal marijuana cultivation in the forested highlands of California's northern
coast has been reduced 40 percent by a two-year campaign of federally financed
helicopter raids against growers, according to police officials.

But the officials concede that many commercial growers forced out of production
here are probably growing marijuana elsewhere in California, or in Oregon,
Washington, Hawaii and other states.

In scenes reminiscent of the Vietnam War, helicopter-borne police officers
wearing fatigues and bulletproof vests and carrying automatic weapons this week
raided dozens of illicit marijuana fields in remote redwood and pine forests
near here, resuming operations that were suspended after last fall's harvest.
They chopped down and burned thousands of marijuana plants.

The raids have aroused high emotion among some residents of the scenic
wilderness region where, after years of setbacks for the local logging and
fishing industries, marijuana has provided the principal cash crop.

Test of Administration Effort

Many residents say the raiders sometimes land on private property without search
warrants, frighten children and animals, spy on them and otherwise violate their
civil rights.

The raids are the most intense effort so far in a program begun by the Reagan
Administration in 1983 to reduce domestic marijuana production.

The Administration has selected the three northern California counties of
Humboldt, Mendocino and Trinity, a largely undeveloped area known locally as the
Emerald Triangle, for a program that consists of helicopter raids each summer
and fall, together with an effort by the Internal Revenue Service and several
Justice Department agencies to put growers out of business by seizing their
land, bank accounts and other property.

Although no one knows the size of the marijuana crop here, many in this
community of 2,000 people say it has been a mainstay of the local economy for at
least a decade, and some police officials estimate its value in the three
counties as at least $500 million annually at wholesale prices.

Growing Began in 60's

According to the authorities, marijuana growing began as a backyard enterprise
pursued by counterculture drifters and dropouts who migrated to the region in
the turbulence of the 1960's and later evolved into large commercial operations.

Vast expanses of pine and redwood forests on private and public land, they say,
have been taken over by marijuana planters, some of whom have killed or injured
hunters, hikers and others who wandered into their plantations.

The region has become the scene of a collision between a community that has come
to rely, directly or indirectly, on marijuana growing and the Government's
efforts to end what it contends is a huge business. Federal investigators say
the existence of the huge commercial industry here hinders Administration
efforts to persuade Mexico and other countries to halt the flow of marijuana
into the United States.

The raids are conducted by the Campaign Against Marijuana Production, or CAMP,
an aggregation of scores of state, local and Federal agencies.

Justice Dept. Coordinates Raids

Five helicopters and several airplanes are used in the program. Raiding parties
include police officers from various cities in California who participate on a
rotating basis for two weeks.

Although local sheriffs are in command of raiding parties in their own counties,
the Federal and State Justice Departments help coordinate the raids and the
prosecution of growers. The Federal Government pays expenses of CAMP, which are
expected to total more than $2.6 million this year.

Merchants, residents and law-enforcement officials concur that plantings of
marijuana have declined substantially this year because of raids over the past
two years. Last year more than a million pounds of marijuana plants valued by
the Government at $320 million were destroyed. #13 Garden Stores Larry Gobin, a
California highway patrol officer, said: ''When I moved here 15 years ago this
was a sleepy little town with fishng, hunting, tourism. Timber was dying off.
Then you got these hippies and flower chldren.''

At first, he said, the newcomers apparently produced marijuana for their own use
only. Later, he said, some became entrepreneurs, and before long ''marijuana had
changed practically everything: we went from one garden supply store here to
13.''

Now, Mr. Gobin said, after two years of CAMP raids, the community seems to be
changing again.

''Forty percent of the people are gone,'' he said. ''There's a lot of houses to
rent, which we haven't had for five years. There's no other reason, except some
of the marijuana growers have given up and left.''

Objections From Residents

Although the raiders this week encountered no resistance from growers, most of
whom were either not at their fields or fled as helicopters arrived, they were
often greeted by residents of mountain communities with cameras who took
photographs in an effort to produce evidence that the raiders were violating a
Federal District Court order last November that prohibits harassment of local
residents., Judge Robert Aguilar in San Jose issued the injunction, which
restricted the flights to a minimum altitude of 500 feet and imposed other
limitations after hearing complaints from residents that the helicopter crews
hovered low over their homes, peered into windows and otherwise kept them under
surveillance for long periods.

Ed Denson, 45 years old, who has 30 acres in nearby Alderpoint where he operates
a company that issues recordings of guitar and banjo music under the Kicking
Mule label, said the CAMP operation had harassed residents indiscriminately. ''I
think they're trying to terrorize everybody, to scare the wits out of the
area,'' he said.

He is a member of the Citizens Observation Group, an organization that is
monitoring the raids this year in an effort to gather evidence that Judge
Aguilar's order is being violated.

Although CAMP officials have said they would not interfere with the citizen
group and that they wanted to be informed of any indiscretions by the raiding
parties, some members of the citizen group were handed subpoenas to appear
before a Federal grand jury investigating the marijuana trade when they showed
up at raiding sites this week. The residents called this ''intimidation'' of
their efforts to detect civil rights violations.

''They don't have that many people in El Salvador to stop Communism,'' one
resident complained at a community meeting near Alderpoint Thursday night.
Another resident said she felt her community was under assault from the air.

Whatever the merits of their arguments, many agree that marijuana growing, so
entrenched in the texture of local life, seems on its way out.

''We believe we're having some effect,'' said Jerry Clemons, a senior California
Department of Justice official, ''but some of the growers are probably in other
counties now. There's just so much money to be made in illegal drugs. It's
astronomical.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mick Mollica (NYT/Terrence McCarthy); photo of Mike Pretzer
(NYT/Terrence McCarthy)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words


SOMETIMES the show doesn't go on quite as scheduled - and everyone has a
wonderful time.

''It was sort of a celebration of what theater is about,'' said Kevin Kline,
describing what happened at last Friday night's performance of ''Arms and the
Man'' at Circle in the Square. ''All of us, audience and actors, colluded in
make-believe.''

The unusual goings-on began backstage during the intermission before Act III,
when Louis Zorich, who plays Maj. Paul Petkoff, became woozy as the result of
some over-zealous gardening in the heat earlier in the day. Tom Brennan, the
understudy, was called in from New Jersey, but had not arrived by the time
members of the audience returned to their seats.

At that point, Mr. Kline, who plays Captain Bluntschli, went out, explained what
was happening and, as he put it, ''compulsively entertained'' - cracking jokes,
making conversation and singing excerpts from ''The Pirates of Penzance.'' After
10 or 15 minutes, Raul Julia, his co-star, also appeared, parodying Mr. Kline
with his version of ''I Am a Pirate King'' and engaging with Mr. Kline in a
two-man comedy routine.

The audience was then asked if there would be any objection to Ted William Sowa,
the stage manager, reading the part, and Mr. Sowa, clad in jeans, came onstage
to begin Act III. He read one scene, and before the next one began, Mr. Brennan
had arrived to take over. By the end of the evening, audience and performers
were applauding each other.

While on the subject of ''Arms and the Man,'' it's definite that John Malkovich,
who directed the production, will also be starring in it as of Aug. 13, when Mr.
Kline leaves. The show, which also stars Glenne Headly, who is Mr. Malkovich's
wife, has been extended to Sept. 1.

Diana Corto, who has sung in several productions of ''West Side Story'' over the
years, has gone into producing, and it's no big surprise that her first venture
will be - ''West Side Story.'' Rehearsals start Monday, a national tour is
booked, and plans call for a Broadway opening sometime next spring.

Miss Corto has asked Fran and Barry Weissler, who were among the producers of
''My One and Only'' and ''Zorba,'' to join forces with her, and Mr. Weissler
said ''we're considering it.'' The show is budgeted at slightly more than $1
million.

Rex Smith and Leilani Jones have been signed to play the leading roles, and
Jerome Robbins has named Ruth Mitchell and Tommy Abbott to re-create his
original direction and choreography. Miss Mitchell was executive producer of the
1980 revival of the show and, together with Mr. Robbins, staged the current
London version. Also redoing their original work will be Oliver Smith and Irene
Sharaff, the set and costume designers.

Why another revival of the 1957 show, rather than an original musical?

''I'm tired of the type of music heard today; there's very little melody,'' Miss
Corto said. '' 'West Side Story' is one of the most melodic Broadway musicals.''

F. Murray Abraham, actor, will also be F. Murray Abraham, professor, as of
September. Mr. Abraham, who won an Oscar this year for his performance as
Salieri in ''Amadeus,'' has been appointed Professor of Theater at Brooklyn
College and will teach advanced acting to graduates and undergraduates. He will
also coach students in productions at the college and in neighborhood schools.

Two plays about South Africa - one dealing with a woman's conflict with tribal
custom and the other exploring the differences between African and American
blacks - will open Monday at the Riverwest Theater. The dramas, entitled
''Carrier'' and ''The Box,'' were written and directed by Paul Benjamin, an
American, and are being produced by Jerry Tortoriello. Included in the cast are
the South African actors Moeketsi Bodibe and Themba Ntinga, and Minnie Gentry
and Cheryl Lynn Bruce, actresses who have both Broadway and Off Broadway
credits. The address is 155 Bank Street (243-0259).

Just when there's an impression abroad that every possible angle of Vietnam has
been fully explored, along comes an aspect that's been, if not ignored, at least
touched on rather lightly.

That aspect is the subject of ''Home on the Range,'' which is currently being
presented by the Actors Collective at the Courtyard Playhouse. The play, by
Karen Golden and Chel Chenier, focuses on the wives, mothers and women friends
of Vietnam veterans and the war's effect on them. The 70-minute production will
run until Aug. 4, the Playhouse is at 39 Grove Street and the information number
is 239-0827.

Tony Roberts enjoys being recognized, but he long ago discovered that returning
the smiles of strangers was not as simple as it appeared.

''If you smile enthusiastically at everyone, you very quickly run out of
enthusiasm yourself,'' he said. ''But if you're too impersonal, you feel guilty.
You have to develop a smile that gives people what they expect and want but
isn't the same as greeting an old friend. My daughter, even when she was very
young, was able to recognize whether I knew someone by the way I smiled.''

Mr. Roberts, who is one of the stars of ''Doubles'' on Broadway and also stars
in the movie ''Key Exchange,'' which opens next month, is one of the
comparatively few actors who were born in New York and who still live within
view of their alma maters - in Mr. Roberts's case, P.S. 6.

''I made my acting debut at the 92d Street Y when I was 11 or 12,'' said Mr.
Roberts, who is now 45 years old. ''Acting was what I did best when I was
growing up, and it's what I got stroked for.''

Mr. Roberts made his Broadway debut at the age of 21, after studying drama at
Northwestern University in a class that included Richard Benjamin, Paula
Prentiss, Marshall Mason and Karen Black.

Although he's done a number of television shows and films - including roles in
such Woody Allen movies as ''Play It Again Sam'' and ''Annie Hall'' - the stage,
he said, provided the most fulfillment, and when the stage was on Broadway,
there was another plus.

''There's a sense of camaraderie, like a campus,'' he said. ''When you're
working on Broadway, you feel part of a community, and that sense of community
makes you feel alive and part of the world.''

Some four years ago, Mr. Roberts began taking piano lessons - ''Gershwin and
jazz'' - and now plays ''fantastically,'' he said.

''I impress everyone for about 15 minutes, but one minute beyond that and I'm in
trouble,'' he said. ''Someone could hire me for a very short lounge act.''

Carol Hall, who wrote the music and lyrics for ''The Best Little Whorehouse in
Texas,'' has a new musical at the Williamstown Theater Festival. It's called
''To Whom It May Concern,'' and a number of Broadway and Off Broadway producers
have made the trek to the Berkshires to give it the once-over before it closes
tomorrow. The musical, about a group of men and women attending mass and
reflecting on their religious beliefs, is directed by Geraldine Fitzgerald. The
cast includes Miss Hall, Gretchen Cryer and Michael Hirsch.

Whether they themselves have theatrical hopes, the young - perhaps 10 years of
age to the early 20's - will probably be fascinated by a just-published book on
young performers. Millicent Brower, the author, has interviewed Matthew
Broderick, Liz Callaway, Alfonso Ribeiro and five other successful actors about
stage techniques, money, child work laws, how they handle auditions and how they
respond to disappointments. ''Young Performers'' is $9.44, including postage,
from Book Order, Simon & Schuster, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y.,
10020.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNTDOWN STARTS FOR DELAYED SHUTTLE FLIGHT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 621 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., July 27


The countdown began today for a second attempt to launch the space shuttle
Challenger on an ambitious seven-day mission to observe the earth, sun and stars
with a battery of advanced telescopes. The liftoff is scheduled for 3:23 P.M.
Monday.

The first launching of the shuttle on the mission was aborted July 12 when a
balky engine valve caused the countdown to be stopped seconds before the
scheduled liftoff. The valve assembly and its associated hardware were replaced,
but space agency engineers are still uncertain why the valve failed.

Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said they were
considering a change of procedure so that future countdowns would not be stopped
by valves in which the only problem seems to be that they are momentarily
sluggish.

'Everything Is Going Great'

The countdown began today on time at 9:00 A.M. even though crews were running
several hours behind schedule on Friday because of hydraulic fluid problems.
Space officials decided to make up for the lost time by performing some
proceedures simultaneously. If the delays had not been made up, a halt in the
countdown would have been called today or Sunday and the blastoff would have
been delayed until Tuesday. But crews made much progress overnight.

''Everthing is going great,'' said Lisa Malone, an agency spokesman. ''All the
hydraulics were done by 2 A.M. this morning.''

The hydraulic problems started with fluids in ground support equipment that are
used to test various movable parts of the shuttle, such as engine valves and
wing flaps, and then spread to fluids on the shuttle itself. The liquids had
picked up too much air, a little bit of which they normally absorb. Engineers
struggled to fix the problem and get the countdown back on schedule.

The seven-day mission is to transform the winged spacecraft into an advanced
orbiting astronomical observatory. The flight is the 19th in the shuttle series
and the first for a $72 million set of telescopes and other sensitive
instruments that are to study the sun, the stars and distant galaxies.

The commander of the seven-member crew is Col. C. Gordon Fullerton of the Air
Force, a 48-year-old astronaut from Rochester who served as pilot on the third
shuttle mission. The pilot is Col. Roy D. Bridges Jr., 41, of the Air Force, a
native of Gainesville, Ga., a former fighter pilot who flew combat missions in
Vietnam.

The mission specialists are Dr. Anthony W. England, 43, a geophysicist from
Fargo, N.D.; Dr. Karl G. Henize, 58, an astronomer from Cincinnati, and Dr. F.
Story Musgrave, 49, a physician from Lexington, Ky., who was a mission
specialist on the sixth shuttle flight.

Oldest Man in Space

The payload specialists on the flight are Dr. Loren W. Acton, 48, a solar
physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory in California, and Dr.
John-David F. Bartoe, 41, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory in
Washington. Payload specialists are experts from outside the space agency who
are selected to participate in shuttle flights, unilke mission specialists, who
are full-time astronauts working for the space agency.

If the flight goes off as scheduled, Dr. Henize, who was born Oct. 17, 1926,
will become the oldest man to fly in space, a distinction that now belongs to
Dr. William E. Thornton, two years his junior. Dr. Henize, who is also a jet
pilot, joined the astronaut corps in 1967 and was a member of the support crew
for the Apollo 15 mission in 1971.

This is the eighth mission for the Challenger, the most frequently flown of the
winged orbiters. The Challenger first went into space April 4, 1983.

The shuttle is scheduled to land Aug. 5 at Edwards Air Force Base in California.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM PATE TO HOT DOGS, TOURISM RISES

BYLINE: By SANDRA SALMANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 36, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


Just down the street from the White House, President Reagan is posing for a
photograph with a troop of Boy Scouts from Yarmouth, Mass. Turn the corner, and
he is narrowly avoiding a tourist's clenched fist. All told, seven life-size
cardboard cutouts of Mr. Reagan have popped up around town, and tourists are
invited to pose with them for $5 a photograph (''Use own camera, $2'').

It isn't much money. But as one cutout concessionaire said, ''It's enough to
make a living.'' And it adds up.  The 17.2 million visitors who stayed in hotels
here last year, ate at restaurants, took tour buses and posed with real and
ersatz Reagans, contributed $1 billion to the capital's economy and generated
45,000 jobs, making travel and tourism the second biggest industry here, after
the Federal Government, and making the city one of the nation's great tourist
and travel centers.

By comparison, roughly the same number of visitors generated $2.4 billion in New
York, also one of the country's great tourist and travel centers, confirming
that it is a more expensive place to visit. Predictably, too, the international
makeup was different. Fewer than 1 million of the visitors to Washington came
from overseas, while New York played host to more than 2 million foreign
visitors. With the strong dollar, that difference helps explain why Washington's
tourism has surged this summer while New York's has suffered a slight decline.

To economists, travelers divide into two important categories - expense-account
and other -and the dichotomy may be greater in the nation's capital than
elsewhere.

The businessmen and women and conventioneers stay at $170-a-night hotels and
dine at pink-linen restaurants; they account for more than 80 percent of the
rooms of members of the Hotel Association of Washington, D.C. The tourists who
pay their own way, on the other hand, often stay in suburbs such as Silver
Spring, Md., or with family, or come just for the day; they eat hot dogs and
visit the free museums.

Meetings Are Rare

The two groups rarely meet; conventioneers peak in the spring and fall, and
tourists converge on Washington in summer.

Last year, according to the Washington Convention and Visitors Association, 1
million conventioneers spent about $630 million while here, which works out to
$630 per conventioneer. By contrast, the 1.4 million tourists who arrived here
on bus tours last year spent $180 million, or $129 apiece.

''There's a big difference between the business visitor and the tourist,'' said
Michael Maher of the Restaurant Association here. Still, he noted, ''They've all
got to eat.''

Because conventioneers and business visitors and even tourists wine and dine a
lot, the per capita spending on food and drink in Washington is well above the
national average. In 1982, the last year for which census data is available, per
capita annual sales by restaurants and fast-food outlets here was $636; the
comparable figure for the United States over all was $357. The capital ranks
first in alcohol consumption. ''Due to the out-of-towner, those figures are
tremendously skewed, like Las Vegas's,'' Mr. Maher said.

This summer tourists are eating, and sightseeing, and spending handsomely. Guest
Services, a Fairfax, Va.-based company that is the sole concessionaire on the
Mall and 11 other sites around the city, says sales of food, T-shirts and film
were up more than 20 percent last month over June 1984.

''The tourist is terribly important right now,'' said Jim Pflaging, vice
president for marketing and development, who credits a succession of sunny
weekends and a splendid Fourth of July for the boom.

Greater numbers of people are crowding on board the buses run by Tourmobile
Sightseeing, perhaps the largest sightseeing organization here and one of the
city's largest black-owned businesses. Tourmobile, a concession of the National
Park Service, was operated by Universal Studios until four years ago, when the
entertainment company sold it to one of its executives, Tom Mack.

'We Cater to Joe and Jane Tourist'

The service shuttles people around 18 of the capital's main attractions, on an
all-day ticket of $6.50; other tours are to Mount Vernon, Arlington National
Cemetery and the home of Frederick Douglass, the abolitionist.

''We cater to Joe and Jane Tourist, coming to Washington with the kids,'' Mr.
Mack said. So far this year, Tourmobile has carried 78,000 more Joes and Janes
than in the same period in 1984, and it is predicting it will have carried
1,950,000 by the end of the year. The number of passengers surges after every
Presidential election year, Mr. Mack said.

It is a good time, too, for the merchants who cater to the tourist trade.

Until recently, shopping here tended to mean Woodward & Lothrop, Hecht's and
Garfinckel's. But in the past two years more than 100 boutiques and small
restaurants have opened a few blocks from the White House, initially in the Old
Post Office Building, then next to the newly restored National Theater in a
complex called The Shops that was developed by the ubiquitous Rouse Company.

The Shops and the Old Post Office are more popular with Washingtonians than
out-of-towners. ''The tourist here is inclined to eat and drink a lot,'' said
Karen Kozemchak, marketing manager for The Shops. ''They're not your serious
shoppers.'' Even so, more than one-third of The Shops' sales in the summer come
from visitors, she said. That has helped boost sales per square foot -the key
retail measure - above projections, to a healthy $300 in The Shops' first year.

TOP SPOTS ON THE BEATEN PATH

Washington's most popular attractions, ranked by number of visitors in 1984, as
reported by the institutions:

* 1. National Air and Space Museum. 14,438,799.

* 2. National Museum of Natural History. 6,096,282.

* 3. National Museum of American History. 5,369,336.

* 4. National Gallery of Art. 5 million (estimate).

* 5. Arlington National Cemetery. 4 million (estimate).

* 6. Lincoln Memorial. 3,963,471.

* 7. National Zoo. 3 million (estimate).

* 8. Vietnam Veterans' Memorial. 2,473,404.

* 9. Jefferson Memorial. 2,033,574. 10. Library of Congress. 2 million
(estimate).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of visitors to the capital lunching (NYT/Paul Hosefros); Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

...AND A NIGHTMARE ABOUT OPERA'S FUTURE

BYLINE: By DONAL HENAHAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words


The other evening I had a nightmare. I dreamed I was present at the creation of
a new form of theater that was fated to replace opera, plays, films and all
other forms of drama. In my semi-conscious state I felt something like the
excitement that must have stirred the Florentine band of connoisseurs known as
the Camerata when, around the year 1600, they brought into being the art we now
know as opera. The thought flashed across my mind, like a subtitle, that opera
and other categories of music drama would never again be the same. I had been
granted a vision of a wondrous future in which all art would be processed in
highly condensed form, like uncut heroin, and served up to audiences in short,
jolting injections.

Imagine my chagrin, then, when I realized I was not asleep but sitting
semi-alert in front of a flickering screen experiencing what is known as music
video. The drama that fled across my retina and through my auditory canals in
perhaps two minutes was a brusquely telescoped account of the aging and decay of
a man. At first he appeared to be a perfectly ordinary Young Werther of our
time, complete with sneer, frizzy hair and funny leather clothes. But as if his
life had been put into fast forward, he speedily grew a paste-on beard and
disintegrated before my eyes into a raving old creature who seemed to be playing
King Lear. The music, meanwhile, either wailed in sympathy or howled in
derision, it was hard to tell which. All this was over in little more time than
it takes to tell.

Will I outrage Schubert lovers if I point out that in starkest outline this
capsule music drama resembles his grim song cycle ''Winterreise''? A man has
been young and in love. Man ages. Man dies. What more need be said? By ruthless
editing, a music video technician might easily reduce ''Winterreise'' to pill
size so that it could be swallowed quickly. And why not? Why take an hour to say
something so simple? No reason, except that the pop dramatist would have to
reduce the tale of man's fate to something even more nasty, brutish and short
than even Hobbes had in mind. Everything of musical, poetic and dramatic
interest would be sacrificed to brevity, raw sensation and superficiality, or at
best a crude adolescent joke. Such an ephemeral experience might be compared to
fast food except that even a Big Mac may leave something behind when it is gone,
such as a stain on the necktie. No, thank you. Life is more interesting than
that and so, probably, is death.

One reason that ''Winterreise'' is such an emotionally powerful work is that the
winter journey it describes unfolds at a pace not merely deliberate but
chillingly measured. In a great performance the mood grows bleaker with every
song in the cycle so that the listener finds himself gradually taking the place
of the desolated traveler, feeling what he feels, suffering and dying with him.
Schubert's 24 tenebrous songs take the listener on a journey that has a
striking, if inexact, parallel in the Stations of the Cross, that grim ritual of
the Roman Catholicism in which Schubert was reared. So, though ''Winterreise''
has the simplest of scenarios and music that is often stripped to a few bare
notes, it is anything but a simple, mindless entertainment. It is the antithesis
of everything that the ''rock community,'' as pop-music promoters refer to their
huge constituency, peddles to the world as a guide to existence. Schubert's song
cycle is not a quick fix for anything, least of all adolescent megrims.

Why in the world, you may ask, would anyone choose ''Winterreise,'' one of the
peaks of Western musical art, to throw up against pop music in its most puerile
form? Because mature adults - chronologically mature, at any rate - are
constantly saying and writing foolish things about the philosophical and
artistic significance of music video and rock music in general, and a dissenting
view needs to be aired periodically. And because, divergent though the aims and
methods may be, both the pop drama and Schubert's cycle represent drastically
simplified approaches to musical drama. They are simple in different ways, but
radically simple, both of them. Both, furthermore, are popular music in their
own ways. The noteworthy difference is that a Schubert song's significance and
popularity are measured horizontally, over centuries, while today's rock
superhit has the life expectancy of a mayfly. Time squares all accounts.

All that said, I must admit that I see a disquieting validity to the claim, put
forward by various pop philosophers, that music video is the opera of our time.
This does not say much for the opera of our time, at least as it seems to be
developing under the hand of today's most successfully promoted stage directors.
Increasingly we find opera companies handing over enormous sums to unmusical and
antimusical directors who come to opera armed with the same post-pubescent
outlook and the same arsenal of crude tricks that make music videos so
acceptable to the pop audience. We see the same juxtaposition of incongruous
styles in costuming and set design, the same vertiginous switches from
sentimentality to cruelty, the same incessant glamorizing of horror and
sado-masochistic violence, the same feeble jokes and routines drawn from old
movies, the same cynicism about an entire generation's willingness to accept any
inanity if it can be construed as youth's revenge against daddy and mommy.

It is striking how seldom these daring directors turn their talents to staging
new operas, where a collaboration with the composer would be possible and might
legitimize any approach, no matter how bizarre. Instead, they insist on trying
to pump blood into Puccini or Handel or Mozart, who do not need anyone's help to
live. They turn poor Butterfly into a whore, Julius Caesar into Ronald Reagan,
''Cosi Fan Tutte'' into a Vietnam war tract. Instead of helping to create
something, which admittedly might strain both them and the audience, they dash
about the world ''reconceptualizing'' classics, jolting them into what they
regard as life with pop-culture jokes and flashy staging stunts learned in drama
schools.

The critics, meanwhile, stand around on one foot and then the other, hoping to
be on the right side when this era's opera history is finally written. Some gulp
down the pill and excuse anything a star director does. Others applaud when
Mozart, say, is bloodied, but draw the line at Wagner or Verdi. All very odd. At
any rate, although there may yet be a way to be traveled between opera and music
video, we may already be on that slick downhill road.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SEIKALY EMERGES AS A LEADER

BYLINE: By WILLIAM C. RHODEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 5; Page 8, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE, La., July 27


During a news conference here to introduce the National Sports Festival's key
basketball players, someone suggested to Rony Seikaly that with the graduations
of Patrick Ewing of Georgetown, Ed Pinckney of Villanova and Bill Wennington of
St. John's, he was now the Big East's top center.

Seikaly, a 6-foot-10-inch sophomore center at Syracuse, shrugged off the
suggestion. ''I do what I can do, nothing more'' said Seikaly, who came to the
United States last year from Greece by way of Lebanon.

''Last year was a learning year. No one knew me, no one expected anything from
me, so anything I did was good.''

Ewing was one of the first of the Big East's upper-echelon players to learn
about Seikaly. In Syracuse's upset victory over Georgetown last January,
Seikaly, who blocked 59 blocked during the season, slapped away Ewing's first
two attempts.

Later, one of Seikaly's teammates joked that he hadn't been intimidated by
Ewing's reputation because, growing up in Beirut and Athens, he didn't know
about it.

Admiration for Ewing

''But that's not really true,'' said Seikaly. ''I knew about Ewing when I was in
the 10th grade in Greece. We get videotapes of all the games, and the first time
I saw him was in the 1982 N.C.A.A. championship game with North Carolina when he
was a freshman.

''Ewing was like a hero to me, but I never thought that I'd play against him.''

Seikaly, who turned 20 years old in May, said facing Ewing and playing in front
of crowds of more than 30,000 at the Carrier Dome was challenging, but hardly
ranked with the tension that marked his childhood.

Although his family left Lebanon when he was 10, Seikaly said he remembered
rocket attacks.

''Things are still clear in my mind,'' he said. ''Even now I get nervous
whenever I see armed guards. It's not like police you might see just standing
around. In Lebanon, they might shoot you or hit you for no reason at all. In my
neighborhood there's not an apartment complex that hasn't been touched. Even my
house was shot up.''

No Plans to Return

When Seikaly was 10, his parents took him and his older sister and brother to
London.

''We didn't move to get away from the war, it really was supposed to be a
vacation,'' he said. ''We went to London for six months, then we went to Greece.
We never came back.''

He added, ''I really don't have much to do with Lebanon now unless it involves
my family. I'm not a Moslem, I'm a Christian and an American citizen.''

Seikaly took his last trip to Beirut three years ago to visit an uncle.
Afterward, he knew he wouldn't be going back.

''I was having dinner with my uncle,'' he said. ''Suddenly bullets and shells
started flying. I dove under the table, but they just kept eating as if nothing
had happened.

''Another time I was on the beach and a rocket blew up 200 meters away. I ran
away; everyone else kept doing what they were doing.''

Perspective on Pressure

But for all of the turmoil, Seikaly said that athletics was an important part of
his early life. ''I played all the sports - soccer, water skiing, volleyball the
long jump - so it really wasn't that hard for me to pick up basketball.''

Seikaly said he chose Syracuse as his college primarily because his older sister
had gone there.

He laughs at suggestions that, with so much expected of him, he might begin to
feel pressure.

''Presure?'' he said. ''I've known pressure. I grew up in a situation where I've
seen things that most people my age never saw - unless they went to Vietnam. I
think that gives me an edge.

''Now I just want to have fun playing basketball. I want to enjoy my life.''
----East Team Loses Playing for the East team in today's opening-round game
here, Seikaly had 5 points, 7 rebounds and blocked 2 shots, but his squad lost,
90-77, to the West team. ---- Mitchell Wins Again BATON ROUGE, La. (AP) -
Michele Mitchell became the first double gold medalist at the National Sports
Festival as she won the 10-meter platform diving today. On Thursday, she won the
3-meter springboard competition.

Valerie Brisco-Hooks was also a double winner, taking the 200 meters and joining
Jeanette Bolden, Alice Brown and Gail Devers on the West team for a comfortable
victory in the women's 400-meter relay.

Jackie Joyner set an American record with 3,942 points after the first four
events of the seven-event heptathlon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DANGER FROM JAPAN

BYLINE: By THEODORE H. WHITE; Theodore H. White, the Pulitzer Prize-winning
author, has reported on Asian affairs since 1939.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8225 words


NO SENSE OF IRONY STAINED THE SPECTACLE OF VICtory aboard the U.S.S. Missouri,
no sense of shadows to rise years later.

We were all too bedazzled by the splendor of the day - for here was American
power at its zenith. We had won the war, totally, and the men who had won it,
soon to become legend, were all there on the veranda deck in pressed suntans or
navy whites. A band had been swinging through ''Anchors Aweigh'' as we gathered
that morning, but as the climax approached a hush fell; silence stretched like a
blanket over our murmurings.

None of us of course knew what America would make of the victory, or the
Japanese of their defeat. But the power was all ours and stretched, visibly, as
far as the eye could see. The Third Fleet had come in from offshore and now
crowded Tokyo Bay - flattops and battleships, cruisers and destroyers, guns
trained on the land we had laid waste. There was no question but that we had won
this war.

It was Sunday, Sept. 2, 1945, there on the other side of the dateline, and the
skies, after a Saturday drizzle, stretched gray. But this was no guarded and
hidden schoolhouse, with only a handful present to watch, as at the surrender of
German forces only four months earlier at Rheims. Douglas MacArthur's sense of
drama insisted that all the world be there to witness, and we were several
hundreds thick on the foredeck.

The Missouri had been swept clean. The Stars and Stripes above the mainmast was
the same that had fluttered over the Capitol on the day Japan attacked Pearl
Harbor; it had just been flown out from Washington. The flag of Commodore Perry,
who had pried Japan open to the West 90 years before, Theodore H. White, the
Pulitzer Prize-winning author, has reported on Asian affairs since 1939. was
draped on the rear turret, with the 31 stars of the then half-grown union faded
but clear. And on each of the three 16-inch guns clung our sailors in white,
holding on by a handgrip, or with their legs curled tight about the barrels.

Just in front of the turret was the surrender table, draped in a navy-blue
coverlet, bare but for the documents. There the Japanese would sign. A few
minutes before the appointed hour we heard the piping that announced the launch
carrying the Japanese was alongside. We watched them come aboard: Mamoru
Shigemitsu, the Japanese Foreign Minister, in morning coat and striped trousers;
Gen. Yoshijiro Umezu, Chief of Staff of the army, in his starched brown uniform.
Shigemitsu limped, for he had been crippled years before by Japanese terrorists
who had tried to kill him, considering him a man of peace.

But that brought him no sympathy from us now as he grasped the rail to pull
himself up, then limped to the table of surrender. I bristled at the sight of
them. I had seen the Japanese blast and flame Chungqing, the city I had lived in
years before, then bring their planes down to machine-gun people in the streets.
Japanese had shot at me, I had fired at them, and so the luxury of this moment
was one I enjoyed. Others, too, hated the Japanese - perhaps all except Douglas
MacArthur, who saw them as he saw all Orientals, as errant little brown brothers
who must be rebuked, but then brought into Western civilization. Yet that day he
was taskmaster and conqueror.

A few minutes after 9, General MacArthur himself appeared, and the Japanese came
forward. No one helped Shigemitsu, but some Americans more generous than I
brought him a chair to sit on as he signed the surrender. Next came Umezu, the
brown pock marks on his cheeks swelling and falling as he clenched his jaws. He
wanted no chair; he stood stiffly, unfolded like a jackknife, then bent and
signed the paper. Neither said anything. Then MacArthur spoke, for peace and
conciliation - rather well, I think now as I read his text 40 years later. Then
all the others signed. I notice, as I follow the notes I made on my copy of the
text, that when the Dutch representative signed, the sun broke through the
clouded morning, and the scene began to glisten.

At this point happened the episode that stands out sharpest among the memories
of that day - the flyover. As MacArthur intoned ''These proceedings are
closed,'' we heard a drone and looked up. It is difficult to recall now, after
years of floundering and blunder, how very good we were in those days, with what
precision we ordered things. Four hundred B-29s had taken off from Guam and
Saipan hours before to arrive over the Missouri at this precise minute of
climax. They stretched across the rim of the horizon, and their heavy droning
almost instantly harmonized with a softer buzzing as 1,500 fleet aircraft from
our flattops joined them. The B-29s had burned out Japan's cities, dropped the
two big bombs; the fleet aircraft had sunk the Japanese Navy. Now the killing
arms of our power, the air forces, slid down from their height in the sky to
circle low over the armada of American ships. Then, still very low, they
disappeared across the sky, over two cities they had left in ruins, first
Yokohama, then Tokyo, as if brandishing our power over the people who had dared,
without warrant and with planned deceit, to attack and bloody us at Pearl
Harbor.

We had won out over them. We lost more than 100,000 men to prove we could not be
lacerated without warning, without seeking revenge.

Except that America's revenge on Japan was of such an extraordinary character as
to befuddle all scholars who claim that history has a logic of its own. What we
are faced with now is the idea that events contradict history's logic. Perhaps
we did not win the war, perhaps the Japanese, unknown even to themselves, were
the winners.

IT HAD TAKEN US YEARS TO GET TO TOKYO BAY. BUT THAT STORY had begun with an
idea, as all wars do.

As a very young reporter, I had gone to Asia, and there became acquainted with
the crowning Japanese idea: ''The Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.'' The
slogan was scrawled across the walls of all the regions I vis-ited, from
Manchukuo to North China, down finally to Hanoi in 1940, when the Japanese took
over Vietnam. And they meant to go further: to Thailand (with its tin), Malaya
(rubber), Indonesia (oil and timber). The Japanese idea was simple: that Japan
was the leader of East Asia, and so it should harness Asia, with its resources,
its genius of mind, its hundreds of millions of people, and all would grow
prosperous - Japan most of all.

But the Chinese, both Nationalist and Communist, had resisted. And, as the
Japanese did their best to beat the Chinese into submission, America said: No.
Franklin Roosevelt imposed his embargo on Japanese trade - no scrap metal, no
oil, nothing that would help Japan pursue its purpose of conquest. The noose had
thus tightened about Japan in 1941, whereupon they attacked us and hoped, having
hurt us, that we would negotiate on their terms.

Tactically, the attack on Pearl Harbor was one of the most brilliantly executed
strokes of the war.

But politically, it was most unwise, for America fought back.

Today, 40 years after the end of World War II, the Japanese are on the move
again in one of history's most brilliant commercial offensives, as they go about
dismantling American industry. Whether they are still only smart, or have
finally learned to be wiser than we, will be tested in the next 10 years. Only
then will we know who finally won the war 50 years before.

So we must go back to Japan at that weekend of surrender and see what we made of
it.

The eye recalls almost nothing sharp of those first three days. Both Tokyo and
Yokohama were wasteland. Here and there was a speckle of corrugated iron shacks
where the bombed-out victims of our raids lived. Spikes of smokestacks rose
above rubble. In the streets trudged the Japanese - forlorn and shabby. Along
the country roads trickled the first of their demobilized soldiers, their
belongings slung over their shoulders. All of Japan was open to us, except for
the Emperor's palace in Tokyo, behind its moat and earthen walls. The 11th
Airborne Division had arrived to protect him from all intruders - Americans and
Japanese alike.

A few days before we entered Japan, an intelligence officer had briefed a few of
us correspondents on how delicate that mission would be: Japan was still fully
armed, with 57 divisions in the home islands. Some units were violent. There had
already been one assault on the Emperor's palace in the days since he had
radioed his submission to us; it had been beaten off. The Emperor was our key.
''In essence,'' concluded the officer, ''we've achieved a coup d'etat. Our coup
has been to take the Emperor. We've given him the widest latitude in telling his
people how to take defeat. But, when they learn he takes orders from us, that
we're using him to restore order, there's no telling how the mechanism will
react.''

So, when we flew in on Friday, Aug. 31, before the surrender, the soldiers in my
plane were taking apart, fingering, reassembling their guns as soldiers always
do before assault, ready to shoot if this surrender was a trap.

But it was no trap; the Japanese had surrendered; the Emperor had defused the
Japanese war machine, still capable of one last explosive bloodletting. The
airfield perimeter had been guarded immediately by the 11th Airborne. The
Japanese had not only obeyed our orders to remove all propellers from their
planes at Atsugi Airfield, our point of descent, but the planes themselves had
been bulldozed into a junkheap at the far corner.

That first weekend of reconnaissance and tingling fear we roamed the streets of
Yokohama with strut and swagger. We took over the new Grand Hotel on the Bund -
just up the street from the offices of the House of Mitsui. So I strolled down
to visit it. The House of Mitsui was one of the grand zaibatsu, those great
Japanese merchant trading houses that we meant to abolish but did not. I walked
in with Jim Stewart of the Office of War Information, who spoke fluent Japanese,
and we were ushered into an executive's suite.

His face I have forgotten; in my notes his name reads simply ''Fujiro,'' and he
spoke fine English. When he understood that we had come not to arrest him but to
talk, he relaxed. I wanted to pick up the threads of the story of defeat and
surrender.

Fujiro told it well: It had been four months since the last ocean-going vessel
of Japan's far-flung merchant marine had made it safely back to Yokohama,
Japan's largest port. It had been more than a year since Kawasaki, the nation's
oil port, had received a tanker from the East Indies. Yokohama was prostrate, he
said. He guessed that 200,000 people had been killed in our bombings and 700,000
had fled.

But the Americans were not hated, he assured us. The people hated their army.
''Why no planes, no guns to defend us?'' He spat out names like Tojo, Oshima,
Shiratori. The people expected them to be executed. People hated the United
States bombers, but the first Americans to land were well-behaved. Jim Stewart
remarked that, unlike the Japanese, American soldiers did not rape. Fujiro
acknowledged this.

Then to his plea. Hunger. Food. Let Japan work to support herself. Japan could
still make ships - ''let us make ships to earn our way.'' Some textile mills
remained; the Japanese could still make cloth to earn a living. But Japan needed
food most of all - one-third of all its food in the closing days of the war had
come out of China. Japan could sell us tea and silk, but it needed food.

What were the plans now of the House of Mitsui? we asked. He replied: ''Frankly,
gentlemen, until your military tells us what to do, we have no plans.'' Before
we left, he poured us a toast: ''To your safe arrival!'' We drank; the House of
Mitsui bowed as if we were not only liberators but allies.

These days, the House of Mitsui is thriving again, its trading net spread from
steel mills in China to refineries in Iran to operations in America - the whole
world has become its ''Greater Co-Prosperity Sphere.''

FOOD, THEN, THAT weekend and that month was of the essence.

There is a strange and wonderful thing about Americans, of which I am proud. In
war we bomb, we kill, occasionally our soldiers are savage, too - although when
an American officer goes berserk, we try him in our own military courts, as we
did Lieut. William Calley for the massacre at Mylai. But Americans abhor
starvation, and they are very good at organizing to help all starving people -
defeated Germans, defeated Japanese, Ethiopians subject to Marxism.

So, in the first few days of occupation, our rage evaporated in the task
immediately at hand: to feed the Japanese people we had conquered.

What MacArthur was up against were the essentials that geography forces on
anyone who governs Japan. Japan is a nation of four rocky islands - with a
combined area that is smaller than California. Seventy-two percent of the land
is mountain and rock, useless for anything but tourism and scenery. Only 16
percent is tillable. When, a century ago, the Japanese were a nation of 30
million people, they could barely feed themselves and infanticide was a common
practice. Their internal history has thus been scorched with savage civil wars.
Then, when Japan was opened, the coiled aggressions so long turned against each
other turned against their neighbors - China first, then the Russians, then
Korea.

But the Japanese add to their poverty of physical resources two extravagantly
useful conditions. They have, first, a sharply indented coastline, with natural
ports inviting deep water to their shore. England has the same advantage, which
once gave that nation, and now gives Japan, access to all the world's resources
of ore, oil, foods, timber; by cheap shipping, Japanese can draw raw materials
from anywhere and can send competitive manufactures anywhere, too.

To this gift of geography is added a gift of genetics, a striking quality of
mind. We often think of the Japanese as less than innovative but, technically,
they are superb adapters and producers. We learned that in the war against them:
their torpedoes were better and faster than ours . . . until we learned to make
ours better. Their initial combat plane - the Zero - was a superlative machine;
it could turn, dart, wheel away and mock American flying machines. No matter
that Americans had invented the airplane and the flattop; when the war started,
Japan had in several arms superior, if derivative, technology. What licked them
was American bravery, the mobilization of then-superior American science and
industry, and their own blundering politics that led them to challenge us.

Whether Americans made an equal blunder in entering Asia in 1945 is something
historians will debate for decades to come. But if we did blunder in that fall
season of 1945, the blunder stemmed from mercy and generosity. Both mercy and
generosity proposed a peace the like of which had never been granted before to
any conquered nation - except, perhaps, the Germany defeated only months before.

Our first challenge in those early weeks was, of course, the simple mechanics of
occupation. But then we faced the problem of how to govern the now-abject nation
- above all, how to feed it. Japan's hospitals were full of the diseases of
malnutrition. MacArthur ordered at once that our occupying forces distribute
their rations to Japanese civilians from Army kitchens. He then ordered that all
the 3 1/2 million tons of food stockpiled for our own armies for the projected
landings of October and November be rushed in. Yet still there was not enough.
He himself decribed it best in a cable to the War Department in the spring of
1946 - a spring of imminent starvation. We must either feed the Japanese or
starve them, he wrote, and then we must face the consequences. ''Starvation
breeds mass unrest, disorder, violence. Give me bread or give me bullets,'' he
finished in a grandiloquent MacArthurian flourish.

The next paragraph of MacArthur's reminiscences is a single sentence: ''I got
bread.''

MacArthur had, almost immediately after moving his headquarters from Yokohama to
Tokyo, set about creating a new Japan. Of the Emperor, he demanded that a new
prime minister be immediately named. By October, the Emperor had replaced his
uncle, the nominal prime minister at the time of surrender, with Baron
Shidehara, to whom, on his first visit, MacArthur explained America's wishes for
the new Japan.

MacArthur's directives were cut from the cloth of American good will. Japan (so
ran his first directive) must completely emancipate Japanese women; must let
workers organize in unions; ban abuse of child labor; abolish secret police.
Further, Japan must reorganize its education system and ''democratize'' its
industrial system. He left it to Shidehara to work out the details.

It was this broad grant of latitude that was most important. The Japanese could
pick and choose their way through MacArthur's directives. The way they chose to
implement them allowed their industry, their universities, their ingenuity to
flourish. And the rebirth of Japan since its defeat is a parable of history. If
one speeds up the interaction of ideas and drive, it becomes a drama.

IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO blame the Japanese for accepting American mercy and the
American invitation to thrive. Neither Congress nor the United States War
Department wanted to feed Japan indefinitely or pay for its recovery. It was up
to the Japanese to work their own way back, to remove themselves from the backs
of the American taxpayer.

A young lieutenant with the 27th Infantry Division was among the first to land
in that week after the surrender; his company had fought in the battle of
Okinawa; it had entered with 180 men and come out with only 20. That young
combat lieutenant, Malcolm Baldrige, is now Secretary of Commerce, and he
recalls the desolation in Japan. ''We sent them,'' he recalls now,
''blood-fractionating technology on humanitarian grounds. Today the company we
gave the technology to competes with Americans around the world. We sent them
technicians from the Underwriters Laboratory to certify that Japanese products
were up to American standards, fit for export. Today U.S. companies fight to get
their exports certified for entry into Japan.'' Baldrige is both wise and
somber. The Japanese, as Government policy, are undermining one American
industry after another. But Baldrige, as a senior Administration official, must
restrain his forebodings in public.

To understand his bitterness one must again go back to the story of governing
ideas. Early in 1947, as Japan was thawing from defeat, we sponsored something
called GATT - the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, with headquarters in
Geneva. GATT embodied an idea almost two centuries old, the idea of Adam Smith.
Smith believed that history moves in stages, and, because he lived at the dawn
of the Industrial Revolution, he denounced the outworn ideas of mercantilism -
the world stage was now set for ''free trade.'' An ''invisible hand,'' Smith
held, should and would shape the flow of goods from one nation to another,
wherever ''comparative advantage'' in production would draw wares from one
country to another.

By the mid-1940s, American thinking had made a holy cause of ''free trade.'' Our
conventional analysis of the Second World War held that both Hitler and the
Japanese had violated the theology of ''free trade,'' staking out spheres of
economic dominance with bayonets, thus bringing war. Now, however, in 1947, GATT
would enforce free trade in all the non-Marxist world, eliminating tariffs and
barriers, and allowing goods to flow freely from country to country. We were at
our peak in the history of commerce. Thus - onward and upward to the sunlit
plateau of world prosperity and peace.

For the Japanese it must have seemed too good to be true, and it took them
several years to learn that the Americans had rewarded them with a world market
far larger than the Great East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. The Americans had
given them an invitation to the world trading game in total ignorance of what
Japanese genius and tactics might accomplish. As late as 1954, a haze of victory
still clouded American thinking. Said John Foster Dulles, Secretary of State, at
a National Security Council meeting in August of that year, I ''told Premier
Yoshida frankly that Japan should not expect to find a big American market
because the Japanese don't make the things we want. Japan must find markets
elsewhere for the goods they export.'' It would be at least 30 years before
history proved Dulles wrong, before our trade deficit with Japan grew to the
thunderhead of an estimated $45 billion for 1985.

There were, of course, several things wrong with the ideas that begot GATT.
First was the belief that all the world would behave by the rules codified by
GATT. We could not entertain the idea that some nations would race, like
broken-field runners, through the new rules of tariffs and trade; that GATT
would be riddled and pock-holed by subsidies, regulations, quotas and barriers
that made mockery of the idea of free trade.

But the more important thing that went wrong with GATT was almost too simple to
consider. If all people of the world were entitled to equally free trade, then
the cheapest producers would be those who paid their people least, yet mastered
world-class technology. In other words, nations whose workers were grateful for
starvation wages could conquer the markets of countries like America, whose
workers demanded the world's highest wages. The only way thus to compete was by
efficiencies of production, in which the Japanese steadily strove to match the
Americans, or by wage standards with which American workers could not compete,
or both. Asian standards of living would have to go up or our standards would go
down until an equilibrium would be reached.

In the 40 years since defeat, Japan has grown to be a giant. Japan has passed
the Soviet Union in industrial production and stands as world class No. 2 to our
No. 1. If the present Japanese expansion of production continues, it will be, in
20 years, a greater industrial power than the United States.

WHEN THE JAPA-nese looked out from their world of ruins in the months after
defeat, disaster drew self-examination as tight as skin about every individual
as well as the community. ''Japan was smashed,'' says one American
industrialist. ''Its industry was shattered or obsolete. Every institution had
failed them . . . . There was no leadership, no model for creating a new Japan
except that which America forced on it.'' So MacArthur and his staff became the
leadership, America the model.

What the Japanese have done since in remodeling the American model is no less
than spectacular. They have devised a system of government-industry partnership
that is a paradigm for directing a modern industrial state for national purposes
- and one designed for action in the new world of global commerce that the
United States blueprinted.

The Japanese have a tangled bureaucracy that baffles foreign intruders, but one
must recognize at least the two main players in the game to understand the
dynamics of the Japanese trade thrust.

The Ministry of Finance comes first. In the words of one American Ambassador to
Japan, ''it has the ultimate call.'' Its policies set the exchange rate of the
yen, keeping the currency undervalued in order to keep export prices low. It
stimulates savings and investment, finances industry by directing the allocation
of funds through the banks it controls. The Ministry of Finance provides the
launching pad from which MITI directs the guided missiles of the trade
offensive.

MITI - the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, the second major player
in the game - is a totally new Japanese invention. MITI targets those Japanese
industries that are to grow, targets the countries and markets to be penetrated.
It can adjust depreciation rates for favored industries; coordinate research
into arcane technologies - for example, into the fifth generation of computers.
(Its only American rival in such research is the Pentagon, which can afford to
match Japan Incorporated's budget).

Sometimes MITI makes mistakes - as in the overbuilding of the Japanese steel and
shipbuilding industries, now in surplus capacity because of competition from
South Korea. More often it is wise enough to put to sleep industries that can no
longer compete. The island of Kyushu once employed 200,000 coal miners; only
7,000 remain there because oil and coal come cheaper from abroad - and so Kyushu
has become a thriving center for electronics. MITI defines strategies; Japanese
private enterprise follows through with zest. No better marriage of government
planning and private enterprise has ever been seen.

The Japanese have caught the essence of Adam Smith -that history moves through
its stages as opportunity and technology beckon. Nor is it alone in seeing the
perspectives of the world America fostered. Although Jean Monnet designed
Europe's Common Market, America was its godfather. Europe also presses to orient
its industries to national purpose. West Germany, Europe's foremost industrial
power, presses hardest. But the Germans expend much of their energies within the
Common Market we sought to build. In American commerce, trade with West Germany
is large, yet marginal. In 1971, when America first fell into the trade deficit
that forced us off the gold standard, Germans exported $3.7 billion worth of
goods to America, Japan $5.9 billion. Last year, the Germans shipped $16.9
billion -but the Japanese shipped $60.4 billion. The Germans, somehow, evoke
little American bitterness because we understand their culture, establish
American plants there without hindrance. The Japanese provoke American wrath
because they are a locked and closed civilization that reciprocates our hushed
fear with veiled contempt.

Few American businessmen abroad would qualify as Knights of the Round Table.
American oil companies once, in the prime of their power, could make and unmake
governments. But many American businesses have been welcomed overseas, if only
because they usually pay higher wages than competitors. Most of all, they have
been restrained by American antitrust laws from the kind of nationally
coordinated trade offensive captained by MITI against all other countries.

American industry grew up in partnership with European industry. But Japan
rouses different fears. Behind Japan (''the Big Dragon,'' some call it) march
the ''four little dragons'' (Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore) following in
its path. And behind loom China and India, desperate as they are to raise their
standards of living - at the expense of American standards, if necessary.

THE JAPANESE ARE far ahead in the race for world trade markets, and they are
moving now to yet another stage. Their export surplus gives them huge sums to
invest -in the Middle East and America - so that Japanese capital is moving from
penetration to control. Japanese are beginning to supply venture capital for the
seedbeds of American technology, from Silicon Valley in California to Route 128
in Boston. They hover over the Draper Laboratories in Massachusetts -the
national laboratories that devise the guidance system of our missiles - and
acquire what patents security lets free to the public. In the Los Angeles area
alone, the Japanese have installed or acquired 1,500 firms. Their acquisitions
in our banking system have grown significantly; contrarywise, Americans are all
but excluded from Japanese capital markets. And, by the doctrine of GATT, all
this is entirely legal.

Yet what is legal may also be unfair. While Japan's tariff rates are, in broad
economic terms, roughly equal to those of other industrial nations, they are
spiked with special tariffs in industries that are considered vulnerable to
foreign competition. In addition, Japanese markets are protected by a maze of
so-called nontariff barriers to trade - many of which fall outside the reach of
GATT regulations. We cannot sell our exports freely in Japan, whether beef,
tobacco, citrus fruits, or leather goods. Consumer markets, too, are closed by
regulations that the Japanese attribute to ''cultural differences.''

What Japan does import from us are, chiefly, those raw materials always taken by
master nations from colonial nations - grain, cotton, ores, fuel. We still ship
to Japan a few remaining high-technology items, like aircraft, and some
telecommunications and high-powered computers in which we hold a narrowing lead.
But the Japanese continue to squeeze that lead, because their
infant-industry-protection laws are planned to give them time to catch up. They
will not buy American satellites until they learn to make their own. Corning
Glass Works has had a fiber-optics patent pending in Japan for 12 years; in this
time, the Japanese have learned to make fiber optics of their own that they now
sell to America. Crude oil may be sold to Japan; but the Japanese will not buy
our refined oil. American products certified here must go through slow, tedious
re-testing in Japan before entering the Japanese market, while Japanese
technology catches up.

American markets for Japanese goods are not only open but come with an
invitation. The United States Census makes its marketing information open to
all; for a fee anyone can buy its tapes that define, area by area, county by
county, income group by income group, where Toyota, Sony, Hitachi, Honda can
best space their distributorships; and American advertising agencies will, for a
fee, translate consumer appetite into market conquest. No nation that thinks of
itself as an assembly of consumers can resist Japanese penetration. But a nation
that thinks of itself as a community has reason for alarm.

Today not a single consumer radio is made in America, although Americans
invented the modern radio; not a single black-and-white television set is made
here, although America invented television. The few companies that assemble
color television sets in the United States could not exist without imported
parts made in Asia, although color television was originally developed in
America. Almost all our video-cassette recorders are made in Japan; so are most
hand-held calculators, watches, a huge share of our office machinery, and most
high-fidelity audio equipment. Only one American motorcycle manufacturer remains
(Harley-Davidson); the Japanese hold 95 percent of our market. Only one American
piano manufacturer remains (Steinway). The Brooklyn Navy Yard, where the
conquering U.S.S. Missouri was launched in 1943, no longer exists.

The American automobile and steel industries were the first to be hit by Japan's
trade offensive - they were vulnerable. Emerging from the war fat, stuffy and
complacent, content largely with obsolescent equipment and practices,
shortsighted American management let its technologies fall well behind those
developing elsewhere. In 1966, the Japanese shipped only 63,000 automobiles to
America; by 1970, MITI had stimulated the shipment of 415,000. Americans found
Japanese cars to be good cars; they consumed little gasoline, they were cheaper;
their fit-and-finish were splendid, and with the rise in gasoline prices, the
American appetite for Japanese automobiles soared. But when the Reagan
Administration this spring released Japan from negotiated voluntary quotas on
car exports to the United States, Japan announced that it would raise its
shipments to 2.3 million autos to America, as if we were a controlled colonial
market. It was too much. By a vote of 92 to 0, the Senate declared Japanese
trade practice unfair. But it was a belated revolt; this summer, American
consumers are gobbling up Japanese automobiles faster than the Japanese can gear
up to ship them.

This year, apparently, MITI's chief target is the American electronic industry.
Last year, the trade deficit with Japan in electronics surpassed our trade
deficit in automobiles - reaching $15.4 billion of our total adverse balance
with Japan of $37 billion. The American semiconductor industry is reeling from
assault. The Japanese, without mercy, propose to wipe out our supremacy in this
industry, based on our own research and invention. Hitachi, now an electronics
exporter, was blasted to bits by our bombers in the last two weeks of the war as
one of the leading Japanese armsmakers. But Hitachi is now on the counterattack,
its tone martial again. Here, for example, is Hitachi's directive this year to
its offices in Denver, where it is trying to take away the semiconductor market
from America's Intel Corporation and Advanced Micro Devices. It reads: ''Win
with the 10 percent rule! Find AMD and Intel sockets. Quote 10 percent below
their prices! If they requote, go 10 percent again. Don't quit till you win!''

A BENIGN PROS-perity temporarily soothes the American economy. In the six years
since 1979, America has added 6,000,000 jobs to its total work force. But these
are mostly service jobs. In the skill-and-brawn base of American production, not
only have real wages fallen, but the job base is shriveling. In machinery
production, in these six years, the United States has lost 288,000 jobs; in
primary metal-making (such as steel) we have lost 439,000 jobs; in fabricated
metals, 241,000 jobs; in motor-vehicle production, 118,000 jobs; in textiles,
186,000 jobs. All in all, on the line, in the old shops, where Americans make
things, we have lost 1,834,000 jobs.

No industry in America has been harder hit by Asian competition than the
American garment industry, which has lost 155,000 jobs in the last six years
alone. One should listen to Sol Chaikin, an air corps veteran of the China war
theater against Japan.

Chaikin is now the president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union.
Once, in the early 1950s, his union counted 230,000 workers in New York City
alone. Today he counts only 100,000 and they work at the lowest-paid union jobs
in the city.

''Ours,'' says Chaikin, ''is the most competitive industry in America. It's a
cheap industry to get into and we have 15,000 ladies-garment manufacturers in
the U.S.A. They all have the most modern machinery, but the Asians have the same
machinery and they work for less and for longer hours. The Japanese once were
our chief competitors, but Japanese wage rates have now risen to levels
comparable to ours. The Japanese now buy American designs, open factories with
new machinery in Singapore and Hong Kong, ship the fabrics from Japan, and
export from offshore. In Korea and Taiwan, they pay 57 cents an hour; in Hong
Kong, $1.08 an hour; and in Sri Lanka they pay $5.00 a week. In New York, our
workers get only $175.00 a week take-home pay - and they pay almost $1 for a
subway fare each way.''

Chaikin knows that his workers in New York cannot compete with Asian standards
of living. ''It's as if we were being poured into a Mixmaster with China, India,
Japan, Taiwan; they've homogenized the international labor market and are
squeezing us out like toothpaste.'' Chaikin insists that some garment jobs, at
least, must be preserved for American working people, that the American market
should be shared with Americans. But there is no high-technology ladder to leap
over cheap Asian wages when it comes to handwork. Of blue-collar jobs in
America, one in seven is held by a textile-garment-apparel worker. The National
Academy of Engineering estimated in 1983 that, of 2,000,000 jobs in the
garment-textile industry, only 750,000 would be left in 10 years. Chaikin's back
is up against the wall.

Less than a mile from Chaikin's union headquarters is the elegant executive
suite of the Radio Corporation of America. Chairman of the Board Thornton F.
Bradshaw is another combat veteran, whose destroyer was put out of action by the
Japanese Navy in the last months of the war. Bradshaw, if anyone, is an
authentic statesman of American industry. He is unworried about RCA, which is
happy and prosperous. His view is entirely different from Chaikin's, for his
company has adjusted to the world market. But RCA long ago gave up on
penetrating Japan. Its creator, Gen. David Sarnoff, thought the American market
was enough, and licensed to Japan and the rest of the world the technologies RCA
has patented - technologies that underlie much of modern electronics production.
RCA prospers from its lead in advanced electronics - from its satellites, from
its arms contracts (like the Aegis guided missile cruiser) from its broadcast
net, NBC, from its marketing of imported parts and products, from manufacturing
television sets. But, despite RCA's prosperity, Bradshaw is deeply worried
-about America as an industrial community where both work ethic and practice
have decayed.

Bradshaw is concerned for America's economy as a whole, Chaikin for his working
people - both equally honorable concerns. But neither believes that any
reasonable persuasion can slow the Asian trade surge unless the American
Government acts - sooner rather than later. What is needed is a structural
change in American life and thinking, as sweeping as Japan's in 1945-1950 - from
factory floor to research labs and universities, from reduction of the Federal
budget deficit, to a total review of our trading policies.

So the story moves to Washington.

WASHINGTON IS always in crisis -small crises, acute crises, lurking crises. But
the trade crisis is quite extraordinary for the anarchy of ideas that prevails.
Ideas clash in perception of a world that has totally changed since the days of
victory. Trade, as we designed it, has become completely global, and America has
become the last open gaming table for world adventurers. Within the confusion of
Washington's thinking, however, at least three truths are taken as paramount.

The first truth, the starting point of all thoughtful conversations, is the
overwhelming burden of the overvalued dollar.

''When I was dealing with Japan the problem was different,'' says Robert S.
Strauss, Jimmy Carter's trade representative from 1977 to 1979. ''I talked in a
universe of tariffs . . . of trade . . . nontrade . . . cultural barriers . . .
political difficulties.'' Strauss, a very suave, but very tough man, is
remembered as one of the few American trade representatives who have been able
to out-negotiate the Japanese. For a brief period, his tenacity caused the
impermeable membrane of Japanese resistance to yield. ''Now,'' he says, ''you're
talking about a world where trade has reached $2 trillion a year, but capital
flows have reached a magnitude of $20 trillion a year, swirling around the world
like a jet stream. It drops off here because of safety and high interest rates,
and pushes the dollar up. It makes the trade problem look like a pygmy problem.
It distorts everything, and leaves the poor American exporter, no matter how
good or efficient, like a runner doing a sprint with an anvil under his arm.

''The Japanese don't adjust the yen every day. But you don't have to be a genius
to know that when the Bank of Japan coughs, everyone gets the sniffles. But we
have no policy. Even if we started now, we couldn't work things out in a year,
or five. We need a strategy.''

There comes next the second truth: Japan's ''unfair'' trading practices, its
regulations, rules, restrictions, quotas. Says Secretary of Commerce Baldrige:
''Japanese export policy has as its objective not participation in, but
dominance of, world markets. Japanese trade policies assume as a right
protection of their industries that are emerging, like satellites, depressed
industries like paper and chemicals, politically important industries like
agriculture, socially sensitive industries like leather . . . .

''In 1983, we took 30 percent of Japan's overseas exports, in 1984, 35 percent.
In practical terms, this means that all the net increase in Japanese domestic
employment in recent years is attributable to sale to the United States. . . .
America's pursuit of free trade is like Sir Galahad's quest for the Holy
Grail.''

From the National Association of Manufacturers to the AFL-CIO, one catches the
alarm in vivid language. ''There are six to eight main interacting
trade-and-production groups, or 'keiretsu,' '' says one association official,
who asked not to be identified. ''They buy and sell chiefly to their own
subsidiaries, and they divide Japan's market up. When we squeeze, they'll allot,
say, 11 percent of a particular market to all importers. They are opaque,
insensitive people, who don't know that they have brought us to the edge.''

Says Lane Kirkland, president of the AFL-CIO, the man most concerned for the
fate of American workingmen, who last visited Japan this winter, ''To hear the
Japanese plead for free trade is like hearing the word 'love' on the lips of a
harlot.''

The last body of truths comes from the engineering community - it is the most
serious, most somber, most challenging. It is that the Japanese are very, very
good, better at some things than Americans. They are brilliant, efficient,
aggressive people who prize education as much or more than Americans - and have
learned to use it. John Gibbons is the head of Congress's Office of Technology
Assessment - he is a physicist, who comes to Congress from the Oak Ridge Labs of
the Atomic Energy Commission. He starts the story of Japan's renaissance with
the occupation:

''The most important thing we did after the war was to reorganize it; we
democratized it; we lifted the burden of arms from it, and they poured resources
into education. We helped them. We gave free doctorates in nuclear science to
their students and brought them to Oak Ridge. But you have to realize that the
Japanese already had traditional skills and techniques; they were superb in
alloying metals, in ceramics, in fermentation - out of the broths they knew how
to brew came the fermentation know-how vital to biotechnologies.

''They are ahead of us in productivity in automobiles, in steel, in robotics. We
are ahead in fundamental research, but they get all our science papers and
research, and they add to that their mastery of 'process technology,'
translating fundamental research into the making of things. They recruit their
managers from the factory floor; we get ours out of law schools.''

In Gibbons's view, the challenge lies, above all, to American technology and
education. Unless we can translate our lead in fundamental research into
practice, then others will be the chief beneficiaries of our science and
laboratories.

IN A FEW DAYS IN Washington, one can trace a trail of irritations blistering
under the bland rhetoric that still binds the Pacific alliance together.

Start at the State Department with middle-level officers who deal daily with the
Japanese - and one hears language almost unheard elsewhere in that labyrinth of
quiet diplomats. ''Japan,'' said one, who asked not to be identified, ''is a
protectionist nation: They have no sense of moderation; they are aggressive.
They are an island nation looking out on the rest of the world as plunder from a
protected bastion. Negotiations are tedious, painful -oh, so painful- and, when
they yield, they yield with no grace. It's not only quotas on beef, citrus
fruits, leather, but even on our catsup and peanut butter.

''In 1981, they banned American metal baseball bats. We had the technology for
making a safe cap for metal bats. The Japanese made a metal bat with a plastic
plug top; a plug flew off at a baseball game and struck a spectator. So all
metal bats, safe and dangerous, were banned. We negotiated for three years, we
had to get them to change 18 laws and regulations; we had to get the consent of
the Japanese Softball Association. Then, when the Japanese learned to make safe
metal caps, they reopened the market. Last year, we finally managed to export
350 metal bats to Japan!''

This is the voice of a working diplomat in the State Department. The bureaucracy
bows to political leadership. But it remains the national political scouting
force abroad, and cannot help but observe politics at home. Its officers do not
blink at the reality that Americans want to buy cheap quality goods; no one
forces them to buy Japanese goods. Nor can they blink at the fact that no fewer
than 30 states now have their own offices in Japan soliciting Japanese
investment. But they cannot blink either at the fact that so much of American
industry is being wiped out, and that the men and women discarded scream to
Congress.

At the supreme level, President Reagan deals with Premier Yasuhiro Nakasone of
Japan, who yields and, with exquisite courtesy, goes on television to urge his
people to sample American and foreign imports. But at the working level, each
negotiation is a tormented, ad hoc, item-by-item bargaining.

A shawl of self-restraint drapes over most official American spokesmen; to be
accused of ''Japan-bashing'' is considered ''protectionist'' or, worse,
''racist.'' Foremost among those who thus speak for the old free-trade
tradition, one finds Secretary of State George P. Shultz. ''There is great
sentiment for protection around the country,'' he told a gathering of the
American Stock Exchange recently, ''but in my opinion it's wrong . . . it's bad
. . . this is a matter of deep conviction on my part.'' But no such restraint
binds Congress, or the unions who influence so many constituencies. Congress is
entertaining half-a-dozen bills right now sponsored by afflicted Congressmen; it
is even considering a 25 percent tariff on all imported goods.

Congress is where one can best see the deadlock of ideas, as shoe workers,
garment workers, steel workers, auto workers demand protection. But Senator
Christopher Dodd of Connecticut is typical of a Congressman in the middle; he is
a young, liberal, thoughtful Democrat, and knows that foreign trade is essential
to America. He comes from that state in the Union that is most dependent on
foreign trade - 25 percent of Connecticut's gross state product goes into
exports. But Dodd also sits on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which he
describes as torn between ''bumper-sticker patriots,'' and those who believe
that world peace rests on world trade.

Dodd is worried not about his state, but about the lack of an American strategy
for dealing with the nature of the new trading world. He says: ''We can't make a
strategy by assembling a majority in the House to protect shoes, or automobiles,
or tool-and-die makers. We need an overall trade policy and we need it now
before the whole thing explodes.''

And so Dodd comes down, as do Baldrige, Strauss, and the National Association of
Manufacturers, to the conclusion that there must soon be a great international
gathering that will create an orderly new system of trade to replace the present
anarchy where the wolves pick off the laggards.

What such an international gathering will do, or can do, is still obscure. The
Marshall Plan is remembered as an example of what may be won . . . but the
Marshall Plan took five years to evolve, in interminable conferences from 1944
to 1949. Now the market that must be shared is not simply the Atlantic basin; it
is the whole globe. Korea makes steel and ships, Taiwan makes electronics,
Brazil makes steel, arms, shoes, India and China creep up on every technological
front. All seek to follow Japan's course, at whatever cost to American jobs.
Conscience prevents Americans from spurning the poor and suffering of the world
who seek to better themselves; but common sense forbids a course that permits
their betterment by our impoverishment. Somehow a new way must be found to
fairly share both world resources and markets. It will take a long time to work
that way out, for America must restructure to live in this world as the Japanese
have done. And time is short.

S O ONE TRIES FI-nally to penetrate the thinking of Executive policy - where an
ailing President, plagued with budget deficits, tax reform, the Middle East and
terrorism is too busy to reflect on trade policy, decide on his will, or impose
it.

It is left for others to speak for him, and when they speak, they speak of
peace:

''Who won the war?,'' an official State Department spokesman repeated my
question and answered: ''We won the war. What did we get from the victory? We
expanded the area of freedom. We made a democratic Japan. Our bases in the
Pacific and Japan are essential to our defense. There's peace in the Pacific
now, Japan is our ally, it's stable. Peace is our reward.''

Peace, of course, is primordial. But the Japanese share the same peace, and
under our protection, paying little for it, reserve the right to press American
livelihoods to the wall. How far or how deeply they can press their trade
strategy before Congress explodes in anger is unknown. But it would be well for
the Japanese to remember that if peace is paramount, they need us to keep the
peace more than we need them. And if a ripple of depression forces Congress to
act, a lockup of the open American market would wound Japan more than it would
wound us. The superlative execution of their trade tactics may provoke an
incalculable reaction - as the Japanese might well remember of the course that
ran from Pearl Harbor to the deck of the U.S.S. Missouri in Tokyo Bay just 40
years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of General MacArthur and japan signing the surrender aboard the
U.S.S. Missouri (Larry Keighley); Photo of Nissan car being unloaded on the
docks of Port Elizabeth, N.J.; Photo of students at a training school for
managers (Pagge 20); Photo of Mitsubishi pavilion (Lucy Birmingham/Gamma
Liaison); Photo of workers in New York City (Page 21); photo of Johnstown, Pa.
steel mill sign (Bill C

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words


July 28, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 6 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 4 2 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 3 2 19 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 4 3 10 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 5 5 5 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 6 6 10 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner
to the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century
American wilderness.

* 7 7 11 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 8 8 27 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 9 12 2 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.

* 10 10 6 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence,
$14.95.) In his 12th case, the private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal
agents to bring down a powerful scoundrel.

* 11 13 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard.

* 12 11 19 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 13 13 2 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 14 20 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married couple
with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 15* 9 22 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this
pseudonymous novel by Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously
wasting away. Nonfiction

* 1 1 3 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to first man
to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 39 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 12 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 17 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 5 2 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis star.

* 6 7 4 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 7 1 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankees baseball
star.

* 8 14 11 MY MOTHER'S KEEPER, by B. D. Hyman. (Morrow, $16.95.) A portrait of
the actress Bette Davis by her daughter.

* 9 8 9 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British nobleman, diplomat and naval hero.

* 10 9 11 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 11* 6 48 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.''

* 12 15 47 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for a true love.

* 13 10 2 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
previously unpublished chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 14 12 22 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 15 139 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.)
Light verse and drawings by the author. And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of
other recent books of particular interest) UNDER THE BANYAN TREE and Other
Stories, by R. K. Narayan. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) Simple observation
for its own sake is at the heart of these 28 benign, even-tempered, elegant
stories by the distinguished Indian English-language novelist. IN GOOD FAITH, by
Edith Reveley. (Overlook Press, $15.95.) Set in Rome and Miami Beach, this
complicated mix of family drama, social satire and slapstick engages many
issues: terrorism, international politics, alienation between parents and
children.

THE OXFORD COMPANION TO ENGLISH LITERATURE: Fifth

Edition, edited by Margaret Drabble. (Oxford University, $35.) This whopping
latest version (1,155 pages) of the famous compilation concisely and usefully
describes almost everything and everybody, though some recent developments
-deconstructionism, for example - are slighted. AN OMELETTE AND A GLASS OF WINE,
by Elizabeth David. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $18.95.) A collection of splendid
food journalism by a writer whose recipes stand as metaphors of a way of life as
much as instructions for manufacture. THE BOOK OF PHOEBE, by Mary-Ann Tirone
Smith. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A very funny first novel about a self-confident and
precocious girl who seizes Grant's Tomb at 13 and at 19, knowing her own mind,
goes to Paris to bear her illegitimate child.

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC, by William Gaddis. (Elisabeth Sifton/

Viking, $16.95.) A mazy, mercilessly adroit carnival of frauds and cynics,
thieves and liars, redeemed (if at all) by outrageous humor and a suggestion
that the world may not be as bad as it is painted. THE IMAGE and Other Stories,
by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) Unruly lusts and
uncontrollable passions dominate this latest collection of the Yiddish writer's
short stories. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 7 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 2 17 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 3 4 3 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives.

* 4 3 34 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 5 5 41 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of a computer entry error, the best seller list for hardcover nonfiction
on page 26 of The Times Book Review today incorrectly includes one title, shown
as No. 8. ''My Mother's Keeper'' should not have been listed. The books listed
9th through 15th should each have appeared one position higher. ''The Courage to
Change,'' by Dennis Wholey (Houghton Mifflin), should have been ranked 15th.

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRITICS' CHOICE;
Broadcast TV

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 2, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 283 words


Grappling for a distinctive indentity in last season's glut of police/detective
shows, ''Miami Vice'' got off to a snappily promising start as a two-hour
made-for-TV movie; it will be rebroadcast on NBC on Sunday evening at 9. The
carefully contrasted partners are Ricardo Tubbs (Philip Michael Thomas), a New
York cop prowling around Florida in search of his brother's killer, and Sonny
Crockett (Don Johnson), former football star, Vietnam veteran and now offbeat
undercover Miami policeman. Crockett is white; Tubbs is black. Both are smooth
and swinging.

The setting being Miami, the subject is, and is likely to remain for the most
part, international drug trafficking, with a sleazy array of Central and South
American thugs working their deals with North American counterparts. Some of the
characters on this initial outing are inspired. There is, for instance, the
delicately elegant hoodlum who brags that he has learned English from classic
television series such as ''I Love Lucy'' and ''Father Knows Best.'' Our heroes
have to admit he gives a new meaning to the word alien.

The dialogue is urban sharp, and the action has some roots in reality, even when
spiced with the usual television chases. The soundtrack is amply stocked with
popular-music sequences, giving the pastel-colored show a music-video veneer.
The production credits are impressive; Anthony Yerkovich, who created ''Miami
Vice,'' has won three Emmy awards in connection with ''Hill Street Blues.'' Mr.
Johnson and Mr. Thomas work well together. The chemistry was promising. The rest
was up to the script writers, and they have subsequently delivered solidly
enough to make the series a bona fide hit for NBC.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THEY COVERED THE LANDSLIDE

BYLINE: By Ken Auletta; Ken Auletta is a columnist for the Daily News. His
forthcoming book is ''Greed and Glory on Wall Street: The Fall of the House of
Lehman.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2210 words


WAKE US WHEN IT'S OVER Presidential Politics of 1984. By Jack W. Germond and
Jules Witcover. 567 pp. New York: Macmillan. $19.95. VISIONS OF AMERICA How We
Saw the 1984 Election. By William A. Henry 3d. 275 pp. Boston: The Atlantic
Monthly Press. $17.95.

HOW can two guys so enthralled with covering politics be so unhappy with the
state of American politics? That's the question I kept asking myself as I read
Jack W. Germond and Jules Witcover's chronicle of the 1984 Presidential contest.
Their book, ''Wake Us When It's Over,'' growls at the way Americans nominate and
elect Presidents, transforming what should be a gentlemanly sport into clawing
''warfare.'' Their premise, after covering seven Presidential contests, is that
the race for the White House has become vicious. ''Men and women who in the
normal pursuits of their lives would not think even of driving through a red
light,'' these syndicated columnists write, ''readily bring themselves, like men
in battle, to commit violations of campaign law or ethics in the name of
political survival - for their candidate or for their own vested interest in
him.''

This impressively reported book begins months before the first votes are cast in
Iowa's party caucuses; it re-creates in exhaustive (and sometimes exhausting)
detail the roller-coaster feel of the campaign - the mistakes from fatigue, the
scrambled strategy, the groggy mindlessness of not just campaign strategists but
journalism as well.

There is also fresh material. They reveal how the Mondale campaign, despite the
candidate's pledge not to accept political action committee funds, which are
generally set up by corporations or labor unions to raise money for candidates,
nonetheless winked when PAC monies, skirting campaign finance limits, poured in
during the Pennsylvania primary. Fearful of handing Gary Hart a smoking gun that
would link the PAC monies and the local Mondale effort, and terrified that
Walter Mondale would learn of these legal but embarrassing transactions, David
Ifshin, the counsel to the Mondale campaign, and Michael Berman, the treasurer,
dispatched the Washington lawyer Richard Goodstein to spy on the Pennsylvania
headquarters. When Mr. Ifshin learned that the local Mondale coordinator, Diane
Thompson, kept detailed notes and ledgers of how they spent approximately
$60,000 of these PAC funds, he and Mr. Berman nodded their approval for their
mole to steal the black loose-leaf notebook from her desk. Torn between their
need for the money in order to win, and their fear that Mr. Mondale would
explode at them if he knew they were doing what he had vowed not to, the Mondale
hierarchy panicked.

An implicit theme running through this tale and others is that a campaign
reflects not just the candidate but his team. Although Mr. Reagan is the extreme
case of a candidate often blithely unaware of what is said in his name, to some
extent this is unavoidable if a candidate is to delegate responsibility. Even
Gary Hart, who delegated too little, was hoodwinked in Illinois by the pollster
Patrick Caddell, who, Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover show, deliberately ignored
his candidate's instructions to yank off the air negative television spots
attacking local politicians and his opponent in the Illinois primary, Mr.
Mondale. The Reagan strategists Stuart Spencer and Lee Atwater jointly conceived
an operation which Mr. Atwater reduced to a six-page memorandum, ''The Great
American Fog Machine.'' The memorandum outlined that the task of the campaign
was to ''fog'' the issues and to ''shift the emphasis to Mondale.'' Accordingly,
the authors demonstrate how President Reagan dissembled about his responsibility
for mammoth Federal deficits or denied his own efforts to pare Social Security
benefits.

At its heart, the authors argue, the problem with Presidential campaigns is that
those who seek office, as well as their aides, lust so much for the titles that
campaigns are no longer conducted in the gentlemanly fashion of the good old
days. This may come as a surprise to those who have read, for example, about the
1884 campaign, in which Republicans attacked the Democrat Grover Cleveland, a
bachelor, for his affair with a Buffalo widow, by whom he fathered an
illegitimate son. Outraged, the Democrats countered by attacking the Republican
nominee, James G. Blaine, for his premarital relations with his wife.

Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover's narrative of the 1984 contests indeed offers a
litany of what is wrong with modern campaigns - the unwillingness to ventilate
issues, the elevation of meaningless straw votes or minor state primaries into
life-and-death struggles, 30-second television spots selling candidates like
bars of soap, journalists playing the expectations game in which they wrongly
rush to declare winners and losers, only to have their hasty judgments
repudiated by events.

This is all too familiar - and convincing. And yet the authors write as if they
bear no responsibility for the mindlessness of candidates' and journalists'
behavior. Throughout, they bemoan the failure of candidates to discuss issues,
they speak of ''political junkies'' who head to Iowa years before the party
caucuses and who, in part, are responsible for the overlong campaigns. Yet
anyone familiar with the journalism of these columnists knows that they, as much
as anyone, are card-carrying ''political junkies.'' For them, the Presidential
race rarely rests; Government is something candidates squeeze in between
elections. Among the press ''pack,'' which chases and handicaps candidates
months before the first primary voter has spoken, Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover
are dons. Nevertheless, they adopt the bored, cynical pose favored by
journalists. Their book's title - ''Wake Us When It's Over'' - mocks their own
professed anger at the way the 1984 campaign was conducted. To their credit,
this book treats the campaign differently from the way their daily journalism
often does. Here they stand back and offer perspective, depth, a table of
contents as well as an index of who did what to whom. They have produced a
prodigiously reported and engrossing book from the inside out of the campaign.

Another vantage point is assumed by William A. Henry 3d, a Time magazine
reporter who covers the campaign from the outside in. Where Mr. Germond and Mr.
Witcover's pointillism leads them constantly to quote campaign operatives, Mr.
Henry does not mention the name of Walter Mondale's campaign manager, James
Johnson, until page 199. His book often is what journalists refer to as a
''thumbsucker,'' suffused with what Mr. Henry proclaims as ''highly opinionated,
even quirky,'' views. Thankfully, those opinions are advanced with graceful
prose, and there is an intelligent effort to place the campaign in a broader
sociological context. It is Mr. Henry's thesis that voters were not snookered;
the election of Ronald Reagan was an expression of the popular will, the
national mood. Instead of focusing on deceitful campaign tactics, as Mr. Germond
and Mr. Witcover do in sizing up the nomination of Walter Mondale and the
election of Ronald Reagan, Mr. Henry, who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage
of television in 1980 and who is currently drama critic for Time magazine,
searches for connections, for deeper meaning.

In 1984, Mr. Henry says, ''Americans wanted heroes . . . Virile Clint Eastwood
in 1984 released three successful movies . . . On television, the nation admired
the profit-taking vigilantes of 'The A-Team,' who were a group of Vietnam war
veterans, and of 'Riptide,' who were a trio of all-American, danger-loving boys.
. . . The quartet of beloved nighttime soap operas, 'Dallas,' 'Dynasty,' 'Falcon
Crest' and 'Knot's Landing,' feature wealthy, vulgar, despicable people whose
chief pleasure in money seemed to consist in not having to be polite. If these
plutocrats were surrogates for viewers engaged in fantasy, then seemingly the
American people yearned, not only for vast wealth and conspicuous consumption,
but also for the wherewithal to crush enemies and exact revenge even from
siblings . . . The prevailing mood in entertainment seemed to be anger.''

The author's ability to link the insular world of politics with popular culture
allows him to show that Mr. Mondale's emphasis on giving, on compassionate
government, was alien to many, while Mr. Reagan's emphasis on individual and
national self-reliance, on a deregulated market and slimmed-down and
decentralized government, was more in tune with what voters wanted. It follows
that Mr. Mondale lost not because his strategy was flawed but because his
message and personality were feebly matched against Mr. Reagan's.

This is true enough, yet Mr. Henry's ''big picture'' approach often wrongly
disdains tactical decisions made by campaign strategists. What if Mr. Mondale
had dared, during the primary season, to offend some of his key supporters,
including labor, and thus positioned himself less like a New Deal Democrat
fighting the last war? What if he had not conducted his Vice-Presidential search
as if it were an affirmative action outreach program? What if his honest pledge
to raise taxes to help balance the budget was not left dangling alone but
instead was one of many examples of his willingness to show that he dared to
offend by talking straight to the American people, while Ronald Reagan soothed
them with lullabies? Perhaps the Presidential outcome would not have been
altered. On the other hand, it is not far-fetched to assume that such a Mondale
effort would have resulted in the defeat of such incumbents as Senator Jesse
Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and would have sabotaged the punditry that
proclaims the Republican Party has been the entrenched party of the majority.

If ''Wake Us When It's Over'' suffers from too much reporting, Mr. Henry's book
suffers from too little. Where Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover explain why Mr. Hart
wrongly accused Mr. Mondale of preparing ads attacking Mr. Hart for changing his
name and misstating his age, Mr. Henry settles for what he calls a ''Chinese
puzzle-box of speculation'' as to why Mr. Hart reacted the way he did. Mr. Henry
downplays the role of advisers, while Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover demonstrate
their importance.

Mr. Henry's book has an annoying tendency to assert things that are wrong or
unprovable. Of Mr. Mondale's posture in favor of Federal loans to the Chrysler
Corporation, he writes, ''Mondale's position typified the preference of liberals
for results over principles,'' while Mr. Hart's opposition ''was prototypical
for reformers'' who yearn for ''intellectual purity.'' This sweeping statement
may come as a surprise to those who followed the welfare reform debate in the
early 1970's when ''liberals'' refused to compromise to achieve half a loaf. And
while it is true that Gary Hart proved at times to be a priggish reformer, it is
also true that he and other so-called neoliberals are often accused of being too
willing to compromise sacred Democratic Party principles in the name of what
works. ''Reformers,'' Mr. Henry writes, ''rarely inspire such enthusiasm among
urban voters.'' Has he never heard of Fiorello La Guardia, John V. Lindsay, Carl
Stokes, the younger Kevin White, or Edward Koch when he was elected mayor in
1977?

Despite differences, these books are alike in some respects. Neither book grinds
an ax for a candidate or ideology. Each paints an ugly portrait of modern
campaigning. Each is angry at the political process, the hypocrisy and lies of
the candidates. And each advances a common theme about the complicity of the
media. Both demonstrate that the press and television, in their hunger for
something fresh to say, downplayed Mr. Mondale's impressive 49 percent victory
in the Iowa party caucuses and played up Mr. Hart's ''surprising'' but lame 16.5
percent showing. The journalists failed to predict Mr. Hart's upset in the New
Hampshire primary, then built him into a giant killer, then sidetracked his
locomotive with incessant sniping about why he changed his name or age.
Throughout the marathon race for the Presidency, the mistakes of the Fourth
Es-tate, particularly television, intruded.

It is not a pretty sight, and yet this reader came away feeling that neither
book, for all the solid evidence produced, adequately explained why -not just
how - journalists faltered. The form of journalism - the need for a fresh daily
story, a headline, a lead paragraph, the need to condense something ''new'' into
a minute-and-a-half television report or a 500-word story - dictates the
content. The form demands that those candidates judged less ''serious'' be
separated and not allowed to blur the focus on the horse race. The form demands
an air of omniscience. Ask a political reporter what's going on in a campaign
and who's going to win, and rarely will we say what we should: ''I don't know.''
Mr. Germond and Mr. Witcover do not question whether journalists should be
handicapping races; their complaint is that they do not handicap well enough.
Actually, what is needed is not more handicapping but more of the
step-back-from-the-fray kind of thinking and reporting displayed in each of
these flawed but nonetheless valuable books.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan (NYT/Ruby Washington)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Sihanouk Accuses Khmer Rouge of Attacks

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 232 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 28


Strains in the guerrilla alliance opposing the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia
sharpened today with a charge by Prince Norodom Sihanouk that the Communist
Khmer Rouge had been turning its guns on his group of fighters.

In a telegram circulated to Western reporters here, Prince Sihanouk said the
Khmer Rouge, his nominal partners, killed 38 of his soldiers, captured 32 others
and seized arms and equipment in attacks from February to June. He demanded
immediate release of the prisoners and compensation for the families of the
dead.

He also gave notice to the Khmer Rouge and its main backer, China, that he would
resign as titular head of the coalition if attacks recurred.

''If the Khmer Rouge kill so much as one more of the Sihanoukists,'' he said,
''my decision to leave the coalition will be irrevocable.''

The Prince, a former Cambodian Chief of State, has threatened several times
before to resign as chairman of the Coalition Government of Democratic
Kampuchea, the loose guerrilla alliance that holds the Cambodian seat in the
United Nations. He has withdrawn the threat each time, but tensions between him
and the Khmer Rouge, and to some extent between him and China, have increased
this year.

The telegram about the attacks was written by Prince Sihanouk at his Peking
residence in reply to a battlefront report sent by his son, Prince Ranariddh,
who is in Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NASA MAY ALTER COUNTDOWNS TO REDUCE DELAYS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., July 28


As the countdown toward the scheduled liftoff Monday of the space shuttle
Challenger continued smoothly today, space agency officials said they might
alter countdown procedures to avoid the type of last-second problems that forced
the postponement of this mission two weeks ago.

The Challenger and its crew of seven astronauts are now scheduled to be sent
into space at 3:23 P.M. Monday on a seven-day mission to study the earth, sun
and stars with an array of advanced instruments.

An engine problem that caused the countdown to be aborted three seconds before
liftoff July 12 has prompted a review of launching procedures, according to
Jesse W. Moore, head of the shuttle program at the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.

''We want to minimize the chances of a needless shutdown,'' Mr. Moore said in an
interview. ''There may be a way to soften up some of our criteria.''

Cause of Valve Failure Unknown

The balky valve assembly that forced the July 12 launching to be scrubbed was
replaced, but engineers did not discover why the valve had failed to move
properly. Mr. Moore said the proposed changes in procedures might allow future
countdowns to continue even if computers detected momentarily sluggish valves.

The shutdown was the second in the shuttle program. In June 1984 the first
flight of the shuttle Discovery was aborted four seconds before liftoff. The
exact malfunction was never determined.

''Before you take off on an airplane the pilot normally tries all his flaps and
hydraulics,'' Mr. Moore said. ''We don't have a chance to do that on the launch
pad right now, and we want to perform those kinds of checks.''

The possibility of new procedures is said to reflect growing confidence in the
nation's fleet of space shuttles as well as concern about rising competition
from abroad.

Shuttle launchings must proceed smoothly and regularly if the program is to be a
commercial success, according to space agency officials. The current schedule
calls for one launching a month, eventually speeding up to one every two weeks.
$50 Billion Business at State As competition in the commercial launching of
spacecraft spreads around the world, the need to adhere to that tight schedule
is becoming more evident. China, Japan, France, India, the Soviet Union and the
European Space Agency all have launching programs and satellite services that
are beginning to challenge those of the American space program.

At stake is what some economists in the aerospace field estimate to be a $50
billion annual business by the end of the century.

New procedures being considered for the countdown include increasing the amount
of time allowed for the shuttle's computers to verify the correct functioning of
engine valves and broadening the criteria under which they are meant to operate.

Mr. Moore said that criteria for safety would not change. The new procedures, he
said, would add ''no risk'' to crew members. He added that the new methods might
be ready as soon as the scheduled August mission of the shuttle Discovery.
#12-Hour Shifts on Flight Today the crew members ate, slept and worked in two
separate teams to prepare for the mission's grueling schedule of 12-hour shifts.
Early this morning the astronauts sat down together for a meal, three eating
dinner and four eating breakfast.

The commander is Col. C. Gordon Fullerton of the Air Force, 48 years old, who
served as the pilot on the third shuttle mission. The Challenger's pilot is Col.
Roy D. Bridges Jr., 41, of the Air Force, a fighter pilot who flew combat
missions in Vietnam.

The mission specialists are Dr. Anthony W. England, 43, a geophysicist; Dr. Karl
G. Henize, 58, an astronomer; and Dr. F. Story Musgrave, 49, a physician who was
a mission specialist on the sixth shuttle flight.

The payload specialists on this flight are Dr. Loren W. Acton, 48, a solar
physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory in California, and Dr.
John-David F. Bartoe, 41, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory in
Washington.

Several Astronomical Studies

The seven-day mission is to transform the winged spacecraft into an advanced
astronomical observatory. The flight is the 19th in the shuttle series and the
first for a $72 million set of telescopes and other sensitive instruments.

The crew will focus some of the telescopes in the shuttle's 60-foot payload bay
to peer at the sun's corona and outer atmosphere, and others to study cosmic
rays, X-rays and infrared radiation from stars and galaxies in distant corners
of the universe.

The astronauts will also release and later retrieve a small scientific satellite
to help understand the effects of solar winds on the earth's atmosphere as well
as a phenomenon that often causes the shuttle to glow softly. Solving this
riddle is considered important to the success of future missions, which will
carry instruments that might be disturbed by the mysterious aura.

The flight will also mark the debut of a $60 million instrument pointing system,
which on this shuttle flight is holding four delicate telecopes. Most of the
equipment on the Challenger was developed by the European Space Agency.

Both Coca-Cola - the new formula -and Pepsi Cola are scheduled to be served in
special cans designed to prevent carbonation from being lost. Space agency
officials say that the crew has been advised not to talk about what is being
referred to as ''the cola wars,'' not to photograph the containers in space and
not to state any possible preference for one cola or the other.

The shuttle is scheduled to land Aug. 5 at 2:35 P.M., Eastern daylight time, at
Edwards Air Force Base in California. >----Easter Island to Be Used SANTIAGO,
Chile, July 28 (Reuters) - Chile and the United States have reached agreement on
a plan to use the airstrip on Easter Island as an emergency landing site for the
space shuttle, Foreign Minister Jaime del Valle said.

He told reporters Friday that the proposed agreement had only to be translated
and sent to President Augusto Pinochet for approval.

NASA had asked Chile to extend the runway on the remote Pacific island so space
shuttles that take off from California could land there if they failed to reach
orbit. Washington has offered to pay for the improvements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Col. Roy Bridges Jr. (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Jeanne Seibold Wed to Michael Teitler

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


Jeanne Hall Seibold, an associate in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose
Goetz & Mendelsohn, was married yesterday to Michael F. Teitler, a member of the
New York law firm of Teitler & Teitler, of which his father, Samuel L. Teitler
of Kew Gardens Hills, Queens, is a senior partner. Donald C. Christ, acting
village justice of Mill Neck, L.I., performed the ceremony at the bridegroom's
home in Port Washington, L.I.

Mrs. Teitler is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Robert M. Hall of Hinsdale, Mass. She
attended Bates College and the University of Maryland's Far East Division in
Taipei, Taiwan, and graduated from Queens College and St. John's University
School of Law, where she was notes and comments editor of the Law Review. Her
previous marriage ended in divorce as did the bridegroom's. Her father is
retired and was an agricultural adviser for the Agency for International
Development in Nhatrang, Vietnam.

Mr. Teitler, a son also of Mrs. Teitler, attended Lehigh University and
graduated from the Brooklyn Law School. His father is also vice chairman
emeritus of World Airways Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRETORIA'S FORCES ASSESSED: ABLE AND, IF TESTED, RUTHLESS

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 29


South Africa's security forces are reasonably well trained, professional and
ably led and can be expected to be ruthless in trying to quell black disorders
or attempts at insurrection, according to American experts.

If the combined force of army troops, reserves and police have any weakness,
these experts say, it may be a diminishing flow of reliable intelligence from
black informants in the segregated African townships during the state of
emergency declared nine days ago. This was once a notable strength of the
security forces.

At any given moment in peacetime, the number of armed services personnel on
active duty totals about 82,000, according to Kenneth Grundy, a professor at
Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, who closely follows South African
military affairs and is preparing a book on the subject.

To that number can be added about 44,000 policemen, all of whom have some
paramilitary training. If all of the better trained military reservists, called
the Citizen Force, were mobilized at one time, the armed forces and police would
total about 275,000.

'Besotted With History'

In addition to these physically fit and well-trained units, nearly all white
South African males are members of local commandos; the word commando is of
South African origin and recalls the citizen military units of the Boer
Republics that fought a losing but determined war against the British at the
start of the 20th century. These commando members and police reservists can be
used in an extreme emergency.

''Few peoples are so besotted with history as the Afrikaners,'' a United States
Government official said, referring to the Afrikaans-speaking whites, who are
descended from the original settlers and who have had many political and
economic disputes with the somewhat smaller English-speaking group of white
South Africans.

The history of the Afrikaners has ''ridden on a wave of violence in which a
terribly small number of Afrikaners defeated much larger numbers of blacks or
British,'' Professor Grundy said.

There are annual commemorations in South Africa of such events as the battle of
Blood River in 1838 in which a few hundred Boers, their wagons drawn in a now
politically symbolic circle, defeated many thousand Zulu warriors.

Panic Considered Unlikely

Nor is all of this morale molding of ancient date. Ten years ago in South
Africa, theaters were jammed for movies much like the American commercial
success ''Rambo.'' In the South African version, an Afrikaner soldier
single-handedly annihilated groups of African guerrillas and their Chinese
advisers with firearms and his bare hands.

The significance of this enduring military nostalgia, according to both official
and unofficial American analysts, is that the Afrikaner-dominated South African
Government and its security forces are unlikely to panic under the pressure of
black unrest.

''Afrikaners are likely to tell themselves, 'We gutted it out in the past, and
this is no time to cut and run,' '' Mr. Grundy said. Some State and Defense
Department officials took an identical view.

But the same experts agreed with Mr. Grundy that the concept of a citizen army
''is a nice myth which the Government would like to retain, but which no longer
has much reality.''

Army More Professional

Much of this is due to the increasing professionalism of the South African Army,
which mostly took place when P. W. Botha, not the President, was Defense
Minister from 1966 to 1978.

Under Mr. Botha's stewardship the armed forces became better trained, and he
embraced a cadre of professional officers who were fascinated with the lessons
of counterinsurgency drawn from the Malayan revolt and the Vietnam War.

Under South African law, which defines the army and the police as a ''single
component'' of the security system, almost all white males are subject to
conscription. Draftees must serve two years' active duty, and about 24,000 men a
year are drafted. They are trained, led and technologically supported by what is
called the Permanent Force, which totaled 29,300 men in 1983. Thus, the standing
army at any time is about 77,000.

But some of the Citizen Force reserves are always on duty. By law such
well-trained reserves are required to serve 720 days, nearly two years, on
active duty before retirement in their mid-50's. Much like the Israeli Defense
Forces, whose soldiers in any major war come primarily from the reserves, these
are not marginally useful troops but the heart of the South African armed
forces. In the invasion of Angola in 1975 and 1976, many of the ablest units
that went farthest into Angola were Citizen Force units.

Weaknesses in the System

There are, however, weaknesses in the South African security system, which is
clearly meant to suppress black political aspirations, according to United
States experts. The police are poorly paid and have relatively low social
status. Although abuse of prisoners has reportedly declined, they have ''no
finesse,'' according to one expert, as illustrated by the tendency to open fire
on crowds rather than control them.

In the present crisis, as in past periods of tension, the black members of the
police have increasingly had to move their families out of segregated black
townships to military compounds - they cannot legally live in ''white areas.''
They have moved because black militants have increasingly begun to attack and
kill people they regard as ''collaborators'' or informers.

After the Sharpeville riots of 1960, which tended to panic the white Government
and in which an emergency was also declared, the authorities were able to
''decapitate'' the black political movement by arresting its main leaders.

''And you can't easily decapitate the resistance now because it has so many
youthful leaders who seem to rise spontaneously,'' Mr. Grundy said.

On the Government side of the ledger, a Defense Department authority said, there
is little evidence that the black dissident movement has the arms, leaders or
organization to conduct a guerrilla war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Why U.S. Is Helping Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


To the Editor:

Helen R. Chauncey's ''Giving Military Aid to the Khmer Rouge'' (Op-Ed, June 30)
is a mixture of well-meant concerns that have already been addressed and
misinformation that needs correcting.

The objections Professor Chauncey voiced about an assistance program for the
non-Communist resistance in Cambodia were met in an amendment that I offered to
the foreign-assistance authorization on the House floor July 9. In accordance
with the amendment, which passed by a vote of 288 to 122:

* The program will be administered by the United States Government and not by
Thailand.

* Funds used for military assistance will be allocated from a military-aid
account and not from the economic-support fund.

* None of the assistance can go directly or indirectly to the Khmer Rouge (this
restates a prohibition already in the law).

These adjustments were not, in my view, essential for preventing abuses. But
they served the valuable purpose of broadening the political coalition
supporting assistance.

That coalition understood, as Professor Chauncey apparently does not, the
central elements of the assistance program. In the first place, the assistance
can take several forms: humanitarian, economic or military -whatever best
strengthens the resistance. Military assistance is not mandated, as Professor
Chauncey incorrectly asserts.

Second, the purpose of the program is not, as she claims, ''to win a war.'' Not
even the non-Communist resistance groups believe it is possible to achieve a
military victory. But they, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
United States Government do believe that a strengthened resistance can raise the
price of Vietnam's occupation and may induce it to withdraw. So strengthened,
the non-Communist groups will also stand as a democratic alternative to the
Khmer Rouge.

Third, there is little prospect for a negotiated solution of the conflict.
Professor Chauncey's undocumented assertion that ''America is strategically well
placed to promote a negotiated settlement for the withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops'' does not square with the facts. We should not attempt to block a
satisfactory negotiated settlement.

But there is unlikely to be progress at the negotiating table unless Vietnam
faces greater difficulty on the battlefield. The continued presence of 50,000
Vietnamese troops in Laos, despite the absence of any genuine resistance
movement in that country, makes clear that the 170,000 Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia will leave only if significant political and military pressure is
mounted against them.

Finally, this assistance program does not represent an open-ended commitment.
Future aid will be governed by the performance of the resistance and the views
of our friends on the region. I believe that our Government can apply resources
to our objectives in Cambodia judiciously and unsentimentally. Precisely because
of our Vietnam experience, Professor Chauncey need not fear the slippery slope.
(Rep.) STEPHEN J. SOLARZ Chairman, House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific
Affairs Washington, July 19, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


MANSIONS Our town's branch office of Washington's Smithsonian Institution is the
Cooper-Hewitt Museum - which is also known as the National Museum of Design.
Long before it became a museum, this was the building where Andrew Carnegie hung
his hat in New York, a 1903 mixed Renaissance-Georgian mansion with many rooms,
a large garden in the rear, a little greenhouse at one end and heaven only knows
how many hatstands.

One of the current exhibitions now on view is in Mr. Carnegie's one-time library
on the main floor, and it is appropriately enough one that deals with books.
''Timeless Sources: Rare Books in the Cooper-Hewitt Museum'' displays 3,000
volumes published between the 1400's and the 1900's, mostly from the 17th and
18th centuries.

In another room, ''Carnegie's Libraries: A Sesquicentennial Celebration'' pays
tributes to one of the magnate's greatest philanthropies, the building of 1,600
free public libraries. The look of the Carnegie libraries, which can still be
seen in some New York branches, is represented here by photographs, postcards,
drawings and commemorative items commenting on the Carnegie gifts.

A jug of wine goes with books, as the poet noted, and yet another show, ''Wine:
Celebration and Ceremony,'' offers jugs and mugs and vineyards and presses and
other items associated with the winemaking art. Finally, there is ''Chicago
Furniture: Art, Craft and Industry, 1833-1983,'' an exhibition of more than 65
pieces of furniture.

Need a breath of fresh air? In the garden, Bob Brookmeyer, composer and jazz
trombonist, and Jim Hall, guitarist, give a free concert today at 6:30 P.M.

The museum is at 2 East 91st Street (860-6868). Hours are 10 A.M. to 9 P.M. on
Tuesdays (free after 5 P.M.); to 5 P.M. Wednesdays through Saturdays, and noon
to 5 P.M. on Sundays. Admission: $2; over-65's and students, $1; under-12's
free, RAISED VOICES The outdoor program by the National Chorale today at 8 P.M.
in Lincoln Center's Damrosch Park has every indication of being on a different
scale from the usual choral program. This is an evening of Kurt Weill and
Leonard Bernstein, and some of it you may never have heard or at least not have
heard in a long time.

The chorale does its programs in song segments, as they might have been done in
shows, with solos, quartets, larger and smaller groups of singers fashioning the
delivery. On this show, it will perform three ''scenes'' from ''Firebrand,''
written in 1945 by Weill with Ira Gershwin as a spoof of grand opera and
operetta; it was less than warmly received but it had, in the opinion of Martin
Josman, who heads the chorale, some beautiful music. In addition, other songs
from ''One Touch of Venus,'' ''Lost in the Stars,'' ''Knickerbocker Holiday''
and ''Street Scene,'' which was written with Elmer Rice and will be memorialized
here by ''The Ice Cream Sextet.''

Mr. Bernstein's music comes from ''On the Town,'' ''Wonderful Town,''
''Candide'' and ''West Side Story.'' Admission is free. Information: 869-0970.

REGGAE

The Bell Plaza, at 42d Street just west of the Avenue of the Americas, is an
attractive place for a stage on one of the busiest of thoroughfares. When
lunch-hour crowds spill out of the offices, they may go to nearby Bryant Park
or, on Tuesdays, to this New York City Telephone Company enclave for a concert
from noon to 2 P.M.

Today's installment of this 11-week series brings the sound of reggae to the
plaza, in the person of Anastas Hackett, drummer, and his Jette Black group.
Sharing the program is the 12-member Acanthus Ballet Company, doing new
choreography and traditional dances in the style of modern and classical ballet.

Admission is free. Information: 395-7764.

STILL IN SERVICE

Bruce Vernon Bradley retired in 1977 from his Air Force career, during which he
had received the Distinguished Flying Cross for action in Vietnam. Mr. Bradley,
once Lieutenant Colonel Bradley, found that he had talent as an entertainer,
particularly in cabaret.

He received good reviews in an Off Broadway show and he has been making the
rounds of theater and club, with his ukulele, ever since. Tonight, and on the
next two Tuesdays, Mr. Bradley checks into Jan Wallman's Restaurant, 28 Cornelia
Street (242-9557), to sing in his new act, ''In a Sentimental Mood,''
accompanied by Ann Adams on piano.

Shows at 9 and 11 P.M. Cover is $5, with a $5 minimum. Drinks, $2.50 up. Main
courses between $7.50 and $11.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 31, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Home, Home on the Mall

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


The Mall, that length of grassy green that stretches from the Capitol to the
quiet majesty of the Lincoln Memorial, could in some ways be considered the
nation's frontyard.

It has been, and continues to be, the scene of both protests and celebrations
that reflect the heart of America.

The farmers bring their tractors, the steelworkers their hard hats and the
''prayer in school'' marchers their Bibles.

But it is also a place for Fourth of July rock concerts and folk festivals, for
frisbee contests and kite flying.

In the winter, there are ice skaters; in the spring, cherry blossoms and band
concerts; in the summer, picnics and polo players and softball. And in all
seasons, there are the tourists and the joggers.

A Year's Worth of History

The Smithsonian Institution's staff of 14 photographers have captured these
American images with their cameras. And on Aug. 9 an exhibition of 55 black and
white photographs culled from thousands of prints will go on view here at the
National Museum of American History.

The exhibit, ''History as Seen from the National Museum of American History,''
is a restrospective that records the parades, dedications, protests and
celebrations of the past year.

Smithsonian photographers are normally busy focusing on such curiosities as
dinosaur bones and the Hope Diamond. But they are also encouraged to capture the
events and happenings that surround the complex of Smithsonian buildings on the
Mall.

''We used a little poetic license and stretched and crooked our necks a bit to
see what was happening over on Pennsylvania Avenue and down at the West Front of
the Capitol,'' said Bernard Finn, who acted as curator for the show.

''We had a wealth of material,'' he added, ''and since we normally do historical
exhibits here we thought we would try to organize the material to make a
historical statement of some sort and say: 'This is what happened in Washington
last year and this is what we, as historians, make of it.' ''

As Mr. Finn and James Wallace, director of the Smithsonian's office of printing
and photographic services, mulled over the collection, they detected three basic
themes dominating the period that fell between the spring of 1984 and the spring
of 1985.

''One, Washington is a city of protest,'' Mr. Finn said. ''People come here to
tell Government where to get off, what to do. It is freedom of assembly.''

''Second,'' he continued, ''Washington is a city like any other city - it is a
community of people. We have our parades and our marathons and Michael Jackson
comes to Washington and we enjoy ourselves. The rest of the country sometimes
forgets that real people live here.''

Those themes have been part and parcel of the city for years, Mr. Finn said. But
a third, more peculiar thread discovered running through those 12 months was
that it was also a period, Mr. Finn said, ''of flag-waving, of patriotism.''

''It was a political year, a Presidential year,'' he said, ''but even so, the
events outside of politics seemed to have patriotic themes. The Olympic
torchbearers came through Washington, the U.S. Olympic teams returned here,
there was the dedication of the Vietnam Memorial and an enormous flag was hung
at the Department of Transportation.''

The retrospective, which will run through Dec. 1, is planned as an annual
exhibition.

So this summer, once again, they are out there with their cameras: the
Smithsonian photographers, pursuing their particular slice of Americana.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of events at the Mall in Washington D.C. (Smithsonian
Institute/Richard Hofmeister, Jeff Tinsley and Jeff Ploskonka)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 31, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SYRIA GIVES LEBANESE SHIITES 50 TANKS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 30


Syria, in an unexpected move, delivered 50 Soviet-made tanks today to Amal, the
mainstream Shiite Moslem militia in Lebanon.

The tanks, identified as T-54's, an older model, dramatically altered the
balance of power among Lebanon's fractious Moslem militias, and between Moslems
and Christians.

The Shiite Moslem militia will use the tanks ''to confront the Palestinians,''
according to a Government source. Amal forces battled Palestinian guerrillas for
weeks earlier this year in the three refugee settlements in the southern
outskirts of Beirut.

The tanks, equipped with 100-millimeter cannons, were brought into West Beirut,
the Moslem sector of the city, on Syrian Army transport trucks. Some of the
tanks flew Amal flags. Officials of the militia confirmed that they had received
50 T-54 tanks, but declined further comment. The T-54 is a tank type that has
been used in combat in the Middle East, Angola, Vietnam and in fighting between
India and Pakistan.

Fight Against Palestinians

Amal, the largest of the Shiite Moslem militias in Lebanon, fought for five
weeks in May and June to crush Palestinian guerrillas who were seeking to
rebuild the power base in Lebanon that they lost when they were driven out
during the Israeli invasion of 1982.

Syria, the main backer and arms supplier of Amal, has opposed the Palestinian
forces loyal to Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Rival Palestinian groups in Lebanon are allied with Syria.

President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, who has become the main power broker in
Lebanon in the vacuum left by a decade of civil war, strongly opposes the
agreement by Mr. Arafat and King Hussein of Jordan to move jointly toward talks
with the United States aimed at organizing peace negotiations with Israel.

Sources in Amal said most of the Amal tanks were positioned around the Burj al
Brajneh Palestinian settlement in the southern suburbs of Beirut, which are
dominated by Shiites.

Some Tanks Near Airport

Burj al Brajneh was the scene of heavy fighting in the battle for the
settlements, in which 600 people were killed and more than 2,500 wounded, most
of them Palestinians.

Reporters saw 19 tanks being unloaded from Syrian transporters at an Amal base
near Beirut International Airport, which is at the seafront in the southern
suburbs.

A Syrian soldier driving a transporter told reporters that one tank was damaged
when its transporter went off the winding road through the Shuf Mountains
outside Beirut, which are controlled by the Druse militia led by Walid Jumblat.

Another Syrian driver shouted: ''These are for the Amal commandos! There are
more to stop the Israelis!'' The tanks dramatically increase the firepower of
the Amal militia, which has 6,000 members and is led by Nabih Berri, the
Lebanese Justice Minister and minister in charge of southern Lebanon affairs.

Before receiving the tanks, Amal's heaviest weapons were multiple rocket
launchers, rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns. That left the Druse
militia as the most powerful Moslem-aligned force in Lebanon. It had about 30
Syrian-supplied T-55 tanks, also an older Soviet-built model.

Rival Groups Have Tanks

The Lebanese Army, whose officer corps is Christian, has 142 United States-made
M-48 battle tanks and 13 French AMX-13 light tanks. But the army has never been
an effective force in halting the Lebanese fighting because it is splintered
along sectarian lines.

The main Christian militia, known as the Lebanese Forces, has 21 tanks
-U.S.-made M-4 Shermans and T-54's. Israel has provided at least 40 Sherman
tanks to the 1,500-man South Lebanon Army, a predominantly Christian militia
that acts as Israel's surrogate in the area Israel calls its ''security zone''
just north of the border.

Mr. Berri and Mr. Jumblat, who is Minister of Public Works, Transport and
Tourism in the Lebanese Government, have been allies against the Christians.
Their alliance, however, cooled during the battle for the refugee camps and the
Shiite and Druse militias clashed several times.

Both men were in Damascus on Tuesday to meet with Syrian leaders about a plan
through which President Assad has been seeking a reconciliation among Lebanon's
factions.

West Beirut Relatively Calm

A two-week-old security arrangement under the plan calls for the withdrawal of
militiamen from West Beirut and an end to the rule of militias there. Riot
policemen in red berets are now patrolling the streets of the Moslem sector,
where relative calm has prevailed after weeks of street battles.

As part of a settlement, President Assad wants Lebanon's Christians, who have
traditionally held a major share of the political power in Lebanon, to share
more of it with Moslems, who increasingly are in the majority.

The Lebanese President, Amin Gemayel, who is a Christian, sent Communications
Minister Joseph Hashem to Damascus today to deliver a letter to Mr. Assad and
confer with him.

Some of Amal's tanks were reported heading for the line that divides Beirut into
Moslem and Christian sectors. Rival militias battled across the line today with
artillery, mortars and grenades, and the police said 7 people in nearby
residential areas had been killed and 27 wounded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 1, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COLECO SMITTEN BY 'RAMBO'

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


Coleco Industries, the company whose cuddly Cabbage Patch Kids became a national
craze, said yesterday that it would market a line of dolls and accessories based
on Rambo, the muscle-bound movie hero portrayed by Sylvester Stallone.

Mr. Stallone plays a gun-slinging ex-Green Beret on a one-man mission to
retrieve Americans missing in action in Vietnam, and the character has already
become something of an American phenomenon. Johnny Carson has parodied him on
television and President Reagan, in off-the-record remarks before a speech, said
that after seeing the film he would know how to handle terrorists.

Quick to Criticize

But while some toy experts predicted Coleco could well have another hit, others
were quick to criticize it for introducing a toy based on a character featured
in R-rated movies, ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' and its predecessor, ''First
Blood,'' that some critics have said glorify violence. The rating prohibits
people under 17 from attending unless accompanied by an adult.

''Wouldn't you know they would pick up on that movie to turn into a children's
toy and a children's hero,'' said Peggy Charren, president of Action for
Children's Television, a Boston-based group that advocates improving television
programs for children. ''The problem with Rambo as a doll is it's a doll for
children, whereas the movie is not a children's movie, it's a movie for
adults.''

Coleco, however, was quick to present Rambo in a different light. ''We believe
the character is emerging as a new American hero, a hero that has a high degree
of excitement and patriotism and a thirst for justice associated with him,''
said Barbara C. Wruck, a Coleco spokesman. ''We are convinced of the potential
of the license,'' she added.

In Time for Christmas

Coleco said it would offer the first figures of a line of six-and-a-half-inch
plastic characters from the movies that would reach stores in time for
Christmas. A full line of accessories and other items will follow early next
year, it said.

The dolls, which would sell for under $10, would be the latest entry in the
growing field of ''male action figures'' that includes Hasbro Inc.'s G.I. Joe
and Mattel Inc.'s Masters of the Universe dolls, and may well be successful, toy
industry analysts said. But they predicted that Coleco would have difficulty
getting out many of the dolls in time for the crucial holiday season.

In fact, despite the popularity the character is enjoying, other toy companies
appear to have been hesitant in making it into a children's toy. Amy Kastens, a
spokesman for Carolco Service Inc., the Los Angeles company that produced both
movies, said it initially had trouble licensing Rambo products to toy companies
and others that make products for children because of the movies's R ratings.

But, Mrs. Kastens said, ''it seems that parents are taking their kids to see
it.'' The second movie has grossed nearly $140 million in this country since its
opening in May. It also had the third-largest opening gross in movie history,
after ''Indiana Jones and The Temple of Doom'' and ''Return of the Jedi,''
taking in some $33 million in its first six days. She said licensing
arrangements are either completed or being negotiated for products including
backpacks, water guns, chewing gum, walkie-talkies, baseball caps and watches.

Dr. Lee Salk, a professor of pediatrics and psychology at Cornell University
Medical College in Manhattan, said Rambo has caught on because he ''obviously
creates big feelings in children who want to identify with figures that
represent power. If they can identify with the figure then they feel they are in
power, too.''

Cabbage Patch Dolls

Industry analysts were reluctant to predict whether Rambo could provide Coleco
with a success comparable with that of the Cabbage Patch dolls. It sold $540
million worth of the dolls last year, which accounted for three-quarters of its
revenues. The dolls have been a key in the company's return to profitability
after it lost $79.9 million last year, mostly as a result of its failed Adam
home computer.

''I don't know if they'll eventually make money or a lot of money on it,'' said
Mark Manson, an analyst with the Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities
Corporation. ''But the company has an excellent track record of buying licenses
at an opportune time, including Cabbage Patch and Smurfs.''

Bernard Loomis, a former president of the Kenner Products Company, a toy maker,
said he was not sure Rambo would have the same appeal for children as other toys
based on movies, such as Kenner's Star Wars action figures. ''I think Rambo will
come and go rather quickly,'' said Mr. Loomis. ''But maybe they've done some
homework and the kids are more into Rambo than I'm aware.''

Mrs. Wruck of Coleco said major advertising and full-scale production of the
toys, which will be manufactured in the Orient and will look as much like Mr.
Stallone as possible, will not begin until next year.

Terms of the licensing agreement were not disclosed, but Mrs. Wruck said Coleco
had paid a ''modest six-figure'' advance against royalties from the new line.
She said the royalites would be between 5 percent and 10 percent of the
wholesale price.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Pretoria Was Anti-British, Not Pro-Nazi

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 379 words


To the Editor:

I was appalled at Len Clarke's letter of rebuttal (July 25) to a statement of
Senator Barry Goldwater on the Senate vote on South Africa sanctions.

My dismay stems not so much from Mr. Clarke's assertion that South Africa did
not participate with us against the Communists in the Vietnam War (although we
never requested their participation). What I found most disturbing was his
effort to link some of South Africa's leaders and the regime of Adolf Hitler.

To be sure, there were elements in South Africa who supported both Hitler and
the Nazis. Our own record is hardly umblemished, with much pro-German sentiment
in our country persisting until months before Pearl Harbor. But to conclude that
South Africa's leaders were pro-Nazi and anti-American is to misread history.

The attitude of some South Africans then was the result of anti-British
sentiments stemming from gross mistreatment of South African civilians in the
Boer War. Remember that among that small population, nearly 25,000 women and
children perished in British concentration camps constructed in South Africa.

That era's strong anti-British sentiment is not unique to South Africa. We still
see it in Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, Israel, India and
elsewhere. Indeed much anti-American sentiment also exists in the world today,
some of it quite strong, irrespective of its accuracy.

Moreover, it was South Africa that welcomed Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany
during the Hitler period when our own doors were closed.

It is noteworthy that Mr. Clarke relies heavily on Brian Bunting, a prominent
South African Communist living in self-imposed exile in Britain. Mr. Bunting's
views are well known and utterly consistent with those who are influencing world
opinion in a way that would result in actions turning South Africa into a
Marxist-Leninist state.

These are critical times for all of the people of South Africa, and the U.S. has
a duty to try to play a constructive role in helping to achieve a solution to a
very complex problem. To this end, debate is very much in order. However, I do
not believe that attempting unjustly to tar South Africa with a Nazi brush
contributes to that debate.JEREMIAH DENTON U.S. Senator from Alabama Washington,
July 26, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TWO NEW STORES THAT MAKE SHOPPING A SAFARI

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 763 words


A jeep rusts in a mound of dirt, weeds and palm trees sprouting around it. A
tattered map of Southeast Asia lies forlornly on the floor, next to a recent
copy of Il Mattino. Luggage spills from the rear.  The scene is not a jungle in
Vietnam, it's Greenwich Village, where Banana Republic opened last week at
Avenue of the Americas and Bleecker Street.

A second store, at 2376 Broadway at West 87th Street, opened yesterday.

Fanciers of catalogues know the travel and safari clothing company, as Banana
Republic calls itself. The catalogues carry attractive drawings of no-nonsense,
natural-fiber clothing against backgrounds of far-off lands. The copy is witty
and literate, dotted with descriptions written in many cases by well-known
contemporary writers. Lines from such authors as Conrad, Faulkner and Thoreau
are also thrown in for inspiration.

Callers to Banana's San Francisco headquarters, when put on hold, are treated to
sounds of lions roaring, rhinos snorting and birds screeching. Above the door
outside the Broadway store is an oval seal, suggesting the embassy of a foreign
nation.

Inside, safari jackets and pith helmets hang next to heads of beasts and fake
tusks. All clothing has a name, like the No-Polo shirt and the Riviera shorts.
''The legs are long enough to mask top-of-thigh flab, but not so long to be
prim,'' writes the author Mickey Friedman in his catalogue blurb.

''When we started, we thought we'd appeal to 11 friends who were creative,''
recalled Mel Ziegler, who with Patricia Gwilliam Ziegler, his wife, started the
company in 1978 in Mill Valley, a San Francisco suburb.

Mr. and Mrs. Ziegler, he a former journalist and she an illustrator, bought
$1,500 worth of Army surplus garments in Europe to sell in the small shop.
Through their catalogue, they branched out into more ambitious clothing, much of
it designed by Mrs. Ziegler from items used by the military forces of various
countries. ''We looked up old military garments,'' Mr. Ziegler said, ''and asked
the original factories to recreate the items.'' Their subsequent success has
been well charted.

Best sellers are shirts ($16 for the short-sleeved Sahara shirt), shorts ($29
for unisex Gurkha shorts) and vests ($39 for the multipocketed Bush vest). ''In
one slanty zipped pocket I keep a flow schedule so I can remember in which
segment of my vest items are stowed, stashed or tucked,'' writes the novelist
Herbert Gold.

''We don't call these endorsements,'' Mr. Ziegler said. ''They're reviews. We
began by sending clothing to customers and asking their honest opinions.'' For
honest opinions, writers receive $100, the test clothing and a 30 percent
discount card.

Colors are low key, the basic one being khaki. White, gray, black and olive are
big, and occasionally Mrs. Ziegler ventures cautiously into magenta. But only
occasionally.

''This is low-profile clothing,'' she said. ''Not to call attention to the
clothing, but to dress the wearer.''

Everything matches, or at least coordinates. ''Since these are also travel
clothes, you can throw them into a suitcase and everything will go together,''
Mrs. Ziegler said.

In February 1983 the Zieglers sold Banana Republic to the Gap Inc., a $535
million retailing corporation that also owns the Pottery Barn. (The Gap does not
provide sales figures for its subsidiaries.) Since then, the chain has expanded
to 17 stores. Another is to open shortly in South Street Seaport's Pier 17
Pavilion, with a projected 30 stores by year's end.

''The major concept is travel clothing,'' said Donald G. Fisher, the Gap's
chairman. ''Our target customer is the 20- to 44-year-old.'' The two New York
stores will also have a travel book department, he said.

The Zieglers have ''almost total autonomy'' over the enterprise, he said.

''We think the fashion business is ludicrous. We're trying to sell intelligent,
functional clothing,'' Mr. Ziegler said.

''It's supposed to be fun, and that's what we're here for,'' Stewart Rosen, the
Broadway store manager, told his sales force in a preopening pep talk. A bush
airplane will hang from the ceiling of the South Street Seaport shop. A
waxed-cotton waterproof flannel-lined vest comes complete with a five-ounce tin
of wax tucked in a pocket.

With expansion, sales will shift toward store business, although ''we think of
ourself as a catalogue business,'' Mr. Ziegler said. The difference between
Banana Republic and L. L. Bean, he believes, is ''Our merchandise is a bit more
stylish.'' I didn't say I didn't care about style,'' he said. ''I don't care
about fashion.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the Banana Republic store (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Making and Remaking of Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1279 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 1


It is standard operating procedure for administrations to overhaul, modify or
trim their foreign policies and deny it all the while.

Consider the Reagan Administration's South Africa policy. Called ''constructive
engagement,'' it means trying to change South Africa's system of racial
separation through persuasion rather than confrontation.

But in recent weeks, among other things, the Administration has recalled its
Ambassador to Pretoria and has toughened its anti-apartheid oratory.

According to Administration officials, all that is going on is some tactical
trimming. And White House and State Department spokesmen are not even
acknowledging that much publicly.

But upon closer inspection, it appears that the Administration has been forced
to take these and other steps that run counter to the constructive engagement
policy and are more ''confrontational'' than ''engaging.'' Based on reports
today, President Reagan would draw the line at economic sanctions and veto
Congressional legislation that tried to impose them.

The process of making alterations but denying that they are being made is not
historically unique.

President Johnson put a lid on American troops in Vietnam and insisted that it
represented no policy change. President Nixon wanted to get an agreement
reducing Moscow's heavy missiles, did not get it, and said what he got was what
he wanted all along. President Reagan sent a Marine contingent to Lebanon to
defend vital American interests there, and after more than 200 were killed in a
terrorist bomb attack, he ''redeployed'' the unit out of Lebanon and said his
policy had achieved its aims.

About the only recent President to admit he changed his mind about anything was
Jimmy Carter. At the start of his term he spoke about ''the inordinate fear of
Communism.'' After the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, he said he had
underestimated the Soviet threat. By testimony of those around him, he came to
regret changing his mind publicly.

To openly admit a policy change, even a modest one, is for a President to grant
he made a mistake. One mistake opens the door to fallibility in general, and
those with political power seem to be more comfortable with people questioning
their veracity than their judgment.

The Reagan Administration also appears to fear the consequences in South Africa
of talking openly about any policy changes. As Frank G. Wisner, the senior
deputy to Chester A. Crocker, the Assistant Secretary of State for African
Affairs, put it: ''We must act responsibly. There's a lot of gasoline on the
floor in South Africa, and the last people who should strike a match is the
Americans.''

Beyond this, Administration officials dealing with South Africa show every
evidence of still believing that their policy of constructive engagement, over
all, is the right one. Privately and publicly, they say that other approaches
that entailed confronting and condemning have failed and that there is no
alternative to working with Pretoria.

The officials cite the decision this week by Pretoria to recall its
Ambassador-designate to the United States. Despite having recalled their own
ambassador, the Reagan officials do not want to lose all formal diplomatic
touch. They worry about the snowballing effect of American-toughness followed by
South African-toughness followed by more of the same.

Nevertheless, over the last few weeks the Administration itself has done a
number of things that seem clearly to run counter to ''constructive
engagement'':

* President Reagan signed a bill that included a ban on the sale of computers to
the South African police.

* Ambassador Herman W. Nickel was recalled after the South African forays into
Botswana and Angola.

* Condemnations of the racial separation system or racial discrimination became
louder and clearer, such as White House spokesman Larry Speakes saying that the
system was ''largely responsible for the violence'' in South Africa at this
time.

To be sure, these actions are being forced on the Administration by events in
South Africa and in Congress. High-ranking Administration officials without
exception make clear that they strongly prefer to stick to constructive
engagement as closely as possible.

The furthest Administration officials have gone is to describe the deviations
from the policy as ''tactical.''

The officials are also careful to say that no policy review is under way, that
they are, instead, reviewing ''the situation.'' Such phrasing is frequently a
euphemism in the capital for something more than a review, and in the case of
South Africa it appears to mean that officials are waiting to see how far they
will have to go to respond to events or how far they will be pushed by Congress.
A Design in the Denials? Sometimes in the past when Administration denials of
policy change turned out to be 180 degrees from the truth, the denial, in
retrospect, seemed designed to enable the Administration to spring an
accomplished fact on potential opponents of policy change before they had a
chance to gather their forces. President Nixon, for example, denied he was even
thinking about an opening to China at the very moment Henry A. Kissinger, his
chief troubleshooter and national security adviser, was arranging secretly to
visit Peking.

It is doubtful that anything like that is going on regarding South Africa
policy. But in any event, the Administration's critics continue to push for
significant change, for toughening the policy.

Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the Foreign
Relations Subcommittee on African Affairs, says the Administration might start
with dropping the very name ''constructive engagement'' because it has come to
be perceived as pro-Pretoria.

To Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat of California, a member of the
Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Africa, ''The Administration policy toward South
Africa is in shambles, and has been repudiated by overwhelming margins in the
House and Senate.'' He was referring to House and Senate bills dealing with
sanctions against South Africa that were reconciled Wednesday in conference,
more along the lines of the milder Senate bill.

What will it take to convince the Administration that its policy toward South
Africa has failed and needs more than review or trimming?

''South Africa has to be judged by Western standards of human rights,'' one
high-level Administration official replied. ''If the internal peace process
stopped dead, we'd have some real problems. We might not like the pace, but the
pace can't be halted.''

Meantime, Administration officials argue that about all they can do is to urge
talks between South Africa and black leaders to end the state of emergency.
Underlying that argument is the official judgment that the United States has
little or no real power to affect the course of events with or without sanctions
and tough talk.

Anthony Lake, an architect of the Carter Administration policy toward South
Africa and now a professor at Mount Holyoke, put it this way: ''Reagan
Administration officials have discovered that South Africa is less interested in
the carrots of good relations than they thought, just as Carter officials
realized that South Africa is less fearful of Administration sticks and
displeasure than they thought.''

It may be that when the dust settles in South Africa and Congress, the
Administration will still be talking about and believing in ''constructive
engagement.'' But given the acknowledgment that the United States has little or
no real power to effect change in South Africa, a policy of constructive
engagement might end up as a policy in name only.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


FIELD OF BLOOD. By Gerald Seymour. 352 pages. W. W. Norton. $14.95. THE
strongest of the international suspense stories are diminished when they are
cubbyholed in bookstores or in book reviews simply as mysteries or thrillers.
Even the modern master of the genre, Graham Greene, once had a problem with
classification. He labeled seven of his own books - including ''The Third Man''
and ''Our Man in Havana'' - ''entertainments,'' as if to tell the reader that
these titles did not carry the full weight of his seriousness. Of course, they
did; a fine writer cannot help doing his best, even when his subjects are
designed to entertain. In recent years, Mr. Greene himself recognized this. Now
he lists his ''entertainments,'' along with such books as ''The Power and the
Glory'' and ''The Comedians,'' simply as novels.

In the field of the suspense novel (or, rather, just plain novel), the three
British masters - Mr. Greene, Eric Ambler and John le Carre -have been joined in
the last decade by a fourth - Gerald Seymour. ''Field of Blood,'' his eighth
novel, is as good as his first and best-known one, ''Harry's Game.'' In fact, it
says something about Mr. Seymour's prescience that what he wrote about 10 years
ago still rings true, fictionally, in his latest book. In both, the scene is
Belfast; once again, the heroes and villains are almost indistinguishable. There
is no Yeatsian ''terrible beauty'' in this novel. ''Field of Blood'' offers only
the terrible reality faced by the Protestant and Catholic militants in Ulster:
unending urban guerrilla warfare.

This is a territory that Mr. Seymour has carved out for himself in such previous
novels as ''The Glory Boys,'' ''Kingfisher'' and ''The Contract.'' He writes
about terrorists, hijackings, assassinations and political dreamers in the
Middle East, Italy, England and Northern Ireland. These are regions he has
covered as a former British television correspondent, but Mr. Seymour is not
just rewriting old assignments. He has broken out of the journalistic strictures
and created situations and characters from the inside out. His emotional
landscapes are painted in hard-edged human colors.

In addition to urban warfare, a Seymour fan always looks for certain hallmarks
in his writing. His knowledge of weapons, police and secret service
organizations lends authenticity. I suspect that he could field-strip a
Kalishnikov automatic rifle and read the instrument panel of a helicopter
gunship. In ''Field of Blood,'' the hidden weapons are part of the story. There
are M-1 carbines, Remington M-742's, Armalites, Lugers and even a hand-held
rocket launcher that figures in the plot. A character in his novel reflects,
''Weapons were Belfast.''

Then, too, Mr. Seymour's novels usually build toward a cinematic climax.
(Sometimes they seem a bit too cinematic.) In his last novel, ''In Honor
Bound,'' a British agent armed with a ground-to-air missile launcher took on a
Soviet MIG helicopter in the Hindu Kush of Afghanistan, followed by a
''walkdown'' between friend and foe that had a ''High Noon'' air about it. In
the new novel, there is a much more believable climax because, in Belfast,
nobody emerges as victor. Another hallmark of a Seymour novel is that the female
characters are not just adjuncts to the main action but very much a part of it.
Few male writers take the time, or have the ability, to give the women in
suspense novels lives of their own. Two important roles in the new novel are
played by women - the wife and the mother of an imprisoned member of the
Provisional I.R.A.

The story of ''Field of Blood'' has some of the same elements - including the
interrogation of a Provo prisoner by his captor - as the British drama ''Rat in
the Skull,'' which recently played at the Public Theater. At the novel's center
is a confrontation between the I.R.A. gunman and a British lieutenant. A
trusting relationship develops between them; both are stuck in their duty to
conflicting ideals. Behind them are the powerful forces - state, religious and
military - that refuse to live and let live and that have bloodied the British
and the Irish in Northern Ireland. Both men, courageous in their own ways, bear
the burden of the long troubles. The Provo prisoner thinks to himself: ''But a
man who had blinded a Brit and taken out a constable could hardly cuff his son
on the ear if the kid wanted to follow his father into the Organization.'' So
terror and death are passed on from one generation to the next.

There is a wonderful scene that evokes Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher without
once mentioning her name or even revealing to the reader that the P.M. is a
woman. The author writes: ''The Prime Minister came at Christmas to be
photographed with the troops, particularly enjoyed being photographed while
wearing a Marine beret or a flak jacket.'' When necessary, he can be subtle.

In ''Field of Blood,'' Mr. Seymour proves - as Graham Greene did on another
battlefield half a world away in his Vietnam novel, ''The Quiet American'' -
that the international suspense story can convey the harshest truths about a
country's crises through fictional characters who become all too real.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gerald Seymour (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 3, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA CALLS REPORTS OF ARMS DEALS WITH ISRAEL 'ENTIRELY GROUNDLESS'

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 2


A Chinese Government spokesman says foreign news reports about secret arms deals
between China and Israel are ''entirely groundless.''

An official statement read at the weekly Foreign Ministry news briefing on
Wednesday said the allegations had been circulated by people seeking to
undermine China's relations with Arab nations. Reports of the arms deals have
appeared in several Western publications in the last year.

The Chinese spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, said, ''We have taken note that some people,
out of different motives, have spread rumors over this issue over a period of
time in a futile attempt to undermine the friendly relations between China and
Arab countries and the Palestinian people.''

The Foreign Ministry official noted that China had repeatedly said it would have
''no relations with the Israeli Government'' as long as Israel occupies Arab
lands and refuses to recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization ''and the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.''

Parade Spurs Reports

The denial of any arms deals came in the face of reports from several sources
that the Chinese forces have been acquiring military hardware and technology
that originated in Israel. In recent months, Western military attaches here,
diplomats from neutral countries and others, including P.L.O. representatives,
have all said they had evidence of the trade.

News reports on the issue were spurred by the appearance at China's National Day
parade last October of a Chinese tank with a gun barrel that military experts
identified as being of Israeli design. Subsequently, sources here have said that
the Chinese have been seeking through intermediaries to acquire tank engines,
laser-assisted equipment for enhancing night vision and range-finding and
air-to-air missile technology, among other items.

The Chinese spokesman's reference to relations with the Israeli Government was
particularly noted by Western diplomats, who said it left open the possibility
that China is knowingly trading with Israel through third parties. Officials in
Israel were quoted in a July 21 report in The New York Times as saying that the
Chinese have been showing increasing interest in Israeli achievements in several
fields besides weapons, including agriculture, solar energy, robotics and road
building. #2 Major Considerations The Chinese interest in Israeli weapons and
military skill is thought to be grounded in two considerations. First, it would
hold out the possibility of circumventing the restrictions placed on weapons
sales to Communist countries by the principal arms manufacturers of the Western
alliance, including the United States. These restrictions, policed by the
Paris-based Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom,
have frequently been a source of complaint by Chinese military officials when
meeting with their Western counterparts.

Second, the principal military problems confronting the Chinese come from the
armed forces of the Soviet Union and Vietnam, both using Soviet equipment of a
type supplied to Israel's Arab adversaries. Chinese officers are said to have
concluded that the sort of difficulties that Chinese forces met during their
brief war with Vietnam in 1979 could be substantially reduced if Israel's
military skill could be brought to bear.

One report that appeared to have particularly irked the Chinese in recent days
said Israeli businessmen were obtaining visas to enter China on their Israeli
passports. The report, originating in Israel, said the Chinese had dropped a
requirement that has seen several Israeli businessmen enter China on passports
of other nations. Some of these businessmen are well known in trading circles in
Peking.

On Monday, the Foreign Ministry said the reports that Israeli passports were now
acceptable was ''groundless.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIROSHIMA AT 40: GRAPPLING WITH THE UNTHINKABLE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words


Scarcely had the atomic bomb been dropped on Hiroshima than Americans began to
ponder its effects: Would the event sear the national psyche and significantly
change our lives, or would it be absorbed along with all the other terrors of
the century? The issue remains as unsettled, and unsettling, today as the issue
of whether the bomb should have been dropped 40 years ago.

A prominent exponent of the view that the atomic bomb has transformed our lives
is Robert J. Lifton, a professor of psychiatry and psychology at John Jay
College of the City University of New York, who has reached conclusions about
the United States from his studies of the survivors of Hiroshima.

Professor Lifton contends that the bomb has undermined man's sense of
immortality, as expressed in one's family, work and faith. He discerns the
influence of this ''sense of radical futurelessness'' in such things as
increased divorce, ''significant impairment of the parent-child bond'' and the
recent growth of religious fundamentalism.

'Politically Motivated'

This diagnosis is tied to his views on what to do about the bomb. A critic of
the Reagan Administration's arms policies, he hails the ''worldwide struggle to
get rid of the weapon,'' and has drawn criticism for what a fellow psychiatrist,
Dr. Seymour C. Post of Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons,
calls ''his politically motivated activity.''

The views of Professor Lifton and others who believe that the bomb has had
profound effects on American life appear frequently in The Bulletin of Atomic
Scientists, an influential magazine established almost 40 years ago by
scientists who worked on the bomb.

Dr. John Edward Mack, a professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School,
surveyed children in Boston, Los Angeles and Baltimore between 1978 and 1980 and
reported that they are ''aware of the threat of nuclear war and live in fear of
it.''

Such concerns for the nation's children go back to the 1950's, when a brief
enthusiasm for classroom air-raid drills sent youngsters crawling under their
desks for shelter; some reportedly had nightmares about the bomb.

Dr. Mack says ''the imminent threat of nuclear annihilation has penetrated
deeply into their consciousness,'' leading to ''cynicism, sadness, bitterness
and a sense of helplessness.''

Like Professor Lifton, Dr. Mack has an opinion on the arms race. He has written,
''There can be no differences between the United States and the Soviet Union
which warrant the level of risk of nuclear annihilation we are now creating for
each other and for the rest of humanity.''

His surveys have been criticized as focused on obtaining desired answers, and he
has conceded that his sample of 10- to 12-year-olds may have been ''somewhat
biased.''

'Sentimental Balderdash'

Robert Coles, the Harvard child psychologist and a supporter of a nuclear
freeze, calls many of the reports on children's fears of a nuclear holocaust
''sentimental balderdash.''

A pair of conservative critics, Professor Joseph Adelson, a specialist in
adolescence at the University of Michigan, and Chester E. Finn Jr., who was
recently confirmed as an Assistant Secretary of Education, wrote, ''The only
testimony we have comes from those engaged - deeply engaged - in the
nuclear-freeze movement; there has been no spontaneous evidence of intense
anxiety among children or, for that matter, among adults.''

Dr. Jerome Kagan, another Harvard psychologist, reports that his studies of
6-year-olds reveal no fear of nuclear war. He thinks parents project their
concerns onto their children.

Another way to try to assess the bomb's impact is through what writers, movie
makers and others have had to say about it. Since the late 1950's, when Tom
Lehrer was singing ''We Will All Go Together When We Go,'' there has been no
shortage of works dealing in some manner with the bomb, from suspense potboilers
to Nevil Shute's cautionary novel ''On the Beach.''

Symbol of Mushroom Cloud

The mushroom cloud quickly became a trite symbol. Among the more notable works
is Stanley Kubrick's movie ''Dr. Strangelove, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying
and Love the Bomb.'' It treats our condition comically, as though, like
observers at atomic tests, its creators avoided staring directly into the blast
lest they be blinded.

The theme of ''Dr. Strangelove,'' popular among stop-the-bomb forces, is that
the weapon has escaped the control of reason and that finally the nuclear button
will be pushed by some highly placed lunatic. That idea was behind the
commercial used in Lyndon Johnson's 1964 Presidential campaign, which suggested
that the election of Barry Goldwater would mean nuclear annihilation, and it
could be found, too, in films and plays about the Vietnam War.

Estimable though some of the works inspired by the bomb have been, these 40
years have produced no generally acknowledged masterpieces on the order of those
inspired by other calamities. There has been no ''Red Badge of Courage,'' no
''All Quiet on the Western Front'' or ''Grand Illusion,'' no painting to rival
Picasso's ''Guernica,'' no major body of poems like those of Isaac Rosenberg or
Wilfred Owen from the trenches of World War I. 'Myth of American Innocence'

Reviewing what he calls the ''episodic and inconclusive'' nature of America's
cultural and intellectual engagement with Hiroshima, Paul Boyer, a historian and
author of the forthcoming study, ''By the Bomb's Early Light: American Thought
and Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age,'' maintains that Hiroshima challenges
both the United States view of World War II and ''the myth of American
innocence,'' the belief that ''our motives are higher, our methods purer'' than
those of other nations.

It has remained for nonfiction, like John Hersey's 1946 report, ''Hiroshima,''
and works containing descriptions of the possible effects of a nuclear blast,
such as Jonathan Schell's ''The Fate of the Earth,'' published in 1982, and
Freeman Dyson's more recent ''Weapons and Hope'' to deal most directly with the
world after a nuclear holocaust, much as the Holocaust that destroyed European
Jewry required the pictures of the camps and personal memoirs to begin to convey
the experience.

Some critics write off works like Mr. Schell's as panic-mongering for political
ends, but they have stirred millions. An enormous audience was reached by last
year's television production, ''The Day After,'' a simulation of the effects of
a nuclear strike on the Middle West.

Worries About Crime and Jobs

Public-opinion surveys do not reveal any sea change in what worries people. A
poll taken this year by the Atlantic Institute for International Affairs and
Harris International found that the main concerns in industrial democracies were
over such prebomb evils as unemployment and crime.

They were followed by the threat of war and social injustice. But such responses
may be written off by psychiatrists as examples of what Professor Lifton calls
''psychic numbing,'' a defense against matters too frightening to acknowledge.

Whatever the level or duration of concern over the bomb, the evocations of
nuclear catastrophe, the drumbeat of warnings by scientists and such groups as
America's Roman Catholic bishops, the antinuclear campaigns and demonstrations
have had a measurable impact.

Nearly half the people questioned by a Gallup poll at the end of 1983 felt that
the Reagan Administration's arms policies had brought the United States closer
to war, compared with slightly more than a quarter who believed we were closer
to peace.

A Belief in Deterrence

Polls over the years indicate overwhelming support for a mutual verifiable
nuclear freeze. Along with this, however, according to a recent Harris Survey,
goes the belief that ''the situation where the U.S. and the Soviet Union both
know that any use of nuclear weapons will result in instant retaliation has
helped to keep the peace of the world.''

Polls in recent years indicate that more people feel more threatened by the
thought of the United States falling behind in nuclear weapons than by a
continuation of the arms buildup.

So there are a lot of Americans who say they believe deterrence has worked, yet
would like to see a world free of the bomb. This somewhat contradictory
viewpoint appears to be an effort to deal with the bomb as most of us deal with
other problems, not by nightmares but with hope and prayer and politics - and,
most of the time, by not thinking about it.

The question remains whether such a response to the ultimate threat is a failure
of nerve or imagination or conscience, or simply an exercise in mental health.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAITING ON TABLES, LIVING ON DREAMS

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words


At 7:55 on a Wednesday night, Jane Perkins stood in front of the mirror, teasing
her hair into a vintage-1967 flip. In a few minutes she would start the
next-to-last rehearsal of Larry Ketron's ''Asian Shade.'' The show, she said,
shaped up as the best piece of theater she had ever done. Some of the others she
had told even her husband to skip.

Everything is relative, though, in the life of a young actress like Miss
Perkins. ''Asian Shade,'' the brightest moment of her New York career, was a
workshop production with spare props, do-it-yourself costumes and no pay. It was
taking place in the Image Theater, a fifth-floor walk-up on West 42d Street's
''Theater Row.'' The theater had one air conditioner and two fans to fight the
midsummer heat; it had 36 chairs, evenly divided among wood, plastic and folding
metal models.

The other thing the Image Theater contained was Jane Perkins's hope, her
aspiration. She had handed out dozens of flyers about ''Asian Shade'' - in which
she played a young woman who falls in love with an American soldier on leave
from Vietnam - to friends, to a director she met, to any casting agency that
knew her name. For all her talk about ''the work'' being its own reward, there
were a lot of practical stakes attached to the five-night run. At the age of 29,
after four and a half years in New York, Miss Perkins had yet to penetrate that
small circle of actors and actresses who can live on their acting alone. What
had there been lately? A job as an extra in a Minolta commercial. Auditions for
Bud Light and Pampers spots. Mostly, Miss Perkins had been waiting tables.

Indeed, at 7:55 on most Wednesday nights, Miss Perkins would be delivering
cappuccino and checks to the pre-theater crowd. She works at Orso, a stylish
restaurant on West 46th Street that is favored by the theater's elite agents,
directors and stars. It was, Miss Perkins said, a particularly good place to
work. The managers let her switch shifts if she has an audition or rehearsal.
She can clear $10 or $12 an hour with tips. She can tell her troubles to her
friend Lisa Perry, who is also an actress and who understands.

But in a sense Miss Perkins could just as well be working at any number of other
theater restaurants, at Charlie's in midtown or Phebe's in the East Village or
Cafe Central on the Upper West Side. For Jane Perkins is both a person and a
personification of the hundreds, perhaps thousands, of aspiring actors and
actresses who spend the time between roles waiting - both in terms of waiting on
customers and of killing time.

There are other ways, it is true, to try to make it as an actor in New York.
Some, like John Malkovich, build their reputations out of town and come to
Manhattan as mature artists. Others, like Christine Baranski, sharpen their
skills in regional theaters. But in New York, waiting on tables and banging on
doors remain the standard rites of passage.

Miss Perkins's story is as typical as any other: acting in a community theater
group, the Town Players, while in high school in Pittsfield, Mass.; majoring in
drama at the University of Massachusetts; a year of voice training in Boston,
and then the leap to New York. ''When I was leaving,'' Miss Perkins recalled,
''my father said, 'Janie, what you do is, you bake a nice cake and give it to
one of those agents or directors, that's all.' He also said, 'What you do is
watch these guys, see what kind of cigar they smoke. Next time you see him, give
him one.''' She paused. ''Well, I still don't know much about cigars. But when
an agency sends me out on an audition, I bake something for them.''

For the vast majority of hopefuls, the big break never comes, and they slowly
proceed from Aspiring Young Actor to Disgruntled Middle-Aged Waiter. But there
is lore enough to keep the myth of the theater restaurant alive. At the Magic
Pan on West 57th Street, the waitresses still talk about Mary Steenburgen, who
went from serving crepes to starring opposite Jack Nicholson in the film ''Going
South.'' Jessica Lange used to wait on tables at the Lion's Head in Greenwich
Village. Sam Shepard poured coffee at the old Cafe La Mama on Second Avenue and
then had his earliest plays performed there.

And inside Orso, Miss Perkins and her friends serve pasta and nurse dreams. ''My
fantasy is very simple,'' Miss Perkins said. ''Somebody will stop eating, look
at me, and say, 'I like your quality. I want you to audition for a movie.''

''Mine goes even further,'' said Jill Cervant, a 24-year-old friend who used to
work at Orso. ''Someone says, 'We've been looking forever and here you are in
front of my nose.' You get the part, you go on, you get out of here.''

Lisa Perry almost had her fantasy come true last year. ''I was folding
tablecloths at Table 16,'' she recalled, ''and Table 10 was staring at me. When
I got off work that night, the manager said, 'Table 10 is a director. He wants
to talk to you.' I had a double screwdriver.''

The director asked Miss Perry to audition for the role of a fact-checker at
Rolling Stone magazine in the film ''Perfect.'' She did not get the part, but
just getting the audition helped sustain her.

So, in its way, does the clientele of Orso, even more so than most theater
restaurants. The customers include the director Mike Nichols, the agent Sam
Cohn, actresses Sally Field, Marsha Mason and Glenn Close, and actors Roy
Scheider, Warren Beatty and Raul Julia. Miss Perkins gave one of her flyers for
''Asian Shade'' to Arthur Sherman, the director of the 1983 revival of ''The
Caine Mutiny Court Martial,'' when she was waiting on him.

The proximity to such talent and such power keeps the flame of ambition alive.
But it proves frustrating in equal measure. ''The thing that bothers me,'' Miss
Cervant said, ''is that they know we're actresses and they can't pick up on it.
When I see people who come into Orso, I wonder how can I break into their
circle.''

There is always the temptation to act, to flirt a little, to recite the daily
specials with a sonority deserving of Shakespeare. That urge to be always
onstage, to impress everyone around is strong enough in any actor's life, and it
is magnified at Orso by the stature of the audience. ''In the beginning,'' Miss
Perkins said, ''I used to get nervous when I waited on someone big. I thought,
'Should I act? Should I do things to interest people?' But it's embarrassing.
And it's an intrusion to the people.'' As Miss Perry put it, ''You can't feel
like you're constantly auditioning.''

Besides, a star seen close up can lose the glitter. ''When you see people doing
something as normal as eating,'' said Vicent Arbona, a 28-year-old waiter at
Orso, ''you realize they're just people. Al Pacino, I remember, came in one
night and just said, 'I wanna pizza.' That's all he said - 'I wanna pizza.' It
was hilarious.''

''I remember Tom Selleck,'' added Skip Powers, 31, another waiter at Orso. ''At
one point he called me over and said, 'Skip, I just want you to know that I'm
stealing one of the ashtrays.' I said, 'O.K., you want a few more?' He said,
'No, it's no fun if you give them to me.' ''

The most powerful associations at Orso, though, have nothing to do with the big
names; they are the friendships between the workers, each of them living a
variation on the same actor-cum-waiter theme. ''If you're down, someone will
support you,'' Mr. Powers said. ''And they'll kick you in the butt to start
auditioning again.''

The bond between Miss Perkins and Miss Perry is especially deep. ''We talk,''
Miss Perry said. ''Endlessly.'' As different ''types'' - Miss Perkins a tall,
blue-eyed blonde and Miss Perry a sort of New Wave waif with spiky brown hair
and multiple earrings - they rarely compete for parts and so they swap
information on auditions. When Miss Perry was in a workshop of Lanford Wilson's
''Home Free'' a few weeks ago, Miss Perkins went to rehearsals as well as a
performance. When the results were a little disappointing - ''I got one
assistant agent to call me,'' Miss Perry said - Miss Perkins commiserated.

Miss Perry is 27 now and she has begun to face the prospect of failure. ''I'm
not worried about being a waitress forever,'' she said, ''because I have a plan.
If I haven't made it as an actress by 33 I'm going to get pregnant and go to
grad school.''

Miss Perkins expresses no such doubts, at least outwardly. ''It's either do it
or die,'' she said. ''I have no alternatives.'' That is evident to anyone around
her. When Miss Perkins is not acting, she tends to overeat; during ''Asian
Shade,'' she lost weight. ''When she's not working, she's psychically
miserable,'' said her husband, Mike Melton, a playwright who supports himself
editing technical documents for an engineering firm. ''When she is, oh, it's
wonderful. Night and day.'' ''Asian Shade'' bowed on July 26, with Mr. Melton in
the opening night audience. And overall, Miss Perkins said, the workshop went
very well, even if the couch did issue an otherwordly groan when an actor sat
down one night. ''It got better every night,'' Miss Perkins. ''All my friends
said they couldn't believe it was free.''

''But it's frustrating, too,'' she went on. ''I want something to happen with
the show and so far nothing has.'' Nor has anything happened yet for Miss
Perkins as a result of ''Asian Shade.'' She did not see any agents in the
audience. One night a writer for the soap opera ''Guiding Light'' did come; he
was a friend of someone in the cast. The run ended on July 31. At 7:55 two
nights later, Miss Perkins was back on her usual shift at Orso.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jane Perkins and Lisa Perry

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDRENS BOOKS;
BOOKSHELF

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


Additional titles of interest: THE FORTY-NINER. Written and illustrated by Oscar
de Mejo. Harper & Row. $11.50. (Ages 5 to 9) A surreal account of Homer McMillan
Solo (born with a beard and mustache) and his experiences in the California Gold
Rush (including a visit with an extraterrestrial) in the inimitable style of the
well-known primitive artist. MY WAR WITH MRS. GALLOWAY. By Doris Orgel.
Illustrated by Carol Newsom. Viking/Kestrel. $9.95. (Ages 7 to 10) Rebecca lives
with her mother, a single parent and busy doctor. Mrs. Galloway is the latest in
a line of housekeepers Rebecca doesn't like and wants to dispatch. The story of
how they come to terms and appreciate each other is believable. VIETNAM THERE
AND HERE. By Margot C. J. Mabie. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $11.95. (Ages 12 and
up) An introduction to events in Vietnam for children and others who may ''have
difficulty locating the war in their minds.'' The slender but provocative volume
has a glossary, notes and an annotated bibliography that make it very useful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words


Aug. 4, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 7 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 2 3 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 3 3 20 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 4 4 11 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 5 5 6 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 6 6 11 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner
to the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century
American wilderness.

* 7 7 12 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 8* 8 28 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 9 13 3 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 10 14 21 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married
couple with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 11 10 7 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence,
$14.95.) In his 12th case, the private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal
agents to bring down a powerful scoundrel.

* 12* 12 20 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 13 11 14 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard.

* 14 15 23 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this
pseudonymous novel by Stephen King, a young lawyer finds his body mysteriously
wasting away.

* 15 9 3 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.
Nonfiction

* 1 1 4 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to first man
to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 40 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 13 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 18 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 5 3 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis star.

* 6 6 5 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 7 7 2 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankee baseball
star.

* 8 9 12 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 9 10 49 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 10 1 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding the
1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 11* 8 10 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British nobleman, diplomat and naval hero.

* 12* 12 3 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
previously unpublished chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 13 14 140 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.)
Light verse and drawings by the author.

* 14 13 23 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect.

* 15* 11 48 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for a true love.
And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
NICARAGUA: Revolution in the Family, by Shirley Christian. (Random House,
$19.95.) A prize-winning reporter's book, detailing at length just what happened
to make revolutionary Nicaragua what it is today, and suggesting how different
American policies might have contributed to different results. EDMUND WILSON, by
David Castronovo. (Frederick Ungar, $15.50.) This articulate guide to the career
of our pre-eminent literary critic shares some of the brisk, lucid informality
that was a distinguishing characteristic of Wilson himself.

FINAL CUT: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of ''Heaven's

Gate,'' by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) The author, himself one of those
responsible, gives a fair, readable account of how a major film studio spent $36
million to create a total flop. UNDER THE BANYAN TREE and Other Stories, by R.
K. Narayan. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) Simple observation for its own
sake is at the heart of these 28 benign, even-tempered, elegant stories by the
distinguished Indian English-language novelist. IN GOOD FAITH, by Edith Reveley.
(Overlook Press, $15.95.) Set in Rome and Miami Beach, this complicated mix of
family drama, social satire and slapstick engages many issues: terrorism,
international politics, alienation between parents and children.

THE OXFORD COMPANION TO ENGLISH LITERATURE: Fifth

Edition, edited by Margaret Drabble. (Oxford University, $35.) This latest
version of the famous compilation concisely and usefully describes almost
everything and everybody, though some recent developments - such as
deconstructionism - are slighted.

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC, by William Gaddis. (Elisabeth Sifton/

Viking, $16.95.) A mazy, mercilessly adroit carnival of frauds and cynics,
thieves and liars, redeemed by an outrageous humor. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 8 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 2 18 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 3 3 4 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives.

* 4 4 35 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 5 5 42 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THREE WITNESSES AND THE BOMB

BYLINE: By Robert Shaplen; Robert Shaplen, who has reported extensively from
Asia, is on the staff of The New Yorker. His forthcoming book is about his
recent return to Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


WITNESS: THE WORLD SINCE HIROSHIMA By Roger Rosenblatt. 110 pp. Boston: Little,
Brown & Company. Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $6.95. FOR various reasons, including a
gnawing sense of mortality engendered by rampant terrorism and other violent
events and by repeated failures of statecraft and diplomacy, the 40th
anniversary of the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima has prompted a fresh
spate of reminiscence, rumination and moral reflection about what the bomb
really meant and what, if anything, can be done about it. Doomsday prognoses
notwithstanding, these personal accounts seem to me a healthy historical
manifestation; they make me hope I'm still around to catch the next decadal
installment.

Roger Rosenblatt, a senior writer at Time, has produced a slim, provocative book
that demonstrates boldness and bravado, originality and audacity, grace and
gusto of style. It leaves one somewhat breathless in the final reach and flight
of its conclusions. Of these, I found most challenging his words - ''In the end
we face a hard, self-evident fact: whether because we dropped the Bomb, or
because we live in its shadow, or because we are to use it, we have created an
enormous handicap for ourselves, and we will have to learn to survive and endure
in spite of that handicap. the handicap will not disappear. It only remains to
be seen if we will disappear, or it,by n effort of will and judgement, we can
make our handicap work in our favor, never pretending that we are anything but
imperfect, yet also understanding tht imperfectionis a state of grace, a gift
tied directly to a perception of common humanity.'' Henry Luce would have liked
that.

Mr. Rosenblatt, like all of us, is very much aware of the oral debate as to
whether or not the bomb should have been dropped. Was the destruction of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the loss of 340,000 lives there (those killed in the
blasts or who died before 1950 from the effect of the bomb) worth the
alternative of losing as many lives ourselves and almost certainly far more
Japanese lives, had we invaded Japan itself?

I WAS myself on Okinawa as a war correspondent waiting to invade Japan when the
bomb was dropped on the morning of Aug. 4 1945. I have always been convinced
that, though the Japanese were in bad shape as a result of our steady
firebombing of their homeland and the attrition caused by years of submarine
warfare, without the bomb being dropped they would not have given up for at
least anothe six months, and it might well have required an invasin. However,if
the first bomb was justified, ther remains grave doubt, in my mind, that the
second, dropped on Nagasaki Aug. 9, was necessary.

Mr. Rosenblatt and three interlocutors - a Japanese survivor of the bomb, an
American scientist who worked onit, and, of all people, Richard Nixon - offer
three different ''perspectives'' before Mr. Rosenblatt submits his. The most
interesting, not surprisingly, is former President Nixon's who appears here in
his new role as a political minstrel to mankind.

Growling and scowling, scolding and lamenting,lecturing and lampooning during
two long interviews, he comments - often with wisdom, frequently with
malice,though seldom with humility - about many things, including the times and
places when he and President Dwight Eisenhower could have dropped the bomb but
sent warnings and signals abroad instead. Listening to Mr. Nixon's list - his
opportunities were in Asia and the Middle East - one is left with the uneasy
feeling that he almost wishes he could have pressed the button, just once.

Mr. Nixon felt that bombing a civillian population in Hiroshima was ''morally
wrong'' less in itself than in reinforcing a wrong principle in military
tactics. He says: ''I strongly believe that we should move away from the concept
of massive destruction of cities and toward military targets. It's a better
deterrent, a better chance to create stability.'' However, he believes that this
may have led to the current diplomatic stalemate that now offers an opportunity
for the real balance of power (or terror) to be achieved. but ''the fact that
the Bomb made us a world power meant that we had to learn how to be one, and it
has been very difficult.''

Until two years ago, when he became director of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial
Museum, Yoshitaka Kawamoto had hidden the stigma of being a survivor of the
bomb, a hibakusha. Now, however, he considers it his duty and obligation to tell
as many people as possible abuot the gruesome details of the bombing and his own
experience as a 13 year old schoolboy who wandered around Hiroshima for a week
in shock. the impact of his account benefits from Mr. Kawamoto's being such an
average man, and, as Mr. Rosenblatt points out, ''it is the ordinariness of the
city that creates the sense of loss.''

The other interlocutor, the scientist Harold Agnew, worked as an apprentice on
the bomb's development under J. Robert Oppenheimer. He was 24 years old in 1945
when he was aboard the instrument plane that flew alongside the Enola Gay, the
bomber, and measured the explosive yeild. He then brought the films back to the
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico, of which he later became a
director.

Mr. Agnew is a realist. He felt the bomb had to be made and the war won. He
believes the relaionship between science and the military, which he helped
supervise, to be sound and enduring, but like many of his fellow scientists, he
worries about how to control the whole awful panoply of modern weaponry. Only
half facetiously, he suggests that the top world leaders be summoned every five
years to witness a multimegaton bomb go off 25 miles away. ''What'll impress
them is not the flash, not the size of the cloud and not the boom, he says.
''It's the heat....(It) really scares the bejesus out of you IN his final
section, Mr. Roosenblatt draws some broad and dubious conclusions. Among other
things, his ambitious but some what contrived tour de force exaggerates the
cultural impact of the bomb. He citess the popularity of Boris Karloff's
Frankenstein films over the last 40 years and of such more recent ones as
''Invasion of the Body Snatchers'' as evidence of a conscious or subconscious
apprehension of the Bomb. He suggests that these were also scare films with
anti-communist connotations - ''Better Dead Than Red.'' Vietnam, he says,
created a hiatus from science fiction and explicit sex and violence films, but
then came a new crop, ''E.T.,'' ''Close Encunters of the Third Kind,''
''Cocoon.''

Returning to more solid ground, he concludes that the bomb has abetted ''much of
what is nerveracking and unsatisfactory in the world; a feeling of dislocation;
aimlessness; loneliness; dim perceptions of unidentified dangers.'' Indeed, as
Mr. Rosenblatt notes, ''the answer seems to be'' that we can do ''nothing,'' and
that perhaps the best that people can do is ''quietly come to terms with the
bomb.'' Which leaves things pretty much where they were, and are.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Yoshitaka Kawamoto (Ben Martin/The Magazine)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
WHAT NEXT FOR THE BABY BOOMERS?

BYLINE: By MICHELE G. DiACRI; Michele G. DiAcri lives in Clinton.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 22, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


WHEN in the course of the lives of the Baby Boomers of the United States, it
becomes necessary for us to buy outrageously expensive sports cars, contemplate
affairs with monks, or switch careers that took 20 years to build, we dissolve
any connection with our predecessor generation and do establish a need for
mid-life crises.

We hold that certain things are fairly obvious: Restraint is not on our side. We
Boomers followed an explosive war in which an atomic bomb was dropped for the
first time. Our births competed in both quantity and noise with new homes being
built and the sputter and spark of appliances being used.

Nature delivered us, but suburbia and television sets separated us from nature
and impelled us to be consumers, making us endowed with certain inalienable
tendencies to buy up things around us. Not only did we Boomers have a generation
to cling to, but we also grew up with a healthy respect for market statistics.

Excessive Boomer behavior is strange compared to the behavior of previous
generations who did not take the pursuit of happiness so seriously. Mention
career changing to somebody who stood in a job line during the Depression and
watch for a puzzled expression. Explain the necessity of purchasing a European
sports car with a five-figure price tag to a former World War II soldier or
nurse and wait for eyes to water.

Boomer causes are trendy, and our communal memories are all of the most
televised kind. Is there one among us who does not wince at the mention of the
world ''hippie''? Are we recovered from viewing daily episodes of the Vietnam
War on the nightly news? Will we ever again get the urge to separate our index
and middle finger when someone says ''peace''?

We loved all the hype then, and we continue to produce it now. Rock music has
been hip-rolled to our children in the form of punk. Preppies, with gloved-hand,
willed status to the yuppies. We productive Boomers produced so much culture
that some of us fell victim to addictive ways; too much culture makes us
thrilled, but not satisfied.

Yet we are at a loss to define what the cars and the status will do for us
during this mid-life time. Rather than propel us into a contented maturity, it
has given us a lot in common with our discontented teen-agers. We both sulk
around the house, pondering what we are going to do with the next part of our
lives. We both become overly time conscious and think that if we do not make a
drastic change, life will have proven us a failure.

The present state of mid-life for usBoomers is marred by certain usurpations of
the aging process, all having in direct object the establishment of
embarrassment in turning 40. To prove this, we submit the following:

We Boomers have called together a prodigious number of ways to celebrate a 40th
birthday that are unusual and uncomfortable. Frequently we are the recipient of
gag gifts that joke about our sexuality, thereby making it necessary for us to
conjure up snappy comebacks to 95 sexual innuendos in one evening.

We Boomers, with the highest regard for media blitz, do not constrain oursleves
from having 40th birthday greetings posted on outdoor billboards, whole-page ads
in local newspapers, or puffed out of the end of a plane, which encourages
others to use the utmost secrecy regarding their age.

In every stage of life, we ask ourselves: ''What am I doing here?'' Our repeated
questioning only points out the fact that we Boomers ask a whole lot more
questions than our parents had time for. Yet we keep asking this question, which
inevitably interrupts our connection between meaning and a red-lacquer paint job
on a car that we really cannot afford.

We Boomers have media manufactured a maturity that is based on success and
achievement, but we have been deaf to the voice that every generation comes to
hear that tells us that life continues, whether we are upwardly mobile or
downwardly out. We denounce that youth is an exercise book away and that old age
is onelong, line dance.

We, therefore, the Boomers of the United States of America, in front of our
V.C.R.'s and computers, in the name of sanity and naturalness of the aging
process, declare that we are free and independent people; that we are absolved
from all allegiance to mid-life crisis and the havoc it presents.

For the support of this declaration, we rely on the premise that we were placed
in the middle of the opposing forces of life and death on the day we were born,
and that the ''crisis'' of being placed between a certain past and an uncertain
future is shared by everyone.

We pledge our lives, but not our MasterCards, to the fact that we are getting
older, but realizing a whole lot better that a generation that started with a
boom does not necessarily have to continue with one. Michele G. DiAcri lives in
Clinton.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Peking Says a Clash Left 200 Vietnamese Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 4


A Peking newspaper said today that Chinese artillery killed more than 200
Vietnamese soldiers in a recent border clash in Yunnan Province.

Peking Daily made the claim in a story about a local war hero identified as Xu
Xiaodan, a scout for artillery units near Laoshan, a frequently reported
flashpoint in the six-year-old undeclared China-Vietnam border war.

It did not specify when the fighting occurred or whether the Chinese suffered
casualties, but said the army recently awarded the scout the title of ''hero
artillery scout'' for directing the shelling of 78 Vietnamese positions.

The report came two days after Vietnam said its forces killed 313 Chinese
soldiers last month in repulsing ''land-grabbing attacks'' in Ha Tuyen Province,
which borders Yunnan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN FLIES FLAG AT MOSCOW FESTIVAL

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 4


By the time the weeklong Moscow youth festival was over this weekend, John Bal,
a 39-year-old youth worker from New York City, had given away 500 American
flags, 200 pins showing the Empire State Building, 40 five-inch bronze replicas
of the Statue of Liberty and nearly 1,000 postcards with scenes of New York.

The pins people gave him in return, representing Soviet holidays, towns and
public figures, covered his jacket so that he jingled slightly as he walked.

''They may have had their own propaganda reasons for holding the festival,'' he
said, ''but I had my own reasons for coming, to make personal contacts with
people from other countries, and from my point of view the festival has been a
success.''

Mr. Bal's experiences during the eight days of the 12th international festival
of youth and students, which ended Saturday night, showed a mixture of official
control and warm individual experiences. Organizers said 30,000 or so delegates
and guests from 157 nations attended the festival, which featured symposiums on
Soviet propaganda themes such as imperialism and racism and an antiwar pageant.

Most of the participants were from Soviet bloc nations or from Communist or
leftist groups that espouse Soviet positions. But some, like Mr. Bal, were
attracted by the chance to make friends across ideological barriers, and they
said their reception was warm.

''I didn't run into much anti-Americanism, except from the anti-Americans in the
American delegation,'' Mr. Bal said.

''I consider myself in the middle, a Democrat, and I never expected to find
myself defending America like a right-winger,'' Mr. Bal said. ''But I guess I
just couldn't continue to hear things that seem basically unfair in criticizing
America.''

He said the divisions among the 276 Americans at the festival became evident
when the group he was in debated whether or not to march to the opening ceremony
with an American flag, and whether to carry the flag upside down.

''I was one of the ones with my hands on the flag,'' Mr. Bal said, ''and we
carried it the right way up.''

Mr. Bal said he later put a small flag on his jacket. ''In about four hours, I
got 82 pins and about 30 postcards,'' he said. ''They even stood in line to tell
me they wanted peace and friendship with America.''

He said he and a dozen other Americans decided to visit the United States
Embassy to hear its answers to Soviet criticisms that it was opposed to the
festival. After some debates about a possible visit, Mr. Bal was escorted into a
back room for what he said ''I guess amounted to an interrogation'' by a Russian
who identified himself as Nikolai, chief of security.

The Russian asked about the festival. When Mr. Bal said he had been impressed
with the opening and was enjoying meeting new friends, he said he was told, ''In
Russia we have an expression that one may be marching in step, but not marching
in step correctly.''

The Russian said he could not stop Mr. Bal from visiting the American Embassy,
but that this would not show the proper festival spirit. Mr. Bal said he went to
the embassy anyway. ''They didn't take our names or photograph us,'' he said.
''And they said we were welcome to contact them if we had any problems.''

Mr. Bal, from the Little Italy section of Manhattan, said that he works as a
youth coordinator for Community Board 4 in Elmhurst, Queens, and that he served
in the Navy in Pearl Harbor during the Vietnam War.

He said that at the Americans' meeting with a delegation from Vietnam he brought
the Vietnamese greetings from Vietnam veterans and handed out some of his
souvenirs.

''Some of the Vietnamese came up afterward and shook my hand,'' he said. ''I was
really touched. It was like, we want to forget and move on.''

Then, he said, Kim Phuc, who at the age of 9 was the subject of one of the most
famous photographs of the war, running down a road without clothing after a
napalm bombing, approached him and gave him a small ring. He said the gesture
overwhelmed him.

''I was so excited,'' he said, ''I almost wanted to leave right then and jump on
a plane to tell my friends, 'Hey, that girl in the photograph.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPACE SHUTTLE IN EXPERIMENT TO AID TELESCOPES ON EARTH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 557 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., Aug. 4


The crew of the space shuttle Challenger fired the craft's jets today to punch
temporary holes in the earth's thin upper atmosphere, or ionosphere, allowing
radio telescopes on the ground to peer deeper into space.

The first firing came over Hobart, Tasmania, causing the ionoshpere over that
area to be temporarily depleted and opening a ''hole'' through which radio
astronomers could peer. The electrically charged ionosphere interferes with the
radio waves from space that radio astronomers study.

At the time of the burn, scientists at the Reber Observatory at the University
of Tasmania turned their large radio telescopes to try to fathom with increased
sensitivity some of the mysteries in the sky. The observatory picks up the long
wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. A second jet firing took place over
Westford, Mass., and the Millstone Hill Observatory.

Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said there was no
danger to humans on the ground because the experiment affected only the earth's
outer atmosphere.

Military Scientists Interested

The experiment was also of interest to scientists working on the Strategic
Defense Initiative, the United States program to develop a defense system
against intercontinental missiles. That system would use laser beams and beams
of subatomic particles to destroy approaching missiles, but the effect the
charged ionosphere may have on such beams is unknown.

The scientists were also interested in data on the ionosphere that were gathered
earlier in the shuttle mission by a small, free-flying satellite launched from
the shuttle and later retrieved, according to the magazine Aviation Week & Space
Technology.

Today the astronauts worked 12-hour, back-to-back shifts to make the maximum
possible number of observations of the sun, stars and distant galaxies with
their $72 million worth of telescopes and other instruments.

''Fantastic!'' said Dr. Loren W. Acton, 48 years old, a solar physicist on the
space shuttle, as the last of the mission's balky instruments, the solar
magnetic experiment, switched on today. It had been without power since the
start of the mission, and unexpectedly came on today in response to signals from
the ground.

All Instruments Operating

At a briefing today, Dr. Eugene W. Urban, chief mission scientist, said the
instruments on the Challenger were operating normally and the mission was
''where we wanted to be all along.''

To make up for time lost earlier when balky instruments slowed things down,
space agency officials have extended the mission for a day. The shuttle is to
land Tuesday at 3:46 P.M. Eastern daylight time, at Edwards Air Force Base in
California.

The commander of the seven-member crew is Col. C. Gordon Fullerton of the Air
Force, 48, who was the pilot on the third shuttle mission. The Challenger's
pilot is Col. Roy D. Bridges Jr., 41, of the Air Force, a fighter pilot who flew
combat missions in Vietnam.

The mission specialists are Dr. Anthony W. England, 43, a geophysicist; Dr. F.
Story Musgrave, 49, a physician who was a mission specialist on the sixth
shuttle flight, and Dr. Karl G. Henize, 58, an astronomer.

Payload specialists on this flight are Dr. John-David F. Bartoe, 41, an
astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, and Dr. Acton.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 6, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
An Abject Excuse

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Whatever America's moral involvement in South Africa, the Reagan
Administration's declared policy of ''constructive engagement'' amounts to
political involvement beyond previous United States commitments.

The rationale is that gentle persuasion can be the most effective way for the
United States to push the South African regime away from apartheid. There is
something to the argument that sanctions would hurt South African blacks and
surrounding states more than they would pro-apartheid whites, and that they
would serve to stiffen Afrikaner intransigence.

But the situation is getting worse, not better. And the official American
attitude is an increasingly important factor. Therefore, hard as it is to agree
on specific measures that have a chance of producing even marginal results,
Washington needs to provide a coherent explanation.

There has been no shortage of clear, sharp denunciations of apartheid from
Washington. No responsible Administration figure has apologized for the racist
system that denies all political and most civic rights to a majority of its
population.

The chasm opens with the next, inevitable question. Why protect Pretoria? It was
put quite directly to Under Secretary of State Michael Armacost by Australian
reporters in a recent United States-sponsored interview by satellite.

''Nicaragua is a country whose Government you do not like and which you accuse
of trying to export revolution,'' they said to Mr. Armacost. ''South Africa is a
country whose system of government, and notably apartheid, you don't like, and
you also deplore its exporting of its troops across its border, not to mention
its illegal occupation of Namibia. In one case you've imposed sanctions, in the
other you're speaking of constructive engagement. Why the double standard?''

Mr. Armacost ducked, mumbling about United States interest in negotiations with
both countries. Besides, he said, Nicaragua is a small country where sanctions
can cause some real ''dislocation,'' while they wouldn't make a significant
difference to South Africa.

But the State Department recognizes that it isn't only distant allies that are
having trouble fitting this lame waffle into the Administration's proclaimed
''crusade for democracy.''

It is also a problem for Radio Free Europe, the Congressionally funded station
that broadcasts American views to Eastern Europe. Broadcasters at Radio Free
Europe have received guidance on how to handle the ticklish issue.

An internal memo instructs writers and speakers mentioning South Africa ''to
bring out two key points.''

The first takes the high road: ''Any system founded on inequality before the law
and the willful violation of basic human rights is abhorrent to us. This is true
regardless of the political coloring of the oppressive regime, and regardless of
the criteria upon which the discriminatory practices rest, be they race,
religion, class, ethnic origin or whatever. Such shaky foundations undermine the
security of the entire polity as the South African leadership will sooner or
later have to recognize.''

That is indeed America's message to Communist-controlled Eastern Europe,
presumably to the whole world. But the second point pulls way back, attempting
to make a moral distinction that goes even further than the realpolitik
inspiring the former United Nations delegate Jeane Kirkpatrick's difference
between ''authoritarian'' friends and ''totalitarian'' enemies.

It said: ''However wicked apartheid may be, South Africa, unlike the U.S.S.R.,
does not constitute a menace to the free world, and its system does not require
aggression against foreign countries to assure its survival. Pretoria has
intervened in neighboring states to remove threats to its own borders, but it
has not tried to export apartheid.''

The note says this explains sanctions against Nicaragua and not South Africa. It
adds, ''A similar contrast illustrates the reasons behind American policy toward
Cuba and Vietnam, on the one hand, and Chile and Paraguay on the other.''

This is the answer Mr. Armacost knew better than to give in public. This abject
excuse is dragging the U.S. into sharing the blame before world opinion for
South Africa's behavior. If Washington can't manage anything more useful, it
should at least seek consistency and try to limit the damage that the mounting
crisis will do to America's standing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 6, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

JURY FINDS LIBEL IN BOSTON GLOBE ARTICLE

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 5


A jury ruled today that a former gubernatorial candidate had been libeled by
five paragraphs of an article in The Boston Globe, three of them about his
business. But the jury found that the article as a whole had not been libelous,
and it awarded no damages.

The candidate, John R. Lakian, 42 years old, a businessman who ran in the 1982
Republican primary, had filed suit in Norfolk Superior Court, asserting that the
article, which also raised questions about other aspects of his background,
represented an invasion of privacy and intentionally inflicted emotional
distress.

Mr. Lakian, who had sought $50 million from the newspaper and the reporter,
Walter V. Robinson, declared immediately after the verdict was read this
afternoon that it was ''a total win.'' He said he would not seek damages. The
Globe also claimed victory. It said the jury had agreed with the conclusion of
the article, which was that an inquiry into Mr. Lakian's backround ''found what
appears to be a pattern of discrepancies between what he says and what the
records show about his upbringing, schooling, military service and business
career.''

Statement Editor of Newspaper

In a statement, Michael C. Janeway, editor of The Globe, said: ''We believe the
jury was inconsistent in finding that the article was substantially true, while
at the same time finding that one of the nine topics covered in it was false.''

''Their decision to award no damages to Mr. Lakian is eloquent, damages being an
essential element of a finding of libel,'' the statement said.

Mr. Lakian's attorney, Norman Roy Grutman, said the jury had probably decided
not to award damages because ''it's hard to cry over someone who is a
multimillionaire, and making millions.''

Mr. Lakian, president of the First Merchants Bank of Boston, ''didn't need the
money, what he needed was to have his reputation deodorized,'' Mr. Grutman said.


Lakian's Bank Also Suing

Mr. Grutman said the writer of the article, Mr. Robinson, was ''a mischievous
reporter,'' and said Mr. Lakian ''was being set up'' by the article to make it
appear that he was being untruthful about the earnings of his company or the
assets it had under management. The company also has a libel suit pending
against the Globe, he said.

Legal experts not connected with the case said the verdict was unusual because
it carried no monetary damages. Victor A. Kovner, chairman of the Communications
Law Committee of the bar association in New York City, called the ruling ''sort
of like an enforced retraction.''

''It focuses on the importance and burden of proving that allegedly defamatory
statements are in fact the proximate cause of substantial damage to reputation,
and have an economic consequence to the plaintiff,'' he said. ''Most people fail
to consider that burden on all libel plaintiffs.''

Five Paragraphs Questioned

The article appeared under the headline, ''Lakian's Self-Portrait and What the
Record Shows,'' on the front page of the Globe, the largest newspaper in New
England, Aug. 18, 1982, and is widely credited with derailing his campaign.

While Mr. Lakian disputed the accuracy of the article in the five-week trial
before Judge George Jacobs, the jury apparently was convinced on most points
that the newspaper's assertions were not false, or at least that the paper had
not published them knowing they were false.

The jury, which had deliberated 14 hours since Thursday, found five paragraphs
libelous, however, and that The Globe published three of them that dealt with
the success of Mr. Lakian's company, Fort Hill Investors Management Corporation,
''with knowledge of its falsity.''

The paragraphs said Mr. Lakian had overstated the amount his company earned. In
the trial Mr. Lakian said the reporter had deliberately confused earnings with
projected earnings. Mr. Lakian's buisness career was important to his candidacy
because he was running as a successful businessman.

The fourth paragraph judged libelous said Mr. Lakian had contradicted himself in
statements about discrepancies, and the fifth said Mr. Lakian changed his
explanation of why he voted in a 1978 Democratic primary.

Lakian Denied Some Points

In the trial Mr. Lakian defended a ''degree of slight fluff'' in some of his
campaign material, and acknowledged that he had made some false statements. On
other points he denied claiming the credentials the Globe article questioned, or
asserted that the records did not contradict him.

The Globe article asserted that Mr. Lakian falsely said he had been a Republican
for 12 years, misrepresented his record in the Vietnam war, lied about his
connection with Harvard University and the time it took him to graduate from
Boston University, and gave conflicting answers about his success in business.

Among the key issues were what Mr. Lakian, who had not sought elective office
before, said about his record as a Republican, and what incomplete voter
registration documents indicated. The article by Mr. Robinson, one of the
paper's top political reporters, said that although Mr. Lakian said he had been
a Republican since 1970, voting records in six communities where he had lived
showed that he first became a Republican in 1980.

Mr. Lakian said he had not asserted he was ''a continuous Republican.'' The
Boston registration records for 1970 are missing, according to trial testimony,
but records for the next year showed Mr. Lakian as an independent. The two sides
differed over whether, as some testimony suggested, the 1971 records indicated
what Mr. Lakian's party was the previous year.

'Battlefield Commission' at Issue

Also at issue was a statement in early campaign literature that Mr. Lakian won a
''battlefield commission'' in Vietnam. Testimony at the trial showed that there
were no such commissions in that war.

Mr. Lakian first said a campaign aide, Roger H. Woodworth, was responsible for
that phrasse, but Mr. Woodworth testified that Mr. Lakian supplied the
information himself.

Mr. Grutman conceded that Mr. Lakian had ''foolishly fantasized'' his connection
with Harvard. Mr. Lakian said in a sworn statement in 1979 that he had a
master's degree from Harvard. In the campaign he said he had taken courses
there, but later said he had audited a single course.

To prevail in the libel charge, according to the instructions Judge Jacobs gave
the jury, Mr. Lakian had to show that the article or parts of it were false;
that it damaged him, and that The Globe acted ''with knowlege of or with
reckless disregard as to the falsity'' of the information. To prove intentional
infliction of emotional distress, the a showing that ''conduct was extreme and
outrageous, was beyond all possible bounds of decency, and was utterly
intolerable in a civilized community'' was required.

Mr. Fox argued in the trial that the story filled the newspaper's proper role.
''If newspapers didn't exist, it would be necessary to invent them for John
Lakian,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 8, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from Boston on Tuesday about a libel suit by John R. Lakian against
The Boston Globe, and another yesterday, inaccurately described the jury's
findings.

The Tuesday dispatch said the jury had found libel in five paragraphs of the
Globe article. The dispatch yesterday said the jury found five paragraphs
''false and defamatory,'' of which it said three were printed with ''reckless
disregard'' for the truth. The jury actually found five paragraphs in the Globe
article to be false and said three of these were defamatory material published
''with knowledge of its falsity or while having serious doubts about its
truth.'' Wording of the kind used by the jury to describe those three paragraphs
normally amounts to a finding of libel, but the jury did not use the term.

The Tuesday dispatch also erred in quoting the disputed Globe article. The Globe
said that Mr. Lakian had claimed a ''battlefield promotion,'' not a
''battlefield commission.''

GRAPHIC: photo of John Lakian and his wife Andrea (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 6, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CONCERT: NEW MUSIC AT TANGLEWOOD

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: LENOX, Mass., Aug. 5


The second of the regular concerts of this summer's Tanglewood Festival of
Contemporary Music, Sunday night in the Theater-Concert Hall, looked on paper
like a typically motley new-music grab-bag. A grab-bag it may have been, but not
motley: there were no bad pieces, and one really striking one.

The concert began with a bow to the past, in Stefan Wolpe's ''From Here on
Farther'' (1969). One of the final works of this father-figure of the New York
avant-garde of the 1970's, this is a rather slight scherzo for clarinet, bass
clarinet, violin and piano, neatly if somewhat doggedly rendered on Sunday.

The program contained two works by former Margaret Lee Crofts fellows - in other
words, promising young composers from previous Tanglewood summers. Sheree
Clement's Chamber Concerto (1982), energetically performed by an ensemble under
Kent Nagano's direction, offered an interesting insight into the younger
''uptown'' New York vanguard sensibility, 1980's-style. This was a piece full of
the virtuosity and intensity one expects from that circle, yet not so
determinedly dissonant as a similar piece a decade ago might have been. Despite
her incomprehensible esthetico-self-pyschoanalytic program notes, Miss Clement
would appear to be a talent.

David Lang's ''Illumination Rounds'' (1981) has a charged title, referring to
phosphorescent bullets fired from helicopters in Vietnam to illuminate territory
for subsequent machine-gun strafing. The piece itself offered a violinist (David
Brickman) and pianist (Karen Harvey) in staggered close proximity. There was a
fiercely motoric beginning (not quite fierce enough from Mr. Brickman, to this
taste), an ethereal middle and a shorter fierce finale.

The best pieces of the night were by the Japanese composer Jo Kondo and the
Hungarian-German Gyorgy Ligeti. Mr. Kondo's ''Sight Rhythmics'' (1975) is a
piano version of a chamber piece with a fascinatingly exotic instrumentation; it
would have been nice to play both versions. But the Australian Lisa Moore's
carefully concentrated account of the piano score, with its limpid, relaxed,
lazily chromatic Minimalism (reminiscent of some of John Cage's recent pieces)
was beautifully done.

Mr. Ligeti's Trio for violin, horn and piano (1982) took the prize for the
night, however. First of all, it's good to keep abreast of the recent evolution
of composers best-known for earlier work in different idioms. But in itself,
this piece was gripping.

Dedicated ''Hommage a Brahms,'' it is not actually based on Brahms's own horn
trio. In four movements lasting 25 minutes, it begins tentatively, with a
hesitant Andantino and a skittering Vivacissimo. But the last two movements, a
march and a lament, open up into real seriousness. Perhaps better dedicated
''Hommage a Messiaen,'' they recall the French master's bold, widely spaced
chords and ecstatic reiterated figurations. The performance, by Miss Moore, the
violinist Thomas Hanulik and the hornist Daniel Schulze, sounded first-rate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DIFFICULT FLIGHT OF SHUTTLE ENDS; HAILED AS SUCCESS

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Aug. 6


The space shuttle Challenger, which lost one of three main engines on its ascent
to orbit eight days ago, returned safely to earth today after a mission that an
official called ''superbly successful.''

Col. C. Gordon Fullerton of the Air Force guided the 108-ton spacecraft to a
landing at 12:46 P.M. on a dry lake bed that danced with watery mirages in
96-degree heat. Plumes of dust rose like steam as the craft rolled to a stop,
returning a crew of seven men and the largest, most advanced scientific
instruments ever built for space flight.

An Orbiting Observatory

On this mission the Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory, with
more than $72 million of telescopes and other sensitive instruments to study the
sun, the stars and distant galaxies.

Dr. Burton Edelson, an Associate Administrator of the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, said some instrument problems had seemed ''insurmountable
when we started out.''

''But we met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission,''
Dr. Edelson said. ''We're absolutely delighted. We know we had trouble getting
started. We breathed a great sigh of relief to get into orbit at all. We had our
fingers crossed.''

'Interesting New Observations'

Dr. Eugene W. Urban, chief mission scientist, was the official who characterized
the flight as superb. ''Everyone has collected tantalizing new data,'' he said
at a briefing. ''It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and
really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some
have been very spectacular.''

Before the landing, one of the astronauts, Dr. Loren W. Acton, a 48-year-old
solar physicist, thanked engineers on the ground for help in transforming ''a
fairly anomalous mission'' into one that produced ''what we trust to be some
excellent science.''

The Challenger's flight was delayed on July 12 for more than two weeks after a
problem in the second of the shuttle's three main engines caused the mission to
be scrubbed just seconds before liftoff. A valve was replaced in the engine, and
preparations for the flight resumed.

The mission finally got off on July 29, but to a harrowing start, when another
of the shuttle's main engines shut down after liftoff, the first time that had
happened on an American manned space flight. Instead of firing about nine
minutes, the engine lasted five minutes and 45 seconds after leaving the Kennedy
Space Center, at Cape Canaveral, Fla.

Orbit Lower Than Planned

The Challenger limped on its other two engines into an orbit about 50 miles shy
of its goal of 240 miles above the earth. Space agency officials said that if
the engine had failed 33 seconds earlier, the Challenger would have been forced
to land at its trans-Atlantic abort site, an airport in Zaragoza, Spain.

As the shuttle passed over Spain today, Colonel Fullerton, 48, the Challenger's
commander, commented that he could see the airport ''that we almost landed at a
week ago.''

Space agency officials said the shutdown had been caused by faulty heat sensors
on the engine. The twin sensors apparently sent false readings, causing
computers aboard to turn the engine off prematurely.

New Sensors Are Planned

Jesse Moore, an Associate Administrator of the space agency, said that the
sensors on the Challenger's failed engine would be inspected and that an
improved type of sensor would be used on future shuttle flights if the
Challenger sensors proved faulty. The next mission is scheduled to start Aug. 24
with the shuttle Discovery.

''NASA plans to send a team to inspect the three shuttle engines,'' Mr. Moore
said. ''We will get the sensors out and take them to the lab.''

''We may be able to say by the end of the week,'' he said, if the sensors were
faulty.

Once in orbit, the Challenger's astronauts struggled with a number of balky
instruments, including a $60 million system that was to point telescopes with
the accuracy of tracking a dime at the distance of two miles. The system did so,
but only after many days of false starts.

The mood of the astronauts swung from disappointment to elation as they solved
the technical problems. ''It really gives us the greatest pleasure to wind up
with a dazzling day like this,'' Dr. Acton said Monday as the crew took its
final observations. ''It's really great to see all the instruments working so
well.''

Extension of One Day

The mission was extended a day so that the astronauts could make up for time
lost earlier.

The crew focused some of the telescopes in the shuttle's 60-foot payload bay on
the sun's corona and outer atmosphere, and others on the cosmic rays, X-rays and
infrared radiations from stars and distant galaxies. The solar telescopes
allowed astronomers on the ground to view the sun with about five times greater
accuracy than ever before.

The astronauts also released and later retrieved a small scientific satellite to
help understand the effects of solar winds on the earth's outer atmosphere as
well as a strange phenomenon that often causes the shuttle to glow softly.
Solving this riddle is considered important to the success of future missions,
which will carry sensitive instruments that might be disturbed by the mysterious
aura.

The crew also fired the spacecraft's small maneuvering jets to punch temporary
holes in the earth's thin upper atmosphere, allowing radiotelescopes on the
ground to peer deeper into space. Some of these experiments in the ionosphere
are said to be of interest to scientists working on the Pentagon's Strategic
Defense Initiative, which is investigating the feasibility of sending laser
beams and beams of subatomic particles through space to destroy intercontinental
missiles in flight.

Colas Were Checked, Too

The astronauts also drank both Coca-Cola (the new variety) and Pepsi Cola, which
were served in special cans designed to prevent carbonation from being lost.
Before takeoff the crew was advised not to photograph the containers in space or
to state any preference for one cola or the other.

After the landing, the eighth for the Challenger, Colonel Fullerton pointed to
it and said: ''That bird on the lake bed out there really performed beautifully.
We are going to recommend they send it back to the shop for an engine tuneup.''

Mr. Moore also said the spaceplane appeared to be in good shape.

''It was a beautiful landing,'' he said. ''The tiles looked very good. The
brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying
machines.''

The flight was the 19th for the nation's fleet of winged spaceships. It also
marked the 50th mission in the history of the manned American space program, the
first being the suborbital flight of Alan B. Shepard in 1961.

The mission's pilot was Col. Roy D. Bridges Jr., 41, of the Air Force, who flew
combat missions in Vietnam.

The mission specialists were Dr. Anthony W. England, 43, a geophysicist; Dr.
Karl G. Henize, 58, an astronomer, and Dr. F. Story Musgrave, 49, a physician
who was a mission specialist on the sixth shuttle flight.

The payload specialists were Dr. Acton, of the Lockheed Palo Alto Research
Laboratory, in California, and Dr. John-David F. Bartoe, 41, an astrophysicist
at the Naval Research Laboratory, in Washington.

The Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three
million miles.

Despite the 17-day delay in the Challenger's launch, Mr. Moore said the shuttle
program could hold ''pretty well'' to its schedule.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of crew members of Challenger (UPI) (page D19)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Gun That Shoots Crooked

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


The Army hails the latest test of its Sergeant York antiaircraft gun as a
triumph, even though it may not have brought down a single target. How can that
be? Why would senior officers foist a defective weapon on their troops? We are
back in the tragicomedy of the Sergeant York, a weapon that can neither kill nor
be killed.

Because of the speed of its targets, an antiaircraft gun has to fire ahead of
them. Skilled gunners can estimate the course of a violently maneuvering plane,
partly because they can see its wings banking for a turn. In the Sergeant York,
the human eye and mind are replaced with a radar and computer at enormous cost -
and for a dramatic loss of effectiveness.

The $6 million gun has repeatedly failed to hit maneuvering planes. In tests
last year it had trouble shooting even helicopters until radar reflectors, not a
standard item of Soviet equipment, were attached to the targets. Last year,
Defense Secretary Weinberger ordered realistic tests before allowing the Army to
complete its $4.2 billion purchase of the guns. So far, 146 guns have been
bought for $1.2 billion.

After the tests, in June, the Army called a Congressional critic, Denny Smith,
Republican of Oregon, to say the gun had successfully shot its targets out of
the sky. An Army videotape dramatically backed the claim: as a Sergeant York
shot each drone, the target burst into pieces. Ford Aerospace, the contractor,
announced that the gun ''destroyed six of seven high-performance aircraft and
three of three helicopters presented.''

In truth, there was not one direct hit, as Representative Smith, a former Air
Force fighter pilot in Vietnam and co-chairman of the House military reform
caucus, had to learn from other sources. The target airplanes carried explosives
that were detonated by ground command a few seconds after the firing of a
Sergeant York. The Army now concedes the drones were destroyed from the ground,
but contends the Sergeant York's proximity shells would have brought planes
down. So why destroy the evidence for that? Because the drones might have veered
off course and caused damage, the Army says. That's a strange explanation for
tests conducted at a range in the New Mexico desert. To the argument that even a
near-miss would be lethal, Mr. Smith notes that many planes are not brought down
even by direct hits.

Ford Aerospace's statement implies a 90 percent kill rate. Mr. Smith says he
learned that targets were presented many more than 10 times. He also has
information that the drones flew in straight lines with little or no
maneuvering, except for a roll in front of the guns to provide a larger target.

How can a weapon fail any test in which possible evidence of failure is
destroyed? Tests like this don't test the Sergeant York but the officers
involved in the charade. They test Congress, which keeps on buying the Sergeant
York despite its poor performance. They test John Krings, the director of the
Pentagon's new testing office, who approved the flaw-ridden methodology and even
wrote to Mr. Smith that ''our observations throughout the test confirm the rigor
of execution and data collection. Rest assured it has been a tough test.''
Instead of welcoming Mr. Smith's interest, the Army impugns his motives. Maj.
Gen. James Maloney, who as commander of the Air Defense Artillery Center is the
chief customer of the gun, says Mr. Smith ''is not doing this for the good of
the country.''

The Pentagon and Congress are rightly concerned these days with service members
who sell weapons data or codes to the Soviet Union. A moment's reflection would
suggest that those who impose defective weapons on American troops, despite
repeated evidence of flaws, do more certain damage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OLYMPIC-STYLE COMPETITION FOR MASTERS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Aug. 6


On the theory that sports are not entirely for kids, a sort of Olympics for
oldsters are scheduled to open here Wednesday, the world's first Masters Games.

Some 8,000 athletes from 59 countries are expected to take part in the 18-day
event. The only qualification is proof of age. The qualification varies with the
sport, ranging from 25 for swimmers to 55 for shooters.

''You don't die at 25,'' said Dr. Maureen O'Bryan, the 46-year-old president of
the games. ''The best years of your life are ahead of you. Let's make those best
years even better.''

The games, which are intended to become a quadrennial event at differend sites
with headquarters here, are being operated on a shoestring budget. The opening
ceremony Wednesday, for instance, costs less than half of what the fireworks
alone cost at the Los Angeles Olympics, the organizers say.

Athletes will pay their own expenses, including a $44 entry fee and further fees
for each event they enter. Far from being put up in an Olympic Village, they
will have to find and book their own hotels.

No National Identification

National identification will be nonexistent - no national uniforms, anthems or
flags are permitted. About one-third of the entrants come from Canada and
another third from the United States, with the remainder scattered fairly
evenly, including participants from China. None of the participants come from
the Soviet Union, although there are several from Czechoslovakia.

Entrants range from swimmers and runners who years ago may have missed making
their Olympic teams by hundredths of a second, to people who have never engaged
in competitive sports, Dr O'Bryan, a former physical education professor, said.

Dr. O'Bryan tells of a Wisconsin canoeist who has always regretted not being
able to try out for the American Olympic team, because he was fighting in
Vietnam. And of the shooter from the Phillipines who lost the use of his right
side, and then learned to shoot expertly with his left hand. The games, Dr.
O'Bryan related, were the shooters inspiration.

Oldest Participant

The oldest athlete in the games, Ella Peckham, 86, is convinced she can dive as
well as any 70-year-old. Dr. Manuel Sanguily, 52, a former Olympic swimmer for
Cuba, will be trying to win the butterfly as a posthumous present to the
teen-ager who taught him the stroke and then died in an accident.

Roland Michener, 85, a former Governor General of Canada, is both Honorary
Master of the games and a participant in tennis and his confidence shows.

''I may have good genes, but I'm in pretty good shape for a man my age,'' he
said. ''I can nip around the court like, shall we say, a 50-year-old.''

The games boast some big names. Dawn Fraser, the Australian who set 27 world
records for swimming, will be on hand. So will Hashim Khan, considered by many
the greatest squash player of all time.

Others suggest that honor, at least for women, might belong to Heather McKay,
who will play competitive squash here for the first time since 1981. ''I haven't
lost a competitive squash match to a woman in 18 years,'' she said.

Events will be staged at 72 different sites in the Toronto area in 22 sports
ranging from basketball to badminton to bowling. There will be men and women
winners in each age category, generally divided at five-year intervals.

Swimming a Big Event

Swimming is the biggest event, with some 1,600 entries churning away for 14
hours a day. Befitting the Toronto location, ice hockey will be a featured
event, with teams coming from such unlikely places as Southern California and
Australia.

Organizers say that the reputed oldest hockey player in the world, the Rev. John
Burgers, 78 years old, of the New York Apple Cores, will show his stuff.

The Masters Games has two special features testifying to the maturity of its
participants. One is a symposium on sports medicine, with leading physicians
addressing their papers specifically to the problems of the aging athlete.

The other special event is called ''A Celebration of Wine,'' including an
international wine-tasting competition. Suzie McKeegan, the publicist, says the
wine-tasting is directed specifically toward the sort of person the games hope
to attract - ''people who know what they want out of life and go for it.''

The event has not been without its problems - one being Government financing.
Organizers had counted on both the federal and Ontario provincial governments
contributing about $400,000 each. Instead, they together committed about that
amount.

Games Within Budget

Still, Ken O'Bryan, Dr. O'Bryan's husband and the vice president of corporate
affairs for the games, calculates the games will come in slightly under their
$3.8 million budget. Part of this is due to their small size: Monthly interest
on the debt of the 1976 Montreal Olympics is greater than the entire cost of the
Masters Games, he said. Another savings results from the lack of national
identification, a factor that greatly reduces security costs.

Gifts from 26 corporate sponsors have met expectations. Many of these come from
companies that will benefit directly from the games. CP Air, for example, gained
three jumbo jets full of passengers - from Japan, Australia and Europe - with
its $200,000 contribution.

On a broader level, companies figure to gain from appealing to a growing market
- today's sports and health-conscious young, who will be tomorrow's sports and
health conscious middle-aged. This is also the market for the games, which
organizers think will swell to 25,000 particpants when staged in four years in
either Copenhagen, Denmark, or Brisbane, Australia.

''We are the games of the future,'' Dr. O'Bryan said. ''The population is
older.''

A larger result, she hopes, is that the games will highlight the importance of
older athletes and convince society to provide more financing for them. ''We
want a few facilities for us older characters, rather than pouring everything in
for the kids,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


INNER TUBE. By Hob Broun. 210 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95. ''IT isn't that
she lacks a sense of humor,'' says the narrator of ''Inner Tube,'' describing a
friend, ''only that in her perverse tropism she turns inevitably toward what is
blackest.'' The same might easily be said of every other character in this
novel, as well as the author himself. Though enlivened by patches of nasty black
comedy and splashes of nervous irony, ''Inner Tube'' - which opens with a
suicide and then moves on to more depressing subjects - is one of the most
relentlessly bleak works I've come across in a long time. Reading it is a lot
like staying up all night, listening to a stranger you don't particularly like
tell and retell the story of his life in stoned, didactic monologues. It's not
something you're likely to forget right away. On the other hand, it doesn't make
for a particularly pleasant - or illuminating - evening, either.

He was, the narrator tells us, a sullen, evasive child; and he's grown up to be
a sullen, evasive adult. ''What must, from the outside, have seemed like
timidity was inside the caution that proceeds from mistrust,'' he says. ''To put
a not very fine point on it, I had my doubts about close contact with other
people. Still do.''

Suspicious of other people, skeptical of his own better impulses, this fellow is
bent on withdrawing completely from the world. He prides himself on his lack of
purpose, and takes a kind of perverse pleasure in the mindlessness of his job -
cataloguing old television shows in a deep, underground video library.
Television, he keeps declaring, is an anodyne, and anodynes are apparently what
he - and the whole modern world - now craves. In his free time, he drives around
the countryside, complaining about the tacky, ahistorical landscape, or he stays
home in bed, sipping cold instant coffee and picking dead skin off his scalp.
He's the sort of guy who sees a sunset and thinks of hydrocarbons in the air,
who drives through a lovely desert and thinks of people roasting to death in
their cars.

Given this morbid outlook and his disgusting personal habits, it's a wonder that
the narrator has any friends at all - but as it is, even his meager social life
leaves him feeling over-encumbered with responsibilities. To dissipate the
intensity of his marriage to Violet, he takes up with a motel maid named Heidi,
but discovers that Heidi, too, expects too much from him - things like
companionship and other basic human emotions. He sheds women and friends, and
tries to pare down his life to a minimal subsistence level - from a rented room,
he moves into a motel bungalow, and from there to an Airstream trailer.
Memories, he argues, are an unnecessary burden, and moral distinctions a silly
pretense.

Practically all the other characters in ''Inner Tube'' are in as sorry shape as
the narrator. His father's a violent drunk, his mother a suicide. Violet, an
anthropologist, needs half a bottle of Chablis to nerve herself for a freshman
lecture, and meekly defers to the opinions of shopgirls in boutiques. Heidi
misplaces her child at Sears, and Carla complains about missing the big
''turnoff'' in her life.

The alienation in these people's lives is so extreme as to resemble a parody of
emotions in, say, an Ann Beattie or Raymond Carver novel, and Mr. Broun appears
to want to draw some kind of parallel between his characters' anomic existences
and the presiding spirit of post-Vietnam, post-Watergate America. Their willful
self-absorption is supposed to mirror the solipsistic mood of the 70's, just as
their rootlessness is suppposed to reflect the nation's shrugging disregard for
history. Certainly these are familiar themes by now, and Mr. Broun's attempts to
be more specific tend to be even more obvious and superficial - i.e., that
television shows like ''Leave It to Beaver'' and ''The Donna Reed Show'' present
a phony, sanitized version of life, that fast foods are a symptom of the
synthetic nature of modern culture.

To make matters worse, the reader is never allowed to see these things for
himself, or simply to experience Mr. Broun's characters' dilemmas firsthand.
Instead, everything is mediated by the narrator's sour commentary: for instance,
of various sit-coms, he says, ''What we wish to believe is this: that all those
shows were worse than ridiculous, that they presented idealized, dangerously
illusory figures, and that our inability to live up to them brought on guilt and
disappointment. (How eager we were some years back to accept the specious rumor
that Jerry Mathers - the actor who portrayed Beaver Cleaver - had died a
mud-sucking grunt in Vietnam.) But this is fatuous, self-flattery at its
cheapest.'' When he is not delivering such pop-sociology lectures, the narrator
contents himself with coining aphorisms and making bizarre apercus: he declares
that ''lust no more obviates the need for skepticism than it cures banality,''
and later dubs America, ''one nation, underdog.''

Mr. Broun's taste for baroque, hyperventilated prose can result in
free-associative riffs imbued with a hallucinatory power, but he puts his gifts
so entirely at the service of his splenetic narrator that everything is tinted
with the ugly shades of this fellow's nihilism. In the end, this character's
alienation seems more an act of willful self-pity than a sad consequence of his
sensitivity, and we can feel little but irritation with him and with his
stubborn refusal to feel or even try to connect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hob Broun

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 8, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Why Is Congress Foiling Reagan?

BYLINE: By Stuart E. Eizenstat; Stuart E. Eizenstat, a lawyer, was President
Jimmy Carter's chief domestic policy adviser.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


With Congress in recess, it is timely to ask why President Reagan is unable to
translate his near-record high personal popularity with the public into more
Congressional support for his major programs. Why is he unable to duplicate the
early successes of his first term, following an election victory even more
sweeping than his defeat of Jimmy Carter in 1980? In the answers lie some
fundamental truths about the Presidency.

Since his inauguration, the President has seen his fellow Republicans in the
Senate join the Democratic-controlled House to brake his massive first-term
defense buildup. His budget proposals for the new fiscal year, which his budget
director characterized as the President's chance to reorder Federal priorities,
lie in shambles, treated with little reverence by either party in Congress.

His tax reform proposal, a genuinely bold initiative that was to be the domestic
centerpiece of his second term, has lost public support and is unlikely to pass
both houses of Congress this year in any form. In foreign policy, both houses of
Congress have rejected his South African policy of ''constructive engagement''
by pass-ing economic sanctions legislation.

Even his few successes have been severely circumscribed - the MX missile will be
deployed at only half the proposed level; the ''contras'' in Nicaragua will
receive only non-military assistance and without the direct role for the Central
Intelligence Agency the President sought. Some of President Reagan's
difficulties can be ascribed to breaking in a new White House team, diversion of
resources because of the Trans World Airlines hijacking, his cancer surgery and
to his lame-duck status, as political jockeying begins for the 1988 Presidential
election. But these are secondary, and more fundamental factors are at work.

First, the President did not use the 1984 election campaign to lay out a
second-term blueprint. His mandate was simply not to rock the boat and not to
return to his predecessor's policies. A campaign gives a candidate his best
opportunity to impose his views on the political system after election, by
claiming a public endorsement. Ronald Reagan unmistakably based his 1980
campaign on deep budget and tax cuts for the troubled economy and increased
defense spending to bolster national security. He got from the Congress what he
campaigned for.

But Presidents rarely succeed with major initiatives for which they did not seek
an election mandate.

Lyndon B. Johnson's 1964 campaign called explicitly for a war on poverty and he
got Congressional support for the Great Society by legitimately claiming popular
backing. Just as surely, he did not seek election support for the Vietnam
buildup, and it undermined his Presidency.

A central error of Jimmy Carter's Administration was making his 1977 energy plan
the domestic centerpiece of his first year, when energy had barely been an issue
in the 1976 race and he could claim no public mandate for a sweeping energy
program.

The Reagan tax reform is in the same position. He has tried to make a top
priority out of an issue for which he never sought an election mandate. His
pledge had been no tax increase, not comprehensive tax reform.

If there is no clear election mandate, only a crisis permits a President to
implement major changes. Without having campaigned for a policy, a President
needs an intervening circumstance to focus public and Congressional attention -
like a sharp economic downturn or a direct Soviet presence in Nicaragua. No such
dramatic event has given Mr. Reagan a peg on which to hang a second-term
program.

The President's difficulties reflect our political system, in which power is
more diffused than in any other democracy. The system was created to promote
continuity, not change, and to avoid abrupt redirections, like those Mr. Reagan
seeks. In his first term, he achieved as much of a major mid-course correction
as our system permits. Ironically, the system's natural conservatism and
dispersion of power prevents full achievement of his conservative revolution,
whose central tenet is further decentralization of authority. Congress's greater
assertion of power since Watergate compounds the difficulty Presidents have in
implementing their agendas.

For Mr. Reagan, his second term may seem longer in time and shorter in
achievement than his first. He will probably leave office with his popularity
untouched, but without fully translating it into permanent achievements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Toys for Tomorrow's Green Berets

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

Six years ago, when my first child was born, I entered the world of the large
toy store. The most violent toys were the cowboy gun, action figures, ''Star
Wars'' and superhero figures. G.I. Joe was nowhere to be seen. Toys, as well as
our country, had undergone a change following the Vietnam War.

Within a couple of years, perhaps with Ronald Reagan's election, toys had
changed.

Now (Business Day, Aug. 1) Coleco Industries is producing a line of toys based
on Rambo, Sylvester Stallone's ex-Green Beret character. Will Coleco produce
Vietnamese characters with it, so that our kids can kill the ''gooks''? Will
this line of toys return us to our violent, racist history, in which we killed
Indians, enslaved blacks, killed Mexicans to preserve slavery in Texas,
incarcerated Japanese-Americans in concentration camps and exterminated
Vietnamese with wholesale bombing?

What next for Coleco? How about a line of Nicaraguan ''contra'' terrorists. Why
not a line of Salvadoran death squads, with American nuns? How about a doll with
a bomb for $8.98, to be used against an abortion clinic selling for $25.98?

The possibilities are endless. Coleco Industries can make tremendous profits as
it represents the right-wing turn in the politics of America -as it helps train
our kids for the next war. LEWIS FRIEDMAN Brooklyn, Aug. 1, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Flags

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


A sanitation truck, sweepers twirling merrily, lumbered up Broadway yesterday
morning. From its front fenders flapped two small American flags. Patriotic
sanitation trucks?  It seems they are leftovers from the Vietnam Veterans
ticker-tape parade on May 7. ''The vehicles assigned to cleaning up were each
given flags to display,'' explained Vito A. Turso, a Sanitation Department
spokesman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP/JAZZ;
NEW YORK IN AUGUST A FEAST OF FESTIVALS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2130 words


IN these lazy days of August, New York traditionally takes a moment to catch its
breath and celebrate its rich cultural diversity with citywide festivals. For a
month, the city ceases feeling like the Big Apple -the all-consuming hub of
world communications and commerce - and becomes a sprawling collection of
community events that swirl together a rainbow of musical colors and accents.
This weekend, the array of indoor and outdoor programs in the city constitutes a
veritable summer Super Bowl of activity in both the folk and classical arts.

The fifth annual New York Folk Festival, which has helped to break down the 60's
stereotype of folk as acoustically based political music, returns this year with
an agenda offering everything from calypso to comedy. The festival, which began
yesterday, runs through Aug. 15.

The international flavor of summer events is enhanced this year by the New York
Shakespeare Festival's far-reaching ''Festival Latino in New York,'' which is
being held at various indoor and outdoor sites through Aug. 18. Festival Latino
presents award-winning theater, film and dance events representing a wide
cross-section of Latin culture the world over.

Caribbean in Brooklyn

The ongoing Celebrate Brooklyn Festival this weekend is offering three nights of
Caribbean music at the Prospect Park bandshell, while the 1985 Lincoln Center
Out-of-Doors Festival is presenting a variety of free events in the center's
outdoor spaces. Hispanic arts and crafts are the focus of a seven-hour festival
with free entertainment at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn tomorrow. There are
free concerts of Brazilian jazz at Bryant Park's Outdoor Festival (today at
12:30 P.M. at 42d Street and the Avenue of the Americas), and Eric Darton's
music/performance ensemble, Salon Bon Ton, will perform for free Sunday at 2
P.M. at East River Park (one block south of Grand Street), as part of the
''Music for Hot Sundays'' program presented by Yomoma Arts Inc.

Two of the largest events of the Fifth Annual New York Folk Festival this
weekend are concerts at Symphony Space by Donovan, the symbol of late 60's
''flower power'' (tonight at 8), and the folk-pop duo Buskin and Batteau
(tomorrow at 8 P.M.).

David Buskin and Robin Batteau, singer-songwriters who have been in the music
business for 15 years, are a late-blooming duo whose act offers a refreshing
combination of folk lyricism and humor somewhat in the mode of Tom Lehrer. The
two began working together in the rock band Pierce Arrow in the late 70's. When
the band broke up, they formed a duo that has evolved a sophisticated cabaret
style of performance. Mr. Buskin's most interesting songs go way beyond the
conventional boundaries of folk. One song, ''Death in Venice,'' is a pun-filled
tango that compresses the plot of the Thomas Mann novella into a Gilbert and
Sullivan-style patter song. On the softer side, his pop ballad ''Warm'' is
turning into a cabaret standard. Mr. Batteau, the more earnestly romantic member
of the duo, is a superb multi-instrumentalist whose integration of the solo
violin into acoustic folk-pop settings is especially sensitive.

''The principle of our collaboration is that we do exactly what we feel like
doing, and humor has become a larger and larger part of it,'' Mr. Buskin said
last week. ''Since, we both have a clownish side, we never liked being perceived
as sad-eyed poetic types.''

Both performers now support themselves mainly by writing and singing jingles,
and their lucrative day jobs have given them a security and freedom they didn't
enjoy as struggling 70's singer-songwriters.

''Our day jobs permit us to take only the gigs we might enjoy and to play in
places where we might even lose money,'' Mr. Batteau said. ''In attempting to
make it in the music business for 10 years, we were always trying to anticipate
what the audiences and music publishers wanted, and when you do that too much
the work can seem artistically second-hand. It's a hard habit to break. It's a
revelation to be doing better at every level just doing what we want.''

Tickets for both concerts at Symphony Space, 95th Street and Broadway, are $8
and $12 and are available through Chargit (212-944-9300), or through Folkworks
(212-807-6896.) Buskin and Batteau are the most musically sophisticated act in a
folk festival that, more than ever, stresses what its executive director, Ted
Geier, characterized as ''decentralization and diversity.''

Sunday's main event is the Clinton Street Immigrant Festival, a six-hour free
concert that begins at noon at Clinton Street, between Houston and Delancey.
Pete Seeger will be the chief attraction of the event, which features Irish folk
music (Brian Conway and Greg Ryan); jibaro music (Puerto Rican mountain music
played by the quartet Son Criollo), and story-songs by the Asian-American
singer-songwriter Charlie Chin.

Folk at the Clubs

The clubs involved in the Folk Festival this weekend include Speakeasy (107
Macdougal Street), the Lone Star Cafe (13th Street and Fifth Avenue), and Folk
City (130 West Third Street). This evening at the Speakeasy, the traditional
group the Rentones will perform at 9 and 11:30 o'clock. Tickets are $5. At the
same club, Dave Van Ronk, the gravelly voiced godfather of the New York folk
scene, will head a double bill with Eric Bibb tomorrow at 9 and 11:30 o'clock
(tickets are $6), and Sunday, Tom Goodkind, the leader of the Washington
Squares, will be the host of an evening of ''new wave'' folk (showtimes are 8:30
and 11 and tickets are $3). The number for information is (212) 598-9670. At
Folk City tomorrow, the Piedmont bluesmen John Cephas and Phil Wiggins will
appear for two shows, at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M. Tickets are $8 (information:
254-8449). Buster Poindexter and the Banshees of Blue are at the Lone Star Cafe,
Sunday at 9:15 and 11:30 P.M. ($10 admission; information: 212-242-1664).

This weekend alone the New York Shakespeare's vast Latino festival in New York
encompasses nearly two dozen theater, film, dance and musical events. The main
musical event is a South American folkloric program tonight at 10 o'clock at the
Public Theater featuring the Uruguayan singer, songwriter and guitarist Alfredo
Zitarrosa leading a five-piece band.

One of the most important theatrical events is Joseph Papp's presentation of a
new play, ''Women Without Men,'' by the New York-born Hispanic playwright Edward
Gallardo.

''The play is about six Hispanic women working here in New York during the
Second World War, who form a tight bond of friendship,'' the playwright said the
other day. ''The action takes place in the garment center, where they work, and
in their apartments. It's based on my family's experience and on interviews and
research. We're not as new a minority as people tend to think. The play deals
with a period that I see as the last age of innocence in America.''

The 36-year-old playwright has also worked extensively as an actor in Los
Angeles, but left because of Hollywood's Latin stereotyping. Or as he put it,
''The guns got bigger and the accents thicker.'' Mr. Gallardo has been writing
plays for more than 15 years, and stylistically his work has been compared with
Tennessee Williams, the playwright he happens to admire most. The star of
''Women Without Men'' is Gilda Miros, the host of a popular radio interview talk
show on WADO. Performances are at the Public Theater at 7 o'clock tonight,
tomorrow and Sunday.

Chicano One-Acts

Another theatrical high point of the festival this weekend is the presentation
of two one-act plays by the 20-year-old California-based Chicano troupe El
Teatro Campesino. The country's oldest Mexican-American theater company, the
troupe was founded in 1965. In 1980, it settled in a playhouse at San Juan
Bautista, near Monterey.

Luis Valdez, the company's artistic director and the author of both plays, is
best known as the writer-director of the critically acclaimed Los Angeles
production of ''Zoot Suit,'' which was staged on Broadway at the Winter Garden
Theater in the spring of 1979.

Both one-acts are revivals receiving their first New York performances, and both
center on the Vietnam War.

'' 'The Dark Root of a Scream,' which I wrote in 1964, merges a contemporary
view of the war with a a pre-Columbian reality and links the themes of war and
human sacrifice,'' Mr. Valdez said the other day. ''The play freely cuts across
time on both the realistic and symbolic levels.''

'' 'Soldado Raso,' which was created in 1970, has become my most performed play
in Latin America,'' he continued. ''It explores the mundane complicity of an
ordinary family in a soldier's death in Vietnam. Death is the narrator and the
sardonic master of ceremonies. I think it has a special relevance today because
of events in Central America.''

Performances are tonight at 7 and 10 o'clock at the Public Theater. Tickets for
all theater, dance and music events at Festival Latino are $12. They are
available at the Public Theater box office and may be charged by calling
212-598-7150.

Celebrate Brooklyn's performing arts festival at the Prospect Park bandshell
will be devoted exclusively this weekend to music of the Caribbean. Leading off
tonight will be a program featuring the seminal Jamaican reggae group Toots and
the Maytals. The style of the group's lead singer, Toots Hibbert - one of the
greatest reggae vocalists - is a mellower West Indian echo of 60's soul.
Appearing tomorrow is the Tobago native Lord Nelson, a comic musician who calls
his fusion of funk, pop, soul and calypso ''soca'' music.

On Sunday, the bandshell will resound with the percussive lilt of the 40-member
Trinidadian group the New York Golden Stars Steel Band, playing everything from
''Take the A Train'' to ''We Are the World.'' Sharing the bill and providing a
heavier percussive vibration is the Village Drums of Freedom, a 10-member
African-oriented ensemble playing hand-carved instruments. All weekend
performances are free and begin at 8 P.M. at the Prospect Park Bandshell
(Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Brooklyn). For program updates, the number
is (718) 768-0699.

Outside at Lincoln Center

Lincoln Center Out-of-Doors, the annual summer festival of free daytime and
evening attractions, returned last Tuesday to Lincoln Center's plazas and
Damrosch Park, where it will continue through Sept. 3. Among the events taking
place this weekend are ''Sweet Saturday Night,'' a lively street and social
dance revue that celebrates the roots of black dancing. Originally produced by
the Brooklyn Academy, ''Sweet Saturday Night'' features profiles of legendary
artists who have influenced dance in America. The program returns at 8:15
o'clock tonight and tomorrow to Damrosch Park. Today at 12:15 P.M., the Chico
Hamilton Quintet will present a jazz concert on the north plaza. At 5 P.M. in
the Fountain Plaza, the Marlene Pennison Company presents dance portrayals of
characters and stories in New Orleans settings.

Tomorrow at 2:30 P.M., Body and Sole Tap Dance Work, a four-member company led
by Anita Feldman, will perform at the Fountain Plaza. And at 5 P.M., the
Chinese-American Arts Council will present the traditional and contemporary art
forms of China as performed by the Chinese Dance Company of New York and the
Hsiang-Yin Chorus of New York. Sunday is Caribbean Music Day, a reprise of one
of last summer's most popular events. The number for the Lincoln Center
Out-of-Doors Hotline is (212) 877-2011.

Tomorrow, the Association of Hispanic Arts is presenting Festiartes '85, a
celebration of Hispanic arts and crafts, with food, dance and music at Floyd
Bennett Field in Brooklyn. The free mainstage entertainment begins at 1:30 P.M.
and will feature Ballet Quisqueya (music and dances of Santo Domingo), Sandra
Rodriguez and Los Surcos (the Puerto Rican singer with a trio of musicians),
Ballet Barranquilla (Colombian music and dance), Briza (New York Latin-jazz),
Ballet Folklorico Mexicana (Mexican music and dance), Manuel Martinez and Los
Afortunados (Afro-Cuban music), and ''Roots of Brazil'' (Brazilian music and
dance). In the children's tent, a girls' group will perform in Menudo style, and
there will be an arts and crafts workshop and clowning. Free shuttle buses leave
from Flatbush Avenue and Nostrand in front of Lord's Restaurant, next to
Wendy's. They leave every hour between 12:30 and 4:30 P.M. The number to call
today for information is (212) 369-7054; tomorrow it is (718) 338-7865.

Such is the diversity of this New York multi-festival weekend that sights,
sounds and smells one might journey thousands of miles south of the border to
discover are right here in New York. Much of the fun is free to the public, and
it is all only a subway or bus ride away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from play; photo of David Johansen; photo of Lord
Nelson; photo of dancers

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GOOD RIDDANCE TO THE CLARK AMENDMENT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 483 words


To the Editor:

''Erring on Southern Africa,'' the July 23 Op-Ed article by Pauline Baker,
neglected an important aspect of Miss Baker's past - her employment with
ex-Senator Dick Clark, author of the disastrous, and fortunately now defunct,
Clark Amendment of 1976, which banned military assistance to Angola's freedom
fighters.

Miss Baker's premise that the Clark repeal makes it ''harder than ever'' for
Angolans to send the Cubans home is preposterous. America's capitulation allowed
the Russians a free hand and no cost to their intervention in Angola. For the 10
years the amendment was law, when there was no threat of U.S. assistance to the
democratic resistance, the Soviet and Cuban presence expanded.

The survival of the regime of the Marxist Popular Movement for the Liberation of
Angola (M.P.L.A.) rests on the estimated total of 35,000 to 45,000 Cuban forces.
Without their military muscle, the regime would fall quickly to the troops of
Unita, the popular, democratic National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola, which control half the country. The last four years of negotiations with
and concessions to the M.P.L.A. have failed, since the only diplomatic
settlement the Angolan Communists will accept is one that will preserve their
unelected, totalitarian regime.

True, commercial interests in Angola have expanded. Today, over 90 percent of
the Marxist Government's revenue is supplied by American oil royalties. Fidel
Castro sees no inconsistency in his soldiers' protecting U.S. business
interests, stating that the contradiction is on the American side. Refreshingly,
he speaks the truth; it was advantageous for him to have U.S. business interests
lobbying against Clark repeal.

While Miss Baker encourages ''constructive engagement'' for Marxist Mozambique
and Angola, she criticizes the policy toward America's strongest friend and ally
on the continent: South Africa. How can she call a reform-oriented government,
which is making strides toward ending Apartheid, one of the world's most
''pernicious oligarchies'' when Desmond Tutu is free to fly around the world
criticizing it and return without fear of reprisal? If only Andrei Sakharov and
Lech Walesa had such liberty!

Attacks over human rights on Iran, Cuba, South Vietnam, Nicaragua and Rhodesia
fell short of their objectives. Pro-Western governments collapsed; Communist and
other anti-American regimes replaced them. Human rights in all these countries
severely deteriorated.

The challenge to America is how to better human rights without losing allies to
the Russians. The President should ignore the clamor of those seeking
appeasement of America's enemies in Africa, and revolution in South Africa,
rather than peaceful resolution of a complex political situation.STEVE SYMMS
Washington, Aug. 5, 1985 The writer, U.S. Senator from Idaho, sponsored the
Senate repeal of the Clark Amendment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: ONE-ACT PLAYS, 'SCREAM' AND 'SOLDADO'

BYLINE: By D.J.R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


El Teatro Campesino, the Mexican-American company from California, is
celebrating its 20th anniversary by presenting two one-act plays that
inaugurated the company - ''The Dark Root of a Scream'' and ''Soldado Razo'' by
Luis Valdez - at the Public Theater as part of this year's Festival Latino in
New York. The company was established in 1965 to entertain and instruct
California vineyard workers who were on strike, and it remains dedicated to
theater that speaks to political and social issues. Mr. Valdez is no stranger to
New York; his ''Zoot Suit'' was on Broadway in 1979. But these short plays,
early protests against the Vietnam war, have not been seen here before.

The title of the first piece is a line in Federico Garcia Lorca's ''Blood
Wedding'' and, as Mr. Valdez said in a brief talk before Thursday night's
opening, he was a bit overwhelmed by the Spanish poet's powerful but elusive
dramatic techniques at the time he was writing ''The Dark Root of a Scream.''
The scream is piercing at the end of the play when the flag-draped casket of a
soldier killed in Vietnam is opened in the presence of a priest, the soldier's
mother, his girlfriend and three of his friends. But the message the cry
punctuates is not at all clear.

Mr. Valdez's protest against oppressed Mexican Americans dying in a war against
oppressed Asians gets lost in his efforts to show that the true destiny of all
the descendants of the Central American Indians lies elsewhere - in the vision
of the Aztecs that eventually life will triumph over death in the person of the
resurrected god, Quetzalcoatl. Not only is the antiwar message obscured, but the
myth itself is also very confused in this presentation.

Mr. Valdez's use of it is, nonetheless, an interesting theatrical device. The
priest, mother and girlfriend on one side of the stage unfold the story of the
soldier's life while his friends, on the other side, strut, feint and fight in
an alley, and argue about whether life has any meaning. The costumes and makeup
of the three fit their names - Lizard, Funny Bunny and Gato - and their actions
approximate the movements of the animals ever more closely as their arguments
lead to the epiphany of the god Quetzalcoatl, the plumed serpent. Mr. Valdez's
revelation of the god's legend, and finally of the god himself, through the
arguments and posturings of three louts is such a nice ironic trick that one
wishes he would return to this early play and give it the kind of lucidity it
cries out for.

In ''Soldado Razo'' (The Private), life is a tale told by Death, who appears in
the robes of a Franciscan friar. His story is an old-fashioned morality play,
acted out under his direction by a mother and father, their 20-year-old son
Johnny, Johnny's fiancee and his little brother, as Johnny goes off to die in
Vietnam. Like many medieval morality plays, it is often comic. The vanity of the
characters, their weaknesses and pretensions, make them so engaging that the
inevitable death of Johnny and the sorrow of the others is profoundly, and
surprisingly, moving.

The key to the surprise is the gracefulness and humor of Death, who becomes so
familiar we forget for a while who he is. In the role, Ruben Garfias glides
around like a dancer as he brings the characters to life, moves them about the
stage and reveals the thoughts and fears they hide in their conversation. Then
at the end, after he has shot the soldier in Vietnam, he kneels to fold the
boy's hands over his chest, close his eyes and drape a flag over him. This Death
is not proud in his triumph; he is delicate, and it is his tenderness, more than
the sorrow of Johnny's family, that makes the death of the soldier so poignant
and the mad futility of war so apparent. ''Soldado Razo'' is a simple, brief and
very effective piece of political theater. The Cast THE DARK ROOT OF A SCREAM
and SOLDADO RAZO by Luis Valdez; directed by Tony Curiel; scenery by Victoria
Petrovich; costumes by Erica Martinez and Sofia Ponce; lighting by Rick Larsen;
music by George Cisneros. Mr. Valdez, artistic director; Gloriamalia Flores
Perez, administrative director; Phillip Esparza, producer. El Teatro Campesino
presented by Joseph Papp. At the Public/ Martinson Hall, 425 Lafayette Street.
LizardRuben Garfias Funny BunnyRicardo Salinas GatoHerbert Siguenza DeliaOralia
''La La'' Polendo MadreRosemary Ramos PriestT. G. Acosta and SOLDADO RAZO, music
by Al Reyes and Tony Manjarez. MuerteRuben Garfias JohnnyRicardo ''Slick Rick''
Salinas MadreRosemary Ramos PadreT. G. Acosta Little BrotherKinan Valdez
CeciliaDolores D'Angelo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Proposes to Send M.I.A. Team to Hanoi

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


The United States proposed to Vietnam today that an American delegation go to
Hanoi to discuss Vietnam's recent offer to resolve the missing-in-action issue,
a State Department spokesman said.

The department spokesman, Bernard Kalb, said the proposed delegation would
include officials from the Defense and State Departments, the National Security
Council and the executive director of the National League of Families. He said
he could not name the delegation members.

According to Mr. Kalb, there will be no change in United States policy toward
Vietnam. There are 2,464 Americans still listed as missing in action in
Southeast Asia, most of them in Vietnam.

The proposal was issued today through the United States Embassy in Bangkok in
response to a Vietnamese offer, made in July, to resolve the issue within two
years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 10, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF GENEVA;
THE V.I.P.'S ARE COMING, BUT THE SWISS ARE BLASE

BYLINE: By THOMAS W. NETTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


The Perle du Lac, a one-star restaurant owned by the city of Geneva, commands a
picture-postcard view of the southern end of Lake Geneva.

It is regarded by many who attend the thousands of conferences here each year as
a perfect place for a quiet, private lunch, and according to witnesses, was
chosen for just that one recent day by Max M. Kampelman and Viktor P. Karpov,
the negotiators at the United States-Soviet arms talks here.

''The heads of delegations were seen alone,'' a Western diplomat said. ''And
it's true that nobody paid any attention in the entire restaurant. Apparently,
nobody knew who they were. This can only happen in Geneva.''

In a city that prides itself on being low-key while playing host to some 30,000
meetings a year, it is, perhaps, not surprising that no one noticed the two
negotiators. For Geneva is a city virtually given over to talk, as European
headquarters of the United Nations and dozens of its agencies, independent
international organizations, businesses, arms talks and, in November, the
meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.

Nestled between the French Alps and the Jura Mountains at the southwestern end
of Lake Geneva, this city of 180,000 has been an international crossroads for
centuries. In Calvin's time, the sleepy manufacturing and trading center became
a gathering point for religious reformers from across Europe.

Geneva's role as a center for international human rights and grand causes really
began with a young businessman, Jean Henri Dunant, who in 1859 was horrified by
the treatment of the wounded in the battle of Solferino in Italy. From Dunant's
works came the International Committee of the Red Cross, the first of many
Geneva conventions on the treatment of prisoners, the wounded and civilians in
times of war, and the first Nobel Peace Prize, which he shared in 1901.

Since then Geneva has become a capital of humanitarian works and international
conventions, combining a cosmopolitan, constantly changing foreign population
with Swiss efficiency and tidiness.

''It's a quiet place, without the distractions of a big world capital,'' a
Western diplomat said. ''The facilities are good, and they're discreet.

''Logistically, it's very good; Swiss police and security are very efficient,''
he said. ''But perhaps most important, the summit here will add visibility to
the arms talks and maybe give some impetus to both sides.''

Since the formation of the Red Cross, and the League of Nations after World War
I, countless international peace and disarmament conferences have been held
here, disrupted by more wars and more armaments and followed by conferences
again.

The League of Nations, forerunner to the United Nations, was opened here,
Vietnam was divided here after the French Indochina War and many arms treaties
have been signed here. In addition to the rights of the wounded and civilians in
war zones, Geneva protocols have sought without success to halt the use of
chemical weapons, and a treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons was
signed here in 1970.

But war and death are not exclusive Geneva topics. The World Health Organization
coordinates vaccination programs, and the International Labor Organization
oversees union rights. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade writes the
rulebook for world trade, and the International Standards Organization
determines the chewability of spaghetti.

In addition to the 14 major and scores of minor international organizations,
Geneva houses 119 diplomatic missions and welcomes about 25,000 delegates a year
in its 12,000 hotel rooms. With more than 50,000 foreigners, English is barely a
second language, and often the first language of diplomacy or in the shops in
town.

''It's all part of the Geneva show, and the Geneva atmosphere, that they're
talking here,'' Robert Vieux, Geneva's chief of protocol, said of the arms
talks. ''But it's one meeting among many, many others. There was a drawing in an
American magazine showing a couple arguing and then saying, 'Let's go to Geneva
and talk.' It's very funny, but it's absolutely true.''

Since this round of arms talks began, there has been only one demonstration of
any kind, on March 12, the opening day. Two members of the environmentalist
group Greenpeace climbed a 100-foot construction crane and unfurled a banner
saying, ''Put Words Into Action: Stop Nuclear Testing Now.'' They were arrested
and escorted out of the country, along with about four members of the British
group Women for Peace singing outside the Soviet Mission.

Demonstrations have never been a problem at this round, or the
intermediate-range nuclear force and strategic arms reduction talks that began
in 1981 and ended with a Soviet walkout in 1983. Toward the end of the round on
intermediate-range arms, a handful of non-Swiss demonstrators set up a table and
chairs outside the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency offices in
the Botanic Building, a grimy, characterless office where the American side of
the arms talks are held, and called on the American and Soviet delegates to come
out for ''real'' negotiations.

When the police came and folded up the table and chairs, one woman shouted,
''You can't do that!''

''Yes I can,'' a police officer answered, ending the exchange and the
demonstration.

Although Geneva, with its 1,000 restaurants, innumerable lakeside and sidewalk
cafes, watch shops and couturiers, may seem like an excellent place for a summit
conference, few if any people seem - or act as if they seem - to care.

''The Genevois, they don't pay much attention,'' Mr. Vieux, the protocol chief,
said. ''Of course, some of them are proud that we're part of the deal in Geneva,
to have the talks here. Some people say, 'C'est formidable, quand meme,' you
know how they talk.

''We leave people alone and let them work as quietly as possible. We know these
things take a long, long time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the southern end of Geneva from the Perie du Lac restaurant
(NYT/Michel Euler)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS GIVE EX-COMRADES A HAND UP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


Since he returned from the Vietnam War in 1968, Benjamin Smith has not worked at
the same job for more than 16 months. He has, at different points, been a
Consolidated Edison lineman, a stock clerk, a fast-food server, a census taker,
a forklift operator and a factory worker.

''When I came back it was hell,'' said Mr. Smith, who quit high school when he
was 16 years old and was drafted at 18. ''I had no work history and I ended up
doing a whole variety of things. I guess I really goofed up.'' He was an
enlisted man with the Ninth Division.

But now, with the aid of a veterans' employment program organized by a group of
Wall Street business executives who served in Vietnam, Mr. Smith has begun
training as an accounting clerk in the Manhattan offices of an insurance
company. He plans to attend college in the evening.

The nonprofit project, the New York Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program, has
placed 200 veterans in a variety of jobs since April 1982.

Encouraged by the attention given Vietnam veterans this year, officials of the
program hope to find jobs for 400 more by the end of 1985.

''This is the time to be doing something - the publicity is not going to last
forever,'' said Eugene Gitelson, the executive director of the program.

There are about 150,000 Vietnam veterans in New York City. A recent study by the
Ralph Bunche Institute of the City University of New York concluded that nearly
41 percent of them had serious employment or financial problems.

Ten percent were unemployed, 5 percent had dropped out of the labor force and
the rest were in secondary or noncareer jobs characterized by high turnover, low
pay and lack of security.

The research also indicated that veterans involved in heavy combat, about a
quarter of the total, were unemployed at three times the rate of those involved
in light combat.

''We want to integrate these people back into the economic mainstream,'' Mr.
Gitelson, a former consultant, said. ''We're not a fraternal organization and
we're not interested in political causes.''

The project grew out of a meeting in 1982 at which veterans working on Wall
Street compared their homecoming from Vietnam with the return of the American
hostages from Iran. ''Things were a lot different for us - no parades, no
welcome,'' Mr. Gitelson said.

Mr. Gitelson, who went to Vietnam when he was 21 and served as a platoon leader
with the First Infantry Division in 1966 and 1967, said: ''Those of us who were
sucessful hadn't had anything to do with our vet identity for almost 15 years.
We decided it was time we did something with our expertise to help those who
weren't as fortunate.''

Calling themselves the New York Vietnam Veterans Group, the men submitted a plan
to the city for a memorial to Vietnam veterans.

The group was then approached by Action, a Federal agency that finances
volunteer organizations, and was asked to become part of its network of groups
helping veterans. The New York group received a $75,000 grant and began
recruiting corporate donors and volunteer counselors.

Mr. Gitelson gave up his consulting business to supervise the program. Drexel
Burnham Lambert, the investment company, donated office space. The Manufacturers
Hanover Trust Company and E. F. Hutton & Company provided the funds and
technical assistance to create a data bank of employers and job candidates.

The group's budget for this year was originally set at $230,000, including a
projected $50,000 deficit because the Federal financing had ended. But at the
end of May the organization was awarded a $500,000 grant by the New York Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Commission.

''The critical ingredient is vets' helping vets - who else would understand what
a vet has gone through and know how to translate that exotic experience in a
far-off land into something business-related?'' Mr. Gitelson said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIVIDED YOUNG DEMOCRATS PICK WOMAN AS CHIEF

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 10


The election this year of the first woman as national president was supposed to
be a proud moment for the Young Democrats of America.

But by the time Marie Prezioso, of Charleston, W.Va., was elected today at the
Young Democrats' national convention here, the 52-year-old organization appeared
to many of delegates to be deeply divided and lacking a sense of direction.

The hotly contested race had narrowed to a contest between Miss Prezioso, the
33-year-old current executive vice president, and Jeri Winter, 32, of Las Vegas,
the group's liaison officer with the Democratic National Committee. Mrs. Winter,
who won 531 votes to Miss Prezioso's 767, was a strong favorite with Young
Democrats from the West who are challenging the traditional domination of the
organization by Southerners.

Charges of Embezzling

The race intensified last spring when members learned that Mrs. Winter faced
charges in Nevada of embezzling a quarter-million dollars from the air
conditioning concern she worked for and was scheduled to stand trial this fall.

Mrs. Winter, daughter of a Nevada legislator, at first said the charge was a
civil complaint and suggested it was drummed up by political opponents.

But William Belk, the 35-year-old outgoing president, who strongly backed Miss
Prezioso, said Mrs. Winter's explanation was incorrect.

''We did some research and found she had nine counts of criminal embezzlement
against her,'' said Mr. Belk, who is the director of finance for his family's
department store chain. ''She hasn't been telling the truth.''

Mrs. Winter, who has pleaded not guilty to the embezzling charges, resisted
overtures that she end her candidacy and campaigned doggedly for the Young
Democrats post. ''This issue has been hung around my neck by a close-knit group
of Southerners who dominate the Young Democrats,'' she charged.

Drift and Stagnation

A second area of concern is more deep-rooted than who gets to run the Young
Democrats, an organization for Democrats 35 years old and younger, for the next
two years. Many delegates say the organization shares with the national
Democratic Party a problem of drift and stagnation on national issues, dwelling
on internal matters rather than discussing national policies.

''Is this convention going to address any of these issues?'' Mrs. Winters asked
in a debate Friday with Miss Prezioso.

Mr. Belk observed: ''The delegates are pretty feisty and combatant about who
gets elected here. That's not bad if they'd use the same energy to support
national Democratic goals. But it's a bloodbath among ourselves. The Republicans
will have a field day with this. They think it's pretty funny.''

Money troubles, another serious problem shared with the national party, has cut
deeply into the Young Democrats' attempts to attract new members, Mr. Belk said.
He placed the current membership at ''about 150,000'' and estimated that fewer
than a tenth worked hard for the party.

He said President Reagan's popularity among young Americans had frustrated
efforts to bring new members into the party. In the Presidential campaign, he
said he had to end voter registration drives by Young Democrats on many campuses
because a clear majority of those registering indicated they would be voting for
Mr. Reagan.

A Change Since the 1970's

Most of the current leaders of the Young Democrats became politically active in
the 1970's, when the organization was galvanized by several national issues: the
Vietnam War, Watergate, civil rights, the environment and women's issues.

According to a number of delegates, members now seem intent on building
political careers and making job contacts or else concentrate on single issues
like abortion or education. They say the membership tends to be far more middle
class than in the party as a whole. Few blacks or members of other minority
groups were noted among the hundreds of delegates attending the four-day
meeting, which began Wednesday, at the Doral Country Club on the outskirts of
Miami.

Need for Clearer Message

''Can you imagine Young Democrats in the 60's and 70's holding their convention
in a nonunion country club, or any country club for that matter?'' asked a Miami
delegate who did not want his name published.

A string of national Democrats came to address the convention, including
Geraldine A. Ferraro, the Democratic Vice Presidential candidate last year, and
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware. But leaders, including Miss Prezioso,
expressed concern that despite the midnight caucusing and the lapel buttons and
pamphlets addressing issues, the Young Democrats would go back home to a world
not at all touched by their debates and quarrels.

''Perhaps our message isn't strong enough for young people,'' said Miss
Prezioso, who vowed to change that perception as president. ''Everyone perceives
that we're ignored, even by our own party.''

As if to underline that sentiment, it was widely noted that Paul Kirk, chairman
of the Democratic National Committee, did not attend the convention, because of
a scheduling conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PROJECT AIMS TO PRESERVE FOLKWAYS OF THE HMONG

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 47, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


Chao Song's broad smile fades when he considers the fate of his ancient culture
in a high-tech world.

''Our children,'' he says; ''they're not interested to learn'' of the tales and
traditions that the Hmong carried to this country from the highlands of Laos.
The Communist takeover there in 1975 prompted an estimated 100,000 Hmong, allies
of the United States in the Vietnam War, to flee the hills for fear of
reprisals. Today, more than 50,000 Hmong - the name (pronounced MUNG) means
''free people'' - live in America.

The concern of older Hmong like Mr. Song, who fear that radios, rock music and
the fast pace of American life will wipe out customs that have survived
centuries of war and displacement, led to the Hmong Folklife and Documentation
Project. For nearly a year, Hmong students have worked with folklorists and film
makers to record the legends and traditions of their people, who until 30 years
ago had no written language.

'For Our Future Children'

''We try to get all the Hmong customs for our future children,'' said Mr. Song,
the project coordinator. ''We have no written history. That's why we had to
record it.''

Though inspired by the older generation, the project seems to have given the
younger Hmong a lively interest in preserving the culture.

''A lot of stuff I found out really amazes me,'' said Phua Xiong, 16 years old.
''I'd like to keep it up for my children so that they can say that we were
Hmong.''

Legends and Advice Recorded

Phua is among seven high school and college students who have participated in
the documentation project. A grant from the National Endowment for the Arts has
provided small stipends and paid for sound equipment used in dozens of hours of
interviews.

From their elders, the students gathered legends, family histories and detailed
accounts of the rites of birth, death and marriage.

Mal O'Connor and Sally Peterson, graduate students in folklore at the University
of Pennsylvania, helped the students summarize the taped interviews in English.

A videotaped program on Hmong life in Philadelphia was made in the documentation
project. The program, made for distribution to schools and colleges throughout
the city.''

Barry Dornfeld, who helped produce the video program, said it was an opportunity
for the Hmong to counter some of the stereotypes that have plagued them in
Philadelphia, where neighborhood violence has prompted most of the 5,000 Hmong
who were here in the late 1970's to leave the city. Only about 500 remain, Hmong
leaders here say.

The tape also shows how modern diversions and ancient practices vie for the
attention of the younger Hmong. While some of the young men have formed a rock
group, Va Cheng Hang continues to play the qeeg, an intricate set of bamboo
pipes. Mr. Hang worries that in the next generation, no one will remember how to
play it.

But some of the young are determined to preserve their heritage.

''I want to get married the old way,'' Phua Xiong said firmly. ''If we don't
keep it up, in 30 years it will be dead.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
THIS MORALITY LESSON RUNS WILD

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


What are the ways in which television can look at our times, and what does it
find when it looks? It depends. What does it want to find? Moral lessons, or
information carefully sorted out so that it can be of use? On the whole,
programs that deal in information work better. Moral lessons suffer from their
own sense of conviction. They don't have to be justified so much as propounded.
Consider, for example, two television programs, one past, one yet to come, both
dealing with roughly the same topic - the dropping of the atomic bomb and all
that has happened since. A recent CBS program, ''Hiroshima Plus 40 Years . . .
And Still Counting,'' gave us information, some of it new. We were able to use
it. A WOR-TV program, ''Years of Danger, Years of Hope: The Postwar World,''
does not give us information so much as it gives us a point of view. It makes
morality simple.

''Years of Danger, Years of Hope,'' a two-hour program that will be shown on
Channel 9 this Thursday at 9 P.M. and then rebroadcast next Sunday at 6 P.M.,
uses Carroll O'Connor as its host and narrator. ''Hiroshima Plus 40 Years'' used
Walter Cronkite. That's a statement right there. Mr. O'Connor, an actor, like
the actors Edward Asner or Charlton Heston, represents a point of view. Mr.
Cronkite represents television journalism. Mr. O'Connor (and Mr. Asner) are
liberals; Mr. Heston is a conservative. When Accuracy in Media, a conservative
group, recently produced a documentary, it used Mr. Heston as a narrator.
Producers of a different political persuasion use Mr. O'Connor or Mr. Asner.

One difference between the O'Connor/Asner and Heston schools of producers,
however, is that with the latter we're more sure of where we are. When Mr.
Heston narrated ''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story'' on public television,
we knew up front that it would be a polemic, a cry against liberals. With Mr.
O'Connor, or Mr. Asner, we can't be sure. They don't identify themselves right
off. By and large, this is one reason Mr. Cronkite is preferable to the other
narrators. We don't have to sift out point of view from fact when we listen.
Presumably, Mr. Cronkite is in service to the story, rather than to making a
case.

Thus ''Hiroshima Plus 40 Years,'' a ''CBS Reports,'' told us a good deal about
nuclear weapons and their menace. It also persuaded us that there were far too
many weapons, that something had to be done and that no nation seemed to be
doing it yet. It did this through reporting. In an interview, for example,
former Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said that in 1967 Aleksei N.
Kosygin, the Soviet leader, shouted at him, ''Defense is moral; offensive is
immoral,'' and seemed to mean it. Now the United States, by advocating the
Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, is saying that defense is moral. It
has adopted the Soviet position from 1967. CBS told us about transitory national
policies that ultimately lead nowhere.

''Years of Danger, Years of Hope'' doesn't do this. The nuclear question is at
its heart, but it presses forth on a great range of issues. It says they are all
connected. It also says that none of them are ambiguous. Is there more than one
point of view on any of these issues? Viewers won't get any here. They will,
however, get a lot of sanctimony, along with a large measure of self-loathing.
This is presumably meant to be a sign that Mr. O'Connor and his colleagues are
sincere.

At one point, Mr. O'Connor stands amid an urban landscape of shining towers. It
hides, he says, ''expanding perimeters of devastation and squalor, cancerous
threats to air, land and water, turning even wilderness into slums.'' Go now to
film of garbage dumps, polluted waters and Love Canal; then move quickly through
acid rain, the environmental threat to California condors and famine in Africa.
Then Dr. Helen Caldicott, the antinuclear activist, speaks. What is the
connection between her position and famine? In the real world, there is none.
''Years of Danger, Years of Hope'' is only trying to show its own moral
rightness. It uses this in place of thought.

In a later segment, Mr. O'Connor discusses postwar Presidents: Harry S. Truman
was ''spunky''; Dwight D. Eisenhower was ''moderate''; John F. Kennedy had a
''buoyant style.'' Ronald Reagan, meanwhile, uses ''harsh rhetoric in our
troubled relations with the Soviets, retreats on environmental and social
issues, stalls on civil rights, justifies a soaring national debt -and, like all
Presidents, he has his critics.''

It's the last part of the sentence that's most interesting. Without missing a
beat, Mr. O'Connor passes neatly from being a critic to saying there are
critics. But he's doing it in a way that suggests he was only reporting. It's
the other people who are critics; he was only a disinterested bystander. Where
is Mr. Cronkite when we need him? Television programs like ''Years of Danger,
Years of Hope'' decline to recognize even their own polemics.

Minutes later, Mr. O'Connor talks about television itself. What has it done to
election campaigns? Although political advertisements on television ''have a
childish appeal, they tell little,'' Mr. O'Connor says. ''It is politics by
salesman's tricks, by cosmetics instead of issues. Often citizens feel
disenfranchised by ignorance on many a vital public issue.''

Sanctimony and arrogance run wild here. The electorate is easily misled, unable
to recognize salesman's tricks when they seem them. Clearly, however, Mr.
O'Connor and his colleagues do recognize them, and they're ready to show us the
way. And where does this way lead? ''Years of Danger, Years of Hope'' isn't
specific, although it favors a general piousness. The nuclear threat, and all
other threats, will vanish, erased by our common zeal.

The program ends with film of small children in playgrounds - a cliche in
programs like this - while Mr. O'Connor speaks of ''our common humanity.''
Fervor and sincerity once again replace thinking. CBS ended ''Hiroshima Plus 40
Years'' with Mr. Cronkite in Hiroshima, telling us that we had to ''struggle''
to avoid a nuclear disaster. It had given us information that equipped us for
the struggle. ''Years of Danger, Years of Hope'' doesn't give us any
information. It wants only to express a moral position, which turns out to be no
position at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN SANCTIONS: ONLY A FIRST STEP

BYLINE: By STEPHEN J. SOLARZ; Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of New York, is a
senior member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


THE recent declaration of a state of emergency in South Africa should have
removed any lingering doubts that the Reagan Administration's policy of
constructive engagement is a monument to moral myopia and wishful thinking. We
must reject the naive notion that we can gently persuade the South African
Government to abandon apartheid, and instead advance racial justice by joining
other countries in applying economic pressure against South Africa.

Ten days ago the House of Representatives took a significant step in the
direction of a new American approach to apartheid when, by a vote of 380 to 48,
it approved legislation establishing restrictions on our commerce with South
Africa.

The bill would bar bank loans to the South African Government, prohibit the
importation of the South African Krugerrand, end the sale of nuclear technology,
restrict the sale of computers and mandate a code of fair employment principles
for the American companies that remain in South Africa. The President must also
recommend additional sanctions, possibly including a ban on new investment,
after 12 months, if he determines that South Africa has not made sufficient
progress toward ending apartheid.

Enacting this legislation would not produce the instantaneous dismantling of
apartheid. The future of South Africa will be determined primarily by its
people, black as well as white. But it will take a combination of increasing
internal and international pressure to end apartheid, and the United States can
play a critical role.

Arguments against sanctions do not withstand close examination. Critics say that
zhere are many other repressive regimes that we have not imposed sanctions
against, and that South African sanctions would, therefore, constitute a double
standard. Yet, we have adopted sanctions against other governments that violate
human rights, ranging from the sweeping embargoes against Cambodia, Vietnam and
now Nicaragua, to the more modest restrictions against Libya and Iran. Thus, we
would be more vulnerable to a charge of inconsistency and selective indignation
if we failed, after all this time, to adopt sanctions against South Africa.

Curiously, some of the most fervent supporters of American sanctions against
Communist countries such as Vietnam and Cuba have opposed restricting our trade
investment with South Africa on the ground that sanctions never worked. In fact,
sanctions have helped the United States to achieve important objectives.

Our embargo against Uganda contributed to the downfall of Idi Amin. Our
sanctions against Iran facilitated the release of the hostages. And the
maintenance of American sanctions against the white-ruled nation of Rhodesia
facilitated the internationally acceptable transition to majority rule in the
new nation of Zimbabwe. ANOTHER suspect argument is that other countries will
simply step into the vacuum created by restrictions on American trade and
investment. This line of reasoning ignores the immeasurable moral dimension of
our policy toward South Africa. It was further undermined recently when France
announced that it would ban new investment in South Africa. Given the escalating
violence and unrest that is an inevitable consequence of apartheid, it is
difficult to foresee any headlong rush into South Africa by corporations from
other nations.

Opponents of sanctions also contend that American corporations exert a positive
influence in South Africa. Yet, our companies in South Africa employ only 70,000
blacks, or less than 1 percent of the total work force. While some American
companies have made notable contributions to the advancement of individual black
employees, our corporate presence must be seen in the context of a brutal racist
system that denies fundamental human rights to the vast majority of its people.

The bill passed by the House, after approval by a House-Senate conference
committee, bans neither new investment nor existing investment in South Africa.
Even if the United States were to adopt a ban on new investment, such a measure
hardly would be tantamount to disinvestment. For example, since Sweden's ban on
new investment in South Africa went into effect in 1980, there has been
virtually no change in the number of Swedish companies in that country.

Opponents of sanctions have also argued that economic restrictions would hurt
black South Africans. Blacks in South Africa undoubtedly want economic growth.
But can anyone doubt that they want even more the opportunity to determine their
destiny? Like oppressed peoples everywhere, they are surely willing to endure
temporary economic setbacks to achieve dignity and freedom.

In South Africa, the National Union of Mine Workers has endorsed the ban on the
importation of Krugerrand gold coins into the United States. The two main black
union federations have issued a call for American sanctions. Indeed, the most
respected black leaders in South Africa, including Bishop Desmond M. Tutu and
Dr. Nthato Motlana, have endorsed sanctions against their own Government.

Black South Africans, who will one day shape the future of their country, are
looking for tangible American opposition to apartheid. By imposing economic
sanctions, we would send a powerful message that we stand for change rather than
for the status quo, and that we are committed, by deed as well as by word, to
the elimination of apartheid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
A RULING BUT NOT AN END TO GLOBE LIBEL CASE

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 325 words


Both the plaintiff and the defendant claimed victory last week in the Boston
Globe libel case, but neither side had given up the fight. In an unusual
decision, a jury found that the Boston Globe had published ''false and
defamatory'' material about a former gubernatorial candidate but that the
article as a whole was neither false nor defamatory.

John R. Lakian, a businessman who ran in the 1982 Republican gubernatorial
primary, had sought $50 million from The Globe. He claimed that the article,
which raised questions about his business and other aspects of his background,
was an invasion of privacy and intentionally inflicted emotional distress.

In a verdict that did not mention the word ''libel'' and perplexed legal
experts, the jury awarded no money, the usual accompaniment of a finding of
falsehood, defamation and the equivalent of malice. The Globe went back to court
to ask for a judgment in its favor, and Mr. Lakian said that he would move
forward with his company's suit against the paper for damages. Mr. Lakian is
president of the First Merchants Bank of Boston.

The article by Walter V. Robinson asserted among other things that Mr. Lakian
falsely said he had been a Republican for 12 years, misrepresented his record in
the Vietnam war and lied about having taken graduate courses at Harvard
University.

In the three paragraphs that the jury said were false and defamatory and were
published with ''knowledge of its falsity or while having serious doubts about
its truth,'' the article reported that Mr. Lakian had given conflicting
information on his company's earnings and had overstated them.

Michael C. Janeway, the editor of The Globe, said that the jury was
inconsistent, but that ''their decision to award no damages to Mr. Lakian is
eloquent.'' Mr. Lakian's attorney said that the jury had probably decided
against damages because ''it's hard to cry over someone who is a multimilionaire
and making millions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ABORTION CONFLICT; WHAT IT DOES TO ONE DOCTOR

BYLINE: By Dudley Clendinen; Dudley Clendinen is a New York Times correspondent
based in Atlanta.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5424 words


ONE FRIDAY AT NOON, AFTER FOUR gray days of rain, the leaden clouds over
northwestern Oregon drew apart and the sun filled the operating room of Dr.
Peter Bours's clinic in Forest Grove. The winter light came through clerestory
windows set in the peak of the cathedral ceiling, filtering through the glossy
leaves of the palms and ferns in the loft, falling gently on Dr. Bours, his
nurse and the pregnant woman lying on the operating table.

The woman looked older than her 32 years - her broad forehead was pale, her
cheeks slack, her eyelids heavily veined. She had three children, no spare
money, and wished no fourth child. She had come to Dr. Bours for an abortion.

In other rooms of the clinic, on other days, women gave birth to children they
want to raise and love, and babies delivered by Dr. Bours returned, bringing
their earaches and their colds for treatment. But Tuesday and Friday mornings
were set aside for abortions, and on those days, out of sight of the doctor and
his staff, but never far from mind, a small grim band of men and women guarded
the entrance of the clinic's driveway. Armed with signs and literature, old Life
Magazine pictures of healthy fetuses and sad pictures of aborted ones, they
stood outside in the damp cold of that Friday morning.

Some knelt on the chill, gritty pavement, heads bowed, rosary beads threading
through their fingers. Others shouted at patients making their way in and out of
the clinic. ''Do you know that little babies are dying in there?'' Rosemary
Young called to a young woman with a little girl. ''I don't want to hear it,''
the woman shot back. April Dauenhauer, another protestor, raised her eyes
imploringly: ''If somebody was murdering me on the sidewalk right now, would you
ignore it?'' ''You bet, because you asked for it!'' the woman snapped, and the
clinic door closed behind her.

The protests started more than two years ago. Since then, on those days when Dr.
Bours performs abortions, a loose coalition of Roman Catholics and evangelical
Christians has set up a gauntlet at the driveway entrance. On Mother's Day
weekend, 1984, two primitive firebombs ignited against a wall of the clinic.
Several death threats have been made against the doctor and his family, his
staff, and even some of the young mothers whose babies he has delivered.

None of that has dissuaded Dr. Bours from doing abortions, but the violence and
the protests at his office did reduce the number of expectant mothers who came
to him for care. Now, caught in the same insurance squeeze that has led other
doctors to leave the field of obstetrics, he has decided to stop delivering
babies, devoting himself almost entirely to family planning, including the
practice of abortion.

Inside the clinic, on this Friday noon, the woman who wanted no more children
had been prepared for an abortion and for a tubal ligation.

When all was ready, Dr. Bours - a bearded 41-year-old with sandy hair and
intense blue eyes - began the procedure. Ten or 11 weeks before, a sperm loosed
inside the woman had joined with an egg in that space medical science knows as
the uterus, but which antiabortionists call the womb. Out of that union came
what medicine terms an embryo - to antiabortionists, it is a baby. Now, Dr.
Bours reversed the process, suctioning the tiny form into a clear glass jar.

It took only a few minutes, this procedure sanctioned by law and repeated
hundreds of thousands of times each year across the nation. For Dr. Bours, it is
part of a modern family practice; to those men and women outside the clinic, it
is murder. And the conflict at the driveway has spread through the small college
and farming town, booming out on the evening news, turning the letters page of
the local newspaper into a polemical battleground, inspiring opposing petitions
circulated among the town's 11,500 residents.

In one form or another, the confrontation over abortion has found its echoes in
dozens of communities across the nation.

There have been some 30 cases of bombing, firebombing and arson at clinics
during the last three years. In Alabama, a Roman Catholic priest smashed up a
clinic with a sledgehammer. The operator of an Illinois clinic and his wife were
kidnapped. Patients at a clinic in the state of Washington had their phones tied
up by as many as 700 anonymous callers. In Texas, an arsonist's work at a clinic
spread to and burned down a small shopping center. Pickets march outside scores
of doctors' offices and clinics, and more and more doctors report personal
threats. The public anger and conflict grow.

Just last month, the Justice

Department asked the Supreme Court to overturn its 1973 decision that
established a constitutional right to abortion.

If the Court did that, the legality of abortion would again become a matter of
state law, and in many states at the time of the decision abortion was still a
crime.

Like other standard medical procedures, abortion is normally a private matter,
quietly practiced, seldom discussed by the either the women or the doctors
involved. But now, to meet the attacks of the antiabortionists, women are being
urged to speak out - Eleanor Smeal, the newly elected president of the National
Organization for Women has vowed that defending a woman's right to abortion will
be a top priority for her. And Peter Bours, who once felt reluctant to enter the
public debate, has changed his mind. ''I think we have to,'' he says. ''Being
low-key hasn't helped.''

THE COURSE OF PETER BOURS'S life in many ways seems to have led him inexorably
into the center of the storm over this most divisive of social issues.

He grew up in the graceful countryside populated by executives and family
members of the Du Pont Company outside Wilmington, Del. Peter's father, William
Alsop Bours III, joined the company after graduating from Princeton and
Columbia, and eventually became a vice president. His son was christened William
Alsop Bours IV, but the family called him Pete, and as an adult he chose to be
known as Peter.

It was a milieu of handsome homes and pools and tennis courts, of affection for
Wyeth paintings, Oldsmobiles and the Republican Party. Like many of his
neighbors, Peter Bours went to private schools, and then to college. At Stanford
University, he made Phi Beta Kappa his junior year.

That year was 1965, which also marked a political turning point for Peter Bours.
''I remember William Sloan Coffin coming out and speaking,'' he says, recalling
the antiwar chaplain of Yale University, now the senior minister at Manhattan's
Riverside Church. ''And I remember after that a whole generation of students in
protest.'' He became fervently opposed to the Vietnam War, and critical of the
society that supported it.

An economics major, Peter Bours did his senior thesis on population control and
economic development in third-world countries. It was an interest he brought
from home, where his parents had long been active in Planned Parenthood.

At the end of his senior year, the subject of birth control became suddenly
personal. ''I was heading off to Boston'' - to Harvard University Medical School
- ''and my girlfriend of all four years was heading off to law school at
Berkeley. That was the first month we had sex, and she got pregnant.''

In 1966, most abortions were illegal in the United States. It had not always
been so. In fact, through most of history, they had been freely practiced. In
early common law, abortion performed before ''quickening'' - defined as that
point when the fetus begins to move in the uterus at 16 or 18 weeks - was not an
indictable offense. In the mid-19th century, as Kristin Luker, a professor of
sociology at the University of California at San Diego, points out, a survey
showed that between 17 percent and 34 percent of all pregnancies in Michigan
ended in abortion. It was not until after the Civil War, in the sway of the
Victorian era and at the urging of the recently formed American Medical
Association, that the states began passing laws making abortion illegal. The
only exception was when a physician determined that an abortion was necessary
''to save the life of the mother.''

In California that spring of 1966, Dr. Bours recalls, ''after some clandestine
arrangements, all these furtive plans'' -made through a doctor across the border
in Mexico - ''we had to meet these guys in the Los Angeles airport. I had to
give them $700, cash.'' His girlfriend flew off to Guadalajara for the abortion,
and Peter Bours, with no money for his own airfare, had to wait for her return.

But even then, the abortion picture was changing. Some years before, in Arizona,
Sherri Finkbine had discovered that her sleeping pills contained strong doses of
thalidomide. Although her life was not at risk, her doctor urged her to abort
her fetus, which he felt certain was deformed. Her story, as Kristin Luker puts
it, ''forced people to define exactly what circumstances in principle
constituted legitimate grounds for abortion.''

Then, in California, came an outbreak of rubella, or German measles, also a
danger to a fetus. Many doctors considered it reason for an abortion, but the
California State Board of Medical Examiners, for one, did not. Seven prominent
physicians were charged by the board with performing illegal abortions. In 1967
-urged on by the American Medical Association, the American Bar Association and
the American Academy of Pediatrics - Gov. Ronald Reagan signed a law that made
abortion legal in California when done by a registered physician in an
accredited hospital to prevent physical or mental damage to the woman.

Meanwhile, Peter Bours had settled in at Harvard. His political activism
continued, centered on opposition to the war. ''I'm sure I was considered part
of the left-wing element of the medical school,'' he says. He also organized a
symposium on abortion. ''But that was all from the political end,'' Dr. Bours
recalls. ''It wasn't like I ever saw myself being involved in it.''

In 1968, Dr. Bours married his girlfriend from Berkeley days, who had moved to
Boston, but the marriage lasted only two years. Then he moved back West, signing
on as an intern at the University of California in San Diego.

By then, more than 99 percent of all California women who applied for abortions
were being granted them. Abortion on demand had become a reality in California,
and a number of other states had enacted similar laws.

Peter Bours had planned to become an orthopedic surgeon, but during his
internship and residency in San Diego, he changed his mind. He had married
again, and fathered a daughter, Emma, and the experience left him more
interested in children, in families and family care, than in bones. When he
began to practice, it would be in family and maternity care.

In 1973, the Supreme Court issued its landmark abortion ruling. Henceforth, no
state could make abortion unlawful except in those instances when the fetus was
old enough to sustain life outside the uterus. Before that age -thought to be
between 24 and 28 weeks - the decision would rest with the woman and her
physician.

F OREST GROVE, some 25 miles west of Portland, is one of a string of small
communities clustered along Highway 8 as it strikes through woods and farmlands
toward the Pacific Coast. Founded by Congregationalists in the 1840's, washed by
a tide of Dutch Roman Catholics who migrated from Wisconsin about a century ago,
it is a town of churches. And increasingly, in recent years, the new
congregations have been evangelical and fundamentalist. The signs at each
intersection along the highway tell the story, pointing the way to the Assembly
of God, Central Baptist, First Life Ministries, Hillside Bible, Foursquare
Church.

The town's population is layered, too, with lawyers and architects who commute
from Portland, students and professors from the town's Pacific University, and
farmers. There is also a community of several hundred people, now middle-aged,
who split with traditional society during the radical years of the 1960's and
1970's, and settled in Forest Grove to find a simpler life.

Peter Bours, too, was drawn by the uncomplicated beauty of the place. He bought
a piece of farmland and an old frame house outside town in 1974 and went into
practice. By this time, Dr. Bours was once again single. ''If I weren't such a
social traditionalist,'' he says in wry reflection, ''I wouldn't have married so
many times.'' And within a few years, he did it again, marrying his nurse, Joan
Moss.

Together, they built a family practice based on delivering babies - often, in
that era, to couples who wanted their children born at home or in one of the
birthing cabins that Dr. Bours fashioned from outbuildings on his property. It
was an effort to take obstetrical medicine out of cold, institutional hospital
delivery rooms and return it to the home - and it fit with the ideas he had
developed during the war years, the search for a redefinition of personal and
social relationships.

Few doctors in the area were offering that kind of care. ''So we had a lot of
highly educated 30- to 40-year-olds in Portland coming out to have their babies
with us,'' Dr. Bours says. For his wife, it was an idyllic time. ''In one
year,'' she recalls, ''we did 350 deliveries, and that was in just 365 days. I
remember thinking, 'I have the most wonderful job in the world.' '' In time, the
couple had their own children, a daughter, Heidi, and a son, William Alsop Bours
V. Peter Bours had his own style. He wore loose shirts and comfortable pants and
knockaround shoes, almost never a coat and tie. His patients called him by his
first name. And he kept his rates low, paying himself less than $50,000 a year,
sinking the rest of his income into the new clinic which he built in town, next
to the community hospital.

Says the Rev. Richard E. Osburn, pastor of the United Church of Christ, whose
congregation supports the right to abortion, ''A lot of people considered Peter
a strange duck. Different.'' When the town police would stop Dr. Bours for
speeding on the way to a delivery, recalls the minister, a former chaplain of
the police force, the doctor would inform them that he would meet them the next
morning if they wanted to give him a ticket, but that at the moment he was in a
rush. ''I know that a lot of the officers think of Peter as thinking he's above
things,'' the minister says.

Dr. Bours's practice flourished. His new office and patient rooms were bright
and cheerful, crammed with snapshots of pink new babies and their beaming
parents. And at the top of the building he hung a bell, to ring out the news of
birth.

From time to time, women would come to him seeking an abortion. He decided that
women who wished to terminate their pregnancies deserved the same guilt-free
atmosphere of professional care that women who brought their pregnancies to term
enjoyed. ''Then,'' he recalls, ''the Portland Women's Clinic started referring
me a regular group of patients each week. Suddenly, I had an abortion
practice.'' With its low fees and cheerful atmosphere, it became one of the
largest in the state.

Reflecting Dr. Bours's philosophy, the clinic offered women the options of birth
control, giving birth, putting the baby up for adoption, or, as a last resort,
abortion. One day, he stood quietly at the counter in his outer office with a
young father and his son, whom Dr. Bours had delivered six years before. Just
now, he had performed the third abortion for the boy's mother. Dr. Bours turned
to the father and said, ''I think we need to get you on some kind of effective
birth control.''

A doctor who performs abortions confronts a host of personal decisions. The law,
for example, permits abortion until the fetus is about six months of age,
leaving doctors to decide how late in life's evolution they are willing to
terminate a pregnancy.

''I don't know where you can draw the line,'' Dr. Bours said at his home one
night as he moved about the kitchen, building a casserole. ''I say 12 weeks.
Others might say 14, 16 or 18 weeks. When you get beyond 18 or 20 weeks, you get
into trouble. I have a practicable kind of morality. The technique changes a lot
between 12 and 13 weeks. The complications increase. The amount of pain to the
patient goes up.''

And an abortion on an advanced fetus, which has taken on more of a recognizable
human form, takes a greater emotional toll on a doctor and his staff. Earlier
that day, performing the procedure on the woman who wished no fourth child, Dr.
Bours finished vacuuming her uterus, funneling the remains of the fetus into a
sock of white gauze, suspended in a jar.

After an abortion, the doctor must inspect these remains to make sure that all
the fetal parts and the placenta have been removed. Any tissue left inside the
uterus can start an infection. Dr. Bours squeezed the contents of the sock into
a shallow dish, and poked about with a finger. ''You can see a teeny-tiny
hand,'' he said.

At the sink and sterilizer, where the surgical instruments are cleaned, a nurse
stood and turned on the faucet. ''I've been cleaning up after him for four
years,'' she said. ''We all wish it were formless, but it's not. It has a form.
And it's painful. There's a lot of emotional pain.''

W HEN DR. BOURS began performing substantial numbers of abortions in 1977, there
were no organized protests. Most of the women who came to him for deliveries
were unaware that he did abortions. But even back then, there were passionate
antiabortionists in Forest Grove. They only lacked a target.

Then, in May 1983, the parish priest at Rosemary Young's church invited one of
the founders of Catholics United for Life to speak to his congregation. As the
visitor talked of the need to save lives by counseling women against abortion,
the words tugged hard at Mrs. Young.

At the University of Oregon at Eugene a decade earlier, Mrs. Young and her
then-boyfriend, Randy Young, a Southern Baptist, had - like Peter Bours - been
part of the student reaction against the Vietnam War, involved in what was then
known as the counterculture. They helped collect food to supply the Indian
radicals rebelling on the reservation at Wounded Knee, and for a time considered
going to live with friends in a commune.

In their junior year they married, and five months later, the 20-year-old
student was pregnant. ''I considered abortion, myself,'' she confesses - she had
been raised in the Catholic Church, which holds that human life begins at the
moment of conception, but her faith had slipped. ''I thought seriously about it.
But I knew that I couldn't do that.'' So she bore her child, dedicating herself
to house and family while her husband went to work.

Then, Mr. Young decided to take instruction in Catholicism. Mrs. Young went
along. ''We had a really nice old Irish priest who answered all our questions,''
she recalls. ''So often you find that so many churches give no absolutes. They
gave us absolutes. That's what we wanted. We were sick of searching, and they
gave us absolutes.''

Thus, when in May 1983 the priest suggested that the women of the parish might
want to meet with the speaker from Catholics United for Life, to discuss what
was called ''sidewalk counseling,'' Mrs. Young offered her home as a meeting
place. Among those who attended were Jamie Nibbler and Maria Vandecoevering.

''Before I knew it,'' Mrs. Young recalls, ''Jamie and Maria said, 'We'll go and
do it - and there's a doctor right here in Forest Grove.' ''

So the picketing outside Peter Bours's office began, pitting the doctor who had
hewed to the liberal ideas of his college years against many of his neighbors
who had abandoned those same ideas. The protests have had strong support from
the Roman Catholic Church. Twice, on the anniversary date of the Supreme Court
decision, the Most Rev. Kenneth D. Steiner, Auxiliary Bishop of the Archdiocese
of Portland in Oregon, has arrived on the scene to bless the effort. And
gradually Protestant fundamentalists joined in the picketing.

Both groups are fiercely single-minded. ''One day,'' Peter Bours recalls, ''they
had a 20-week fetus in a bottle. There were some first-graders walking down the
street, and they showed it to the first-graders and said, 'This is a baby, and
the doctor in there is killing them for $1,000 a baby.' '' (In fact, Dr. Bours's
fee is $140.) The most vociferous of the demonstrators has been Michael Thomas
Story, who began conducting his own campaign on the days when abortions were not
performed. He carried a sign likening the clinic to Auschwitz. He paraded with a
cross on which he had crucified a doll splattered with blood-red paint.

Because of Mr. Story, Dr. Bours's children no longer drop by the clinic after
school. ''You wouldn't either,'' Dr. Bours says, ''if you had Michael Story
yelling at you. Would you want to be a child brought to the doctor's office for
an earache and have this man yelling at you that the doctor is a murderer?'' He
stopped, his disgust evident. ''I've had a hard time not getting into a fist
fight with the guy,'' he said. ''And I haven't been in a fight since I was seven
years old.'' In fact, late last month, the two did get into a scuffle.

The battle over abortion in Forest Grove has taken a variety of forms. At one
point, the antiabortionists started to flood the local weekly, The News-Times,
with letters to the editor attacking Dr. Bours and his clinic. Some of his
friends got up a petition of support. It drew several hundred signatures. Then
the fundamentalist owner of a fast-food store started an opposing petition. It
gathered even more names.

The attacks on Dr. Bours in the letters columns grew ever more graphic and
angry. Finally, says David H. Baker, the managing editor at the time, ''this
elderly lady called me and said, 'Look, I love your paper and I've read it for
years and years, but I just can't take this anymore.' And she was crying and
sobbing. And I said, 'Oh, God, you're right.' '' When, in May 1984, the clinic
was bombed, Mr. Baker, fearing that the letters had become inflammatory,
announced a temporary moratorium on them.

The first firebomb attempt came the Friday of Mother's Day weekend; the second,
that Saturday. In each case, a plastic 7-Up bottle filled with gasoline was
connected to a propane tank and attached to the clinic's outer wall. Each time,
the gasoline flamed but the propane failed to explode; the cedar wall was badly
scorched.

''The bombings were somewhat upsetting,'' says Dr. Bours's wife, Joan Moss,
''but it was the death threats that changed my feeling -and how we lived.'' The
first letter, handwritten on plain paper and then machine-copied, was signed
''The Firebomber,'' and the writer provided exact details of the firebombs'
construction.

''In case you haven't noticed,'' the letter read, ''there is an ever-growing
militaristic movement against babykillers. You will be stopped. Unless you stop
voluntarily upon receipt of this letter, you and your staff will be killed to
save the lives of those you would kill. Terrorism? No more than the American
revolution was terrorism or the civil war.''

Emma, Dr. Bours's daughter by his second marriage, had just arrived to spend the
summer, but her alarmed mother insisted that Emma could not stay in Forest
Grove. So the Bourses rented a house 50 miles away on the Oregon coast, and Joan
Moss took Emma and her own two children to stay there. ''It was very
stressful,'' she says. ''I was very upset.'' Then the second letter from ''The
Firebomber'' arrived. This time, Dr. Bours did not tell his wife the details.
The letter - describing the story of David and Goliath - promised that since Dr.
Bours had not ceased doing abortions, he would be decapitated, and his head
would be left in a public place to be urinated on by his enemies.

Peter Bours was with his family in their refuge on the coast, celebrating his
40th birthday, when the next threat came, delivered in person to the Bourses'
house in town. As the neighbors described it, ''Someone pulled up in a pickup
truck in front of the house at 4 or 5 in the morning,'' Dr. Bours said, ''and
revved up a chain saw, and said they were going to kill the whole family.''

Forest Grove's police force of 17 has been unable to find the person or persons
who placed the firebombs, sent the letters or showed up with a chain saw. Gary
Tyler, the police chief, says that his investigation has been hampered because
the antiabortionists will not cooperate; they take offense at being questioned,
he says.

Joan Moss's fear for her children lasted until the end of summer, when the
family moved back to town. ''And then after two weeks, I had my cancer
diagnosed,'' she says. It was breast cancer, the same disease that had killed
Dr. Bours's sister Mary Anne in 1980.

The family's focus shifted to the new threat. Joan Moss had a mastectomy, and
began chemotherapy treatments. She lost her hair and bought a wig; she rested at
home on the days the chemicals made her ill, but continued working in the clinic
when she felt well. As the months passed, each Tuesday and Friday brought the
antiabortionists back to the clinic, but the family was preoccupied by the more
immediate threat. ''The crisis that they are all dealing with, that they know
about,'' Joan Moss says simply, ''is my cancer.''

January of this year brought another anniversary of the Supreme Court decision.
Peter Bours closed the clinic for the day, but at home that night, on the
television news, he saw Bishop Steiner blessing the protest effort. And he saw
John David Ott, a new doctor in town, the product of Catholic schools, a former
Marine who for a time prepared for the priesthood, standing over a tiny,
makeshift coffin with a bugle -blowing Taps.

Says Peter Bours: ''It was gross.'' He called Dr. Ott, a man he saw every day at
the community hospital or the community pool where both men swim at noon. They
talked, and now Dr. Ott, though still a firm antiabortionist, seems sorry about
his performance. Of Peter Bours, Dr. Ott remarks: ''I think he's been the fall
guy. I think there's been a witch hunt, and most of the people here are tired of
that.''

If anything, Dr. Bours says, the people he sees each day ''seem to know that
we're going through a hard time, and most of them seem to go out of their way to
be friendly.'' In restaurants and stores around town, friends remain friends,
and abortion, Dr. Bours says, ''seems an issue that most people would rather not
bring up - which is fine with us because we talk about it plenty anyway.''

He is glad that he followed his family's pattern, placing his children in
private schools. In public schools, he says, they might be thrown in with the
children of the antiabortionists, who ''really do teach their kids that I'm a
murderer.'' He has seen the change this message can bring. ''There's a
6-year-old boy that I delivered that I say hello to,'' Dr. Bours says, ''and
after the last newspaper article came out, he wouldn't look at me. That's the
hardest thing for me, because I've always prided myself on my relationship with
kids. It hurts me.''

Dr. Bours's practice has been affected. Not his abortion practice, he says
-''That doesn't seem to have been affected at all.'' But deliveries fell from
about 300 cases a year to 150 or fewer. ''The major dropoff,'' he is convinced,
''was because of the protest and the controversy. About half are people who are
against abortions and didn't realize I was doing them all that time. And the
others simply worried that someone was going to try to blow the place up while
they were in there.''

Meanwhile, the controversy goes on. The protestors picket. The newspaper again
prints letters of protest. And the threat of violence remains.

The Rev. Stan Doland, until recently the pastor of the Foursquare Church and now
a missionary, said: ''The Marines, that's what I call them. I don't think the
Marines around here will let up until he goes out of business, or quits doing
abortions, or -God forbid - something violent happens.'' The church is against
abortion, but the minister - whose son was delivered by Peter Bours before the
pastor knew the doctor performed abortions - cannot bring himself to call it
murder. ''Peter honestly believes what he is doing is right,'' the minister
says.

O NE AFTERNOON, Rosemary Young spread across her kitchen table snapshots of a
handful of women who had been persuaded not to have abortions. She pointed to a
photograph of Kimberly Crutsinger, 19 years of age. ''She comes over quite
frequently,'' Mrs. Young said. ''She'll probably need our help for quite some
time.''

Then Kim Crutsinger arrived, carrying her baby, Amber Christina. She has a
3-year-old son as well. Her husband, who was furious that she chose to have
Amber, left, returned, left again. He had no job. Neither did she, and she was
pregnant again. ''Everything seems so dark, now, but I don't regret having them
at all. It's a responsibility,'' she said, her eyes shining, ''but it's a joy,
too.''

She is living on welfare, in an apartment of her own. ''For the two children, I
get $386 a month, plus food stamps. And I have car insurance to pay.'' It wasn't
enough. She smiled uncertainly, and turned to give Mrs. Young some news: ''They
are coming to get the furniture today.''

Mrs. Crutsinger's fortunes have since changed again - her husband is back, the
new baby has arrived and the furniture is safe. But it is the kind of case
history she represents that supports Peter Bours in his conviction that abortion
serves a moral need. He sees women every day, he says, for whom ''unwanted
pregnancies are a real disaster. So for me the continuing experience of being
involved in this area further reinforces my feeling that this is right.''

For a time, under the pressures of his day-and-night practice and the protests
and the worry about his wife's cancer, he considered going into industrial
medicine or some other kind of private employment, or simply moving his practice
to a high-rise building in downtown Portland. But this is home. ''We couldn't
replace the friends we have here,'' he says.

He could, however, change his practice, and he did. After 2,200 births, he
decided to stop delivering babies.

Since April 1, he has accepted no more pregnant women for obstetrical care. Dr.
Bours will confine himself to the other elements of family practice,
specializing in ''women's health care, family planning, birth control, and the
main business we have been doing, abortions and tubal ligations and
vasectomies.''

The reason for the change is grounded in a national trend - the huge increase in
malpractice suits and, as a result, an enormous rise in the cost of malpractice
insurance. ''For a doctor doing the work of an OB-GYN in Oregon in the last
three years,'' Dr. Bours says, ''malpractice premiums have gone from $6,000 to
$30,000 this year. And it's expected to continue to go up.''

In fact, for many doctors -particularly those who do large numbers of
procedures, as Dr. Bours does, and for those who deliver babies - it has become
more and more difficult to obtain malpractice insurance at all.

In the first week of July, Dr. Bours went to court to defend himself against a
three-year-old lawsuit brought by the parents of a child whose scalp had been
scarred in a difficult delivery. ''The estimated cost of repairing the scar was
$4,000,'' Dr. Bours says, but the parents had sued him for $450,000. The jury
found him blameless, but the case made it more difficult for him to get
malpractice insurance.

To deal with the problem, Dr. Bours established a new maternity care practice in
his clinic, under the direction of a nurse-midwife, who could more easily obtain
malpractice insurance. But now midwives are experiencing the same insurance
problems. The new maternity center has received a 60-day cancellation notice
from its insurance carrier, ''and if a new form of coverage cannot be found,''
Dr. Bours said last month, ''then we'll be out of that business altogether.''

On July 6, Dr. Bours turned 41. ''At about midnight,'' he says, as they were
celebrating at home, ''I got called off and had to go deliver a baby.''

Now he has only a few more expectant mothers left in his care. But the prospect
that he will deliver no more babies beneath the bell he erected years ago to
ring out the news of birth does not dismay him as it would have once.

''I have a certain sense of relief at this point,'' Peter Bours says. ''We need
time to focus on the family.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Protestors outside Peter Bour's clinic (Paul Fusco/Magnum);
Photo of Clasping hands of a women and a nurse; Photo of the doctor performing a
tubal ligation (page 20); Photo of the doctor visiting with a family (page 21);
Photo of an antiabotion activist praying outside his clinic (page 22)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTY

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words


SOLDIERS' PAY, by William Faulkner. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $4.95.)
Published in 1926, ''Soldiers' Pay'' was Faulkner's first novel. In it, a
mutilated and amnesiac soldier comes home from war. On his way he meets a war
widow and a veteran, who accompany him to his small Southern town. An unsigned
review in The Book Review said ''This book rings true. It is the opinion of this
reviewer that it belongs among such excellent conceptions of war and man as are
to be found in 'What Price Glory' and C. E. Montague's 'Disenchantment.' ''
Washington Square/ Pocket Books has also republished Faulkner's second novel,
the 1927 MOSQUITOES ($4.95). In ''Mosquitoes,'' Faulkner placed his myriad
characters on a New Orleans matron's yacht, where they buzzed and stung each
other for several days. Reviewers continued to hail Faulkner's writing but
chided him for trying to be too clever.

BLOODS: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans, by Wallace Terry.
(Ballantine, $3.95.) For this book, 20 American veterans reminisced to Wallace
Terry, a former Vietnam correspondent for Time magazine. Stanley Karnow wrote
here last year that Mr. Terry's ''focus on the experience of the blacks in
Vietnam is welcome, since recognition of their role has been long overdue. A
disproportionately large number of blacks served there. . . .

They also took a disproportionately large number of casualties. But the broader
value of Mr. Terry's book is that it demonstrates that blacks and whites in
Vietnam, whatever their differences, went through essentially the same ordeal.''

CADILLAC JACK, by Larry McMurtry. (Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster, $8.95.) The
6-foot 5-inch, 35-year-old Cadillac Jack is a Texan roaming about in the
automobile that gave him his name, looking for women and scouting for salable
antiques. In 1982 our reviewer, Eden Ross Lipson, remarked that ''the double
conceit of scouting and that fancy vehicle allows Larry McMurtry, the author of
seven other novels, the peculiar luxury of a rambling, often incoherent,
frequently entertaining tale.'' The same publisher has also issued Mr.
McMurtry's THE DESERT ROSE ($7.95), in which all is not coming up roses for
39-year-old Harmony, a former Las Vegas showgirl. But, as Steve Tesich wrote
here in 1983: ''She doesn't complain even when her life starts falling apart.
Instead, she laments - she mourns the loss of her youth, the absence of somebody
to love, the absence of somebody to hug. And this reaction gives the novel its
sweet smell of humanity and realism.''

TAHITI: A Paradise Lost, by David Howarth. (Penguin, $7.95.) Europeans came upon
Tahiti in 1767. Our reviewer, Craig McGregor, wrote last year that by 1842 ''the
Europeans had virtually destroyed Tahitian culture.'' Mr. McGregor called this
account of that process ''a good story, tolerably well told, and a worthwhile
addition to the literature that has created out of Tahiti an indestructible
legend.''

THE SUFFRAGE OF ELVIRA, by V. S. Naipaul. (Vintage, $4.95.) This early (1958)
novel of V. .S. Naipaul tells the story of a village election while satirically
examining the consequences of political change. It was a portent of later novels
manifesting the author's sour views of developing nations, in one of which
(Trinidad) he was born. The same publisher has issued two other early Naipaul
novels. In one, MR. STONE AND THE KNIGHTS COMPANION ($4.95), Mr. Stone, a
bachelor librarian on the threshold of retirement, marries and unleashes his
creative spirit with unpredictably fortunate results. In 1964 reviewers said
this first Naipaul novel to deal directly with the English scene exhibited
praiseworthy style and writing, although the author approached London through
memories of its Edwardian laureates. Mr. Naipaul's hero in THE MIMIC MEN ($5.95)
is a West Indian politician who was educated in England, married an
Englishwoman, rose to political power and fell from it. In 1967 Saul Maloff
wrote here that though he had reservations about the book's structure,
''sentence for sentence'' Mr. Naipaul ''is a model of literary tact and
precision, and his imagination - despite any criticism that can be leveled
against this book - is nothing but a novelist's.''

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF ALCOHOLISM, by George E. Vaillant. (Harvard University,
$9.95.) This 1983 book is based on a 40-year study of some 600 men, and another
report on 100 men and women treated for eight years. (The ''natural history'' of
the title refers to an individual's lifetime drinking habits.) Our reviewer,
Stanton Peele, wrote that ''in alcoholism research, where one side regularly
parades a new study and the other then vilifies it, Dr. Vaillant's work can be
cited approvingly by both. This is due in part to his admirable balance,
fairness and honesty and in part to his willingness to accept contradiction and
to defy his own research findings.''

HOLLYWOOD DYNASTIES, by Stephen Farber and Marc Green. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.)
The theme of this collaboration is that blood is thicker than water, even in
Hollywood. The authors examine the industry's old families of power - such as
the Selznicks, the Mayers and the Warners - and recent familial groups,
including the Coppolas, the Fondas and the Ladds. James Lardner observed here
last year that the authors ''make a convincing anecdotal case for the
proposition that being born (or marrying) into the movie business is a high
benefit/high risk affair.''

ENGINES OF THE MIND: A History of the Computer, by Joel Shurkin. (Washington
Square Press/Pocket Books, $4.95.) The first electronic computer, named Eniac,
was secretly created during World War II to calculate the trajectories of cannon
shells. Eniac weighed 30 tons; today even desktop models are more powerful and
more useful. Joel Shurkin traces computation from thousands of years before
Eniac to the present; his emphasis, however, is on the people who helped create
computing devices. Last year William Stockton wrote here that Mr. Shurkin
''tells the story dispassionately, balancing one person's claim against
another.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wallace Terry

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words


Aug. 11, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 8 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 2 4 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 3 3 21 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 4 4 12 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 5* 6 12 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) A restless explorer
scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

* 6 5 7 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West larger than life.

* 7 7 13 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 8 8 29 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 9 9 4 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 10 10 22 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married
couple with five children cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 11 11 8 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence,
$14.95.) The private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal agents to bring down a
powerful scoundrel.

* 12 12 21 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 13 15 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A new desert
world rises from the Old Empire's ashes in the science fiction series.

* 14 14 24 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this
pseudonymous novel by Stephen King, a lawyer is mysteriously wasting away.

* 15 13 15 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard Yard.

* 16* 15 4 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.
Nonfiction

* 1 1 5 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to first man
to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 41 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 14 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 19 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 7 3 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankee baseball
star.

* 6 5 4 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis star.

* 7 6 6 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 8 8 13 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 9 9 50 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 10* 10 2 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding
the 1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 11 11 11 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British nobleman, diplomat and naval hero.

* 12* 15 49 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for a true love.

* 13 12 4 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
previously unpublished chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 14 1 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 15 14 24 BREAKING WITH MOSCOW, by Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
autobiography of the highest-ranking Soviet official ever to defect. And Bear in
Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) OPERA &
IDEAS: From Mozart to Strauss, by Paul Robinson. (Harper & Row, $22.95.) In
showing how attitudes toward society, culture and politics shape great operatic
works, Mr. Robinson places opera firmly in the intellectual history of Europe.
FIRST LOYALTY, by Richard Lourie. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) In this
chilly and often original literary suspense novel, a Russian poet who is also a
K.G.B. agent comes to New York to recover the formula for a drug that extends
human life. FRIENDS ALONG THE WAY, by Julia Markus. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
The friends of Betsy Lewis, a 28-year-old American woman in Rome, are guides as
well; they point her toward self-knowledge in this energetic coming-of-age
story. NICARAGUA: Revolution in the Family, by Shirley Christian. (Random House,
$19.95.) A prize-winning reporter's book, detailing at length just what happened
to make revolutionary Nicaragua what it is today, and suggesting how different
American policies might have contributed to different results. EDMUND WILSON, by
David Castronovo. (Frederick Ungar, $15.50.) This articulate guide to the career
of our pre-eminent literary critic shares some of the brisk, lucid informality
that was a distinguishing characteristic of Wilson himself. UNDER THE BANYAN
TREE and Other Stories, by R. K. Narayan. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.)
Simple observation for its own sake is at the heart of these 28 benign,
even-tempered, elegant stories by the distinguished Indian English-language
novelist.

FINAL CUT: Dreams and Disasters in the Making of ''Heaven's

Gate,'' by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) The author, himself one of those
responsible, gives a fair, readable account of how a major film studio spent $36
million to create a total flop. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 9 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 3 5 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives.

* 3 2 19 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 4 4 36 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book. 5 1 FIT
FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond. (Warner, $16.50.) A diet for
weight loss and physical fitness. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
THE YEARS SINCE THE YEARBOOK

BYLINE: By PATRICK KEEFFE; Patrick Keeffe lives in Cold Spring Harbor.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 18, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words


IN my dusty yearbook, dated 1965, I found the photo of Phil and me sitting on
the hood of the dark-green '55 Chevy. I'm now on the far side of 35 and
nervously holding something the mailman just delivered - an invitation to my
high school reunion.

I never attended any of the previous reunions, so this is alien social
territory. The invitation makes me anxious, yet curious.

I place incalculable value on long-term friendships as some of the most
dependable refuges of adult life. And now I am acutely disappointed that I
missed the other sentimental journeys. Those other summers I was traveling in
Europe, looking for a job in California or, as a penurious graduate student,
writing a master's thesis 2,000 miles away.

I blink uncomprehendingly at the calendar, mystified at the constant
acceleration of the years. Last summer I heard of plans for a 20-year reunion. A
woman called my mother to get my address for the committee's mailing list.
Later, in the winter, a flier arrived announcing dates and asking for
information on classmates no one could find.

A friend told me that the first two reunions became mini-conventions for the old
cliques. I was almost glad I had missed them. But the 20th was a chance to see
radical changes wrought in people's faces, bodies, lives. The summers of the
other reunions, I had thought there were only a handful of people left that I
cared enough to be curious about . . .

A recurring dream: I am standing with friends in a hall. Dion and the Belmonts
sing on the phonograph. A broad Scandinavian face atop a thick body flashes a
shy grin. It's Marty.

In high school, he was my entree to a group of rascals. Guys who were athletic,
irreverent, reckless. Guys who had fake I.D.'s and drank beer. The ones the
girls wanted to go out with.

We were from a neighborhood where a family's big dream was for its kids to go to
college. So it was with a certain pride that Marty and I found ourselves
accepted to the noted public university in our hometown. We took political
science and sociology together - the beginnings of our shared dream of becoming
lawyers and opening a practice together.

In November 1969, during the Vietnam War, the morning after the first draft
lottery, we all timidly asked one another what numbers we had drawn. Mine was
way beyond the draft limit. Marty's was very low. He figured he would just let
them draft him. Then, when he was about to leave for the Army, he said, ''I'll
call you when I get home on leave. We'll get together.'' I lost track of him
after that.

Of course, I didn't need that old photograph from the yearbook to remember Phil.
I met him in Latin on the first day of high school. We shared a locker and ran
together on the cross-country team. A talented artist and teacher, he is still
one of my closest friends, and has been since graduation, when we showed each
other our diplomas, bravely avoiding thoughts about freshman year at the
university. Instead we drove to an all-night party, a bacchanal in a rural woods
where we, in blissful ignorance, celebrated the threshold of adulthood. Marty
and all the others were there, too.

Many of our classmates walked out of the graduation ceremony and out of our
lives on the same afternoon. There were 300 of us, but what would I possibly say
to most of them 20 years later? Five minutes of verbal resumes, a few dim
recollections, and we'd be looking for pauses in the small talk to mingle
elsewhere.

Now, after having worked as a journalist on both coasts, I am curious more than
ever, musing about those who never left, wondering whether I would seem alien to
them after having lived far away in big cities. Would I look at their deep
Midwestern roots and evenly modulated lives and wish I had never left? I wonder
how they've changed. Or, to be honest, how I have. I want to tally the
tradeoffs, to see whether leaving was worth the price I paid.

I anxiously wonder, too, if I would still like them, if they would like me.
Perhaps if they heard that I live in New York, a stereotype would leap to mind
and cloud what they see. I wonder if old girlfriends would still think I'm
attractive, or if the athletes I knew would be just old jocks who still talk
football. Or would we be able to talk about our families, disappointments,
dreams?

I fear the residue of social humiliations past - of being awkward with girls, of
having acne, of not being tall enough or cool enough. I wonder whether, in their
eyes, I would have earned the respect that seems so elusive to us as teen-agers.

After having seen the names of those on the reunion committee, my reporter's
curiosity made me want to find out what happened to most of them. And, of
course, modesty aside, I would want them to see what had happened to me, that I
had turned out all right, wasn't just the awkward kid they knew way back when,
had in fact had some measures of personal success: a good marriage, a
satisifying work life.

I called my parents recently, and my father asked whether I had heard about
Marty. Marty died, he said. I felt unstable, dizzy, with a cold knot in the pit
of my stomach. All weekend I was preoccupied, obsessed with my friend's death.
There was a palpable ache in my heart. I called one of the hometown papers on
Monday: Marty, who had apparently moved home and was living with his mother, had
had a heart attack.

I stared out the window, thinking about mortality, and vowed to go to the
reunion - and to hoist a beer at the student tavern, our old hangout, in Marty's
honor. In the yard, the lilacs had burst into perfume. Beyond them, the sun
dropped quickly into the woods. A barn swallow swooped by, nesting materials in
its beak, headed for the garage. The wind came up off the harbor, rustling the
big spruces as well as the little vase of dried flowers on the windowsill. The
last rays of the sun illuminated the dust on the windowpanes, then disappeared.
My wife's old chiming mantel clock seemed to be ticking louder than usual.
Patrick Keeffe lives in Cold Spring Harbor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARE MOVIES READY FOR REAL ORIENTALS?

BYLINE: By DAVID HWANG; David Hwang is a playwright whose works include ''FOB,''
''The Dance and the Railroad'' and ''Rich Relations,'' which is scheduled to be
presented in New York this season.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1931 words


It was at the movies that my father first saw America. In Shanghai cinemas he
watched ''North by Northwest'' and ''It's a Wonderful Life,'' whetting his
appetite to cross an ocean. Years later, as his Chinese-American son, I sat in
southern California theaters, and saw an America that did not include me - an
exciting land, a romantic land, but not my land.

On the few occasions when people who looked like me appeared on the screen, it
was a foreigner who was on display. These Orientals spoke English like goofy
children. Leaving the theater, I imagined all eyes upon me, wondering if I had
helped shoot down John Wayne.

This month brings the opening of two new movies portraying, at least in part,
the lives of Asians in America - Wayne Wang's ''Dim Sum: A Little Bit of Heart''
and Michael Cimino's ''Year of the Dragon.'' ''Dim Sum,'' which opened last
Friday at the Lincoln Plaza, explores the relationships within a
Chinese-American family in San Francisco; ''Year of the Dragon,'' which opens
this Friday at Loews State and other theaters, looks at gang warfare in New
York's Chinatown.

Will these films represent a departure from past portrayals of Asians in the
cinema? And how far has Hollywood come toward bringing to the screen
three-dimensional Asian characters?

To answer the second question, one must begin by differentiating between films
that are simply about Asians and those that truly concern Asian-Americans. There
are quite a few of the former, due partly to the long history of United States
military involvement in Asia. But there are only a handful of the latter,
reflecting the fact that even a third-generation Chinese-American, for example,
is still considered something of a foreigner. When I tell people I am from Los
Angeles, some of them still ask, ''Yes, but where are you really from?'' I am
hungry for films that recognize the reality of my world.

Among the earliest Asian film stars were Anna May Wong and Sessue Hayakawa. Miss
Wong often portrayed characters of mystery and dark sexuality, as in ''Shanghai
Express.'' Her persona is consistent with the movies' portrayal of Asian women
as feminine to an extreme. She is more than sexual - she is a mistress of erotic
arts. She is more than manipulative - she is the dowager empress. She is the
ultimate earth mother, possessing 5,000 years of wisdom. The familiar
madonna-whore dilemma, translated into Oriental terms, makes all women either
lotus blossoms or dragon ladies.

Hayakawa was a silent-film star and matinee idol who rose to stardom with ''The
Cheat'' and enjoyed a long career that culminated in his portrayal of the camp
commander in ''Bridge Over the River Kwai.'' As an example of an Asian male in
the cinema, Hayakawa is atypical. In his silent films, he presents Japanese men
with Valentino-like charisma and sex appeal, a view that has rarely been
duplicated. If the Asian female is typed as feminine to the point of caricature,
her male equivalent has been systematically emasculated by American media. The
roles usually associated with Oriental men are feminine ones: cooks, houseboys,
laundrymen. Over the years, Asian men have gone from being laboring coolies to
technical coolies: the white lab coat, the pocket calculator and the business
suit are among our images in the 80's.

Asian men are sympathetic when they are unthreatening to white men. Gunga Din is
so attached to his white idols that he does what a good lotus blossom should -
he dies in the service of the Caucasians. Asian men can often be acceptable if
they are literally children. Hence, the only sympathetic nonwhite in ''Indiana
Jones and the Temple of Doom'' is a Chinese boy, Short Round.

The most popular Asian male of the movies of an earlier day was probably Charlie
Chan. But though he was often cleverer than both his adversaries and his fellow
detectives, he, too, was unthreatening to white men. The image, that of a dumpy,
middle-aged man who tended to speak lines straight out of a fortune cookie, was
benign. That he was mostly played by white actors in yellow face is the greater
irony. Chan was servile, nonsexual, irritatingly ingratiating, and never used
the word ''I.'' As an example of a positive portrayal, Charlie Chan was
preferable only to a character like Fu Manchu, who was totally evil.

More recently, Bruce Lee leaped into the American consciousness and demonstrated
a box-office appeal in martial arts films that continues to this day. The late
Mr. Lee, an attractive figure who was both powerful and principled in his screen
personae, made some headway toward creating a more positive cinematic image of
Asians. But he spent many years in America trying to ignite his career,
receiving little work beside the sidekick role of Kato in ''The Green Hornet''
series. Only in Hong Kong was he able to appear in the films that have become
classics. His death in 1973, concurrent with the release of ''Enter the
Dragon,'' which went on to became one of the top money-making films of all time,
left many questions unanswered. One is why he never appeared in a love scene,
though it would seem almost obligatory for heroes in the action adventure genre.

The United States has been at war almost continuously with one Asian nation or
another since 1941, and from these experiences have come a wealth of films that
have gone a long way toward determining the public's perception of the Asian as
enemy. The question is whether such films have promoted the belief that people
with darker skins are less civilized and therefore of less value as human
beings. The average Japanese soldier seen in World War II films, for instance,
is of a particular cut - short, nearsighted, babbling, sadistic and violent - in
short, less than human. An exception might be Hayakawa's role in the David Lean
''Bridge Over the River Kwai''; his character was no less the enemy for being
three-dimensional and capable of feeling pain.

One interesting footnote to the history of World War II films is ''Go for
Broke,'' a postwar release that starred Van Johnson and a cast of
Asian-Americans and told the story of the all-Japanese-American 442d Infantry
Regiment, the war's most decorated unit in terms of its size and length of
service. Whatever the film's faults, it offered a sympathetic portrayal of
people with wives and sweethearts - brave souls who had a sense of humor.
Essentially, these were Americans, without the condescending cuteness of an
assimilated character like Charlie Chan's No. 1 son. The movie dealt with
racism, cultural conflicts and the internment of Japanese-Americans in United
States concentration camps.

Those war films that transcend shoot-'em-ups and attempt a serious examination
of the American role in wartime can be held particularly accountable for their
portrayal of the enemy. Two such films were Francis Ford Coppola's ''Apocalypse
Now'' and Michael Cimino's ''Deer Hunter,'' both works of the late 1970's. In
''Apocalypse Now,'' one feels the fervor of the Vietcong against the haphazard
and self-glorifying slaughter brought by Robert Duvall's air cavalry. It is a
pity that the movie disintegrates into a depiction of Marlon Brando as the white
god-king of a tribe of adoring natives.

In ''The Deer Hunter'' one cannot help but note the lack of humanity accorded
the Vietnamese, most of whom seem to live for the sadistic thrill of playing
Russian roulette with their prisoners. It is a short step from the grinning
goons of ''The Deer Hunter'' to ''Rambo,'' a cartoon that returns us to the old
days of evil Japanese torturers.

Of the films about Southeast Asia, Roland Joffe's ''Killing Fields'' is probably
the most sensitive and humanistic. Though the film has some faults, it is a
daring attempt to explore the psyche and spirit of a Cambodian caught in the
agony of a ravaged land. ''The Killing Fields'' also attempts to account for Pol
Pot's slaughter of his people by placing it in the context of historical
hysteria, brought about by years of bombing.

There are few recent films dealing with Asian-Americans. Last year, John
Avildsen's ''Karate Kid'' featured a moving performance by Pat Morita as a
kindly Japanese martial arts practitioner who teaches his young pupil about both
karate and life. This is probably the most sympathetic portrayal of an
Asian-American in a youth-oriented picture.

John Hughes's ''Sixteen Candles'' was marred by the presence of an alleged
Chinese exchange student, who embodied almost every Asian stereotype of the last
60 years. He was buck-toothed, spoke a mealy-mouthed English devoid of
first-person pronouns, and perpetually lusted after white females. Every time he
walked into the frame, we heard the clanging of an Oriental gong, lest the image
be too subtle.

Louis Malle recently attempted a sympathetic portrayal of a Vietnam immigrant's
struggle against Texas fishermen in the film ''Alamo Bay.'' Yet, again, the
Vietnamese character seemed more a child than a man -unassertive, passive,
persecuted, an Oriental variation on the noble savage. Without a true human
being at the core of the film, the dilemmas of all the characters came off as
too contrived, as if Mr. Malle had set out to create a drama and instead made
merely an argument.

This depiction is an example of my fundamental objection to the way Asians have
been treated in American films. A sympathetic two-dimensional Asian is only
slightly better than the same cutout designed to be hated. Directors attempting
to make movies with Asian characters need only ask themselves one question: If
this character were white, would he or she seem to be a fully fleshed-out
creation? If the answer is no, then minorities are being used as little more
than set decorations or special effects, and the film makers are enforcing a
double standard that implies that Asians are less than fully human.

In the absence of such humanity, all we see on screen is a foreign face. A
completely good character does little more to elicit understanding than one who
is completely evil. Neither seems like someone you could lunch with, whose home
you could visit, whose life you could value.

I look to the two films being released this month hoping that they are filled
with characters whose hearts beat. Mr. Wang's first film, ''Chan Is Missing,''
broke new ground in expressing the diversity of Chinese-Americans. But ''Chan''
functioned somewhat as an outsider's introduction to a Chinese-American
community. By contrast, ''Dim Sum'' is a personal statement that presents family
and cultural conflicts from an insider's point of view. Upon seeing ''Dim Sum,''
my companion mentioned that it was like spending an afternoon with relatives.

Though I have not seen Mr. Cimino's film, I once met with him to discuss the
script. At that time, he seemed intent on making a film that would speak
truthfully about the Chinatown community.

Mr. Wang's film, privately funded, is one of a number of independent efforts by
young American directors to put real Asian stories on the screen. Other pioneers
include Michael Uno, who was nominated for an Oscar, Christine Choy and Visual
Communications. Mr. Cimino's film, produced by Dino De Laurentiis, is a more
standard big-budget Hollywood product.

I would like to think that audiences are becoming too sophisticated to buy into
the old Oriental stereotypes, and that Hollywood would encourage this awareness
by shopping for fresh, new stories with a ring of truth. While movies like
''Sixteen Candles'' are discouraging, there are also enough quality films to
give an American like me continued reason to hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mickey Rourke and Ariane

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thailand Reports Firing Across Mekong River

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 11


Thai military authorities said today that Vietnamese and Laotian forces had been
firing across the Mekong River at Thai positions for three days. The Thais were
reported to have returned the fire.

The mortar and gunfire exchanges were reported near the Thai river town of Nong
Khai. A Thai policeman was reportedly killed.

Thai and Laotian Government officials had been meeting recently in attempts to
reduce tensions between the two countries.

Laos, which has been ruled by a Communist Government since December 1975, has
been drawn increasingly closer over the last decade to Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BARBED TAPE: JAGGED ARMOR ON THE NEW YORK LANDSCAPE

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


On a residential street in Murray Hill in Manhattan, the razor-edged coils of
steel strike a jarring note. Ringing the top of a temporary scaffold on a
16-story luxury cooperative at the corner of Park Avenue and 39th Street, their
message to would-be burglars is unmistakable.

The tenants of the building, the Griffon, decided to have the coils installed to
protect the second-story apartments from break-ins while the scaffold is up
during repairs, according to the superintendent, Herb Bringslid.

''The bridging was up for a few weeks before they secured it,'' he said. ''The
tenants were very nervous.''

The coils, which are known generically as barbed taped, are described by
manufacturers as having been developed by the military and first used during the
Vietnam War. They are sold under such brand names as Razor Wire and Razor
Ribbon.

While they are a common sight around prisons and military installations, the
coils, which are usually found atop fences, walls and roofs, have in recent
years become a part of the urban terrain.

The coils are advertised by one manufacturer as ''the mean stuff'' that will
entangle and injure anyone who tries to get past them. Fencing companies
describe barbed tape as the urban fence accessory of the 1980's. At $60 for a
50-foot coil, business is booming.

Nine years ago, one of the country's two primary manufacturers, the American
Security Fence Corporation, sold $500,000 worth of barbed tape, according to
Will Boggs, vice president of the Phoenix-based company. Last year, sales
reached $5 million, with about 30 percent of the share going to the New York
metropolitan area, Mr. Boggs said.

'More of It Than Anyone Else'

''New York has more of it than anyone else in the country,'' he said. New York,
he added, was the first place he went to sell barbed tape in the late 1970's,
with car dealers and factory owners among his first customers.

There are differences of opinion among urban planners and architects about how
pervasive the coils are and what kind of atmosphere they create in the city.

William H. Whyte, an urban sociologist, said he was struck more by the city's
increasingly welcoming atmosphere than by such high-security devices as barbed
tape which, he said, was becoming an anomaly. He said there were more public
spaces and open-air dining and a crime rate that has fallen, ''New York is
outstandingly hospitable compared to other cities,'' Mr. Whyte said. ''It's very
much a street town. Most middle-sized American cities are still afraid of the
street. We have to be tolerant in New York. We've had to learn to get along with
a lot of strange people.''

'An Antisocial Act'

But people like Bernard Rothzeid, a Manhattan architect who discourages his
clients from building fences and recommends increased lighting as the preferred
security measure, are troubled by devices like barbed tape.

''We're making little fortresses,'' he said. ''It's an antisocial act to put it
up. It makes me sad to see it going up all over the city.''

One of the biggest and most visible users is the Transit Authority, which four
years ago installed double chain-link fences and barbed tape around all 18
subway yards - a $21 million investment against graffiti vandals.

''Just plain chain-link fencing is no longer effective,'' said Michael Provino,
the manager of Gunhill Fence, in the Bronx. ''Now a fence is mandatory, and it's
almost automatic they want barbed wire and barbed tape on top of it.''

Church and Penthouse Secured

Robert Canora, the operations manager for Clark & Wilkins, a fencing company at
1871 Park Avenue at 127th Street, in Harlem, said his workers recently installed
barbed tape on top of the back wall of a church on the Upper East Side that had
five burglaries in three weeks. While permanent use in residential areas is
rare, Mr. Canora said, his company also secured a penthouse terrace in Chelsea
with barbed tape.

''There is no question that it's the best way to prevent someone climbing over a
fence,'' Mr. Canora said.  Before barbed tape began to appear in the city a
decade ago, there was barbed wire - a fixture of the American West that was used
to define the range.

Barbed wire is a late-19th-century invention designed primarily to contain
livestock and never intended for human beings.

Nothing Better Available

Its use was expanded to prisons and other places in need of security simply
because there was not, at the time, anything better, according to Dr. Thomas
Stanley, a physicist who directed the military's research project on the
development of barbed tape. Dr. Stanley is now vice president for engineering
and development at Man Barrier Corporation in Seymour, Conn., which, along with
American Security, makes most of the country's barbed tape.

Manufacturers and wholesalers strongly discourage the use of barbed tape in
residential areas. Many communities across the country have ordinances
forbidding its use. The city's Department of General Services tries to avoid it
wherever possible, according to David Moskovitz, a spokesman. ''We think it's
offensive in the way it looks and the type of atmosphere it creates,'' he said.

Like all the other measures, even barbed tape does not make property
impregnable. ''You can't keep the professionals out,'' Mr. Canora said. ''What
you can do is make it as hard as possible and hope they'll go for an easier
mark.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of construction at Park Ave. and 39th Street (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING AUCTION OF 'LOVER' FOR PAPERBACK

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


MARGUERITE DURAS'S novel ''The Lover'' has been on The New York Times fiction
best-seller list for one month now, and tomorrow it is being auctioned for
paperback. But its success does not exactly bathe the book industry in glory,
since a large part of that industry greeted its publication here lukewarmly -
even though it sold some 800,000 copies in France, was that country's No. 1 best
seller for more than six months and won the 1984 Prix Goncourt, France's most
prestigious literary prize.

The obstacles the book had to overcome, said Andre Schiffrin, managing director
of Pantheon Books, ''are indicative of the difficulty a literary work in
translation can face.''

The first of those difficulties was that despite an initial Pantheon printing of
25,000 copies, a sizable amount for a literary book, bookstores ordered only
slightly more than half that number for their initial distribution. And none of
the mass market paperback houses were interested in acquiring it.

But as ''The Lover'' began getting favorable reviews, and as the word-of-mouth
publicity built, the bookstores - especially the independent ones - slowly upped
their orders. Not until the book - the story of an adolescent girl's sexual
initiation in Saigon in the 1930's - appeared on The Times best-seller list last
month did the paperback houses express interest. Almost all of them will be
represented at tomorrow's auction, but because there will soon be 72,500 copies
of ''The Lover'' in print, they have been told that they will have to bid six
figures or Pantheon will publish it itself in trade paperback.

Hard-cover publishers routinely consider whether they can earn more by selling
reprint rights or by reprinting a book themselves, and these days a number of
houses are increasingly opting to do their own reprints. Prominent among them is
Harper & Row, which recently published in trade paperback Milan Kundera's ''The
Unbearable Lightness of Being'' and which early next year will reprint ''The
Soong Dynasty'' by Sterling Seagrave.

Pantheon itself plans a trade paperback this winter of ''The Destruction of the
European Jews'' by David Wyman, a best seller for which it received several
bids, including one that Mr. Schiffrin described as ''substantial.'' Susan
Isaacs Signs Three-Book Contract Soon after signing David Stockman to a contract
in excess of $2 million, Harper & Row has signed a three-book contract for what
it describes as ''a substantial seven-figure advance'' with Susan Isaacs, author
of ''Almost Paradise.'' That book reached No. 3 on the Times hardcover fiction
list last year and No. 1 on the paperback list.

The amount of money involved is a sure sign that Harper's expects continued big
things of the author, but the multiple contract says more about what is
happening in publishing at the moment.

For example, a small percentage of authors remain with the same publisher year
after year, including Irving Stone, Louis Auchincloss, John Hersey and Frank
Yerby. But the big money contracts that were common until a few years ago
weakened and in many cases severed the ties between authors and publishers, with
the former shopping around for the best deal and the latter enticing authors
from other houses.

The old loyalties may never be as strong as they once were, but there has been a
quiet movement back toward long-term relationships. Among many recent examples:

Harper's has a multibook contract with Saul Bellow and a six-book contract with
Allen Ginsberg, the poet. E. P. Dutton and New American Library signed a joint
hardcover-paperback contract with James Carroll. Dell has a three-book contract
with Danielle Steel. Bantam has signed Louis L'Amour and John Saul to multibook
contracts and has a contract to reprint Robert Ludlum's next three books.

One reason long term contracts are in vogue now, obviously, is that the big
money that inspired the literary hopscotching has dried up for all but a handful
of best-selling authors. Nevertheless, a surprising number of agents and authors
say they think they are likely to be better off in the long run with a working
relationship spread over several books, rather than hopping from house to house
in search of the highest bidder. Lumen Books Plans To Publish Translations
Manuel Puig is riding high these days, because of the success of ''Kiss of the
Spider Woman,'' the movie made from his novel of the same name. His earlier
novels include ''Heartbreak Tango'' and ''Betrayed by Rita Hayworth,'' and Mr.
Puig, an Argentinian who lives in Brazil, has written one original screenplay,
''Under a Mantle of Stars.'' That was not available in the United States until a
few months ago, when a translation by Ronald Christ was published by Lumen
Books.

Lumen is a book-publishing offshoot of Sites, a magazine of literature and
architecture. In coming months Lumen will publish a lengthy literary essay by
Matti Megged, an Israeli author living in the United States, a collection of
essays by and about Nicaraguan political and cultural figures and an anthology
of writings on film by Jorge Luis Borges.

''At least in the beginning, we will specialize in translations and smaller
works that a bigger house can't justify taking on,'' said Mr. Christ, a
professor of English at Rutgers University, who founded Lumen with a partner,
Dennis L. Dollens, the editor of Sites.

If that sounds like a sure prescription for financial disaster, Mr. Christ said
they intend to keep costs at a minimum by publishing only a few titles a year
and publishing only small first printings. Meanwhile, he said, obtaining the
Puig book was easy. ''I just asked him if I could translate it and publish it,
and he agreed,'' Mr. Christ said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV SPORTS;
PRAISEWORTHY EFFORT BY NBC

BYLINE: By Peter Alfano

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


It would have been safer, if not particularly innovative, for NBC's ''Sports
World'' to continue the tradition of programming that makes the three networks'
sports anthology shows seem like parodies. Arm wrestling, log rolling, cliff
diving, speed skating and, perhaps some day soon, chicken plucking from Havana,
are events that are televised more often than anyone cares to see.

But on Sunday, Mike Weisman, the executive producer of NBC Sports, made a
radical departure from form with ''The Great Communicators of Sports.'' And
although there was ample room for criticism, the effortshould be praised.

In 90 minutes, NBC's Sports World attempted to trace the history of sports
journalism from its roots in the print media to the electronic age. That's a
rather ambitious undertaking for a medium that too often is content to repeat
itself.

The emphasis was on the ''great communicators,'' the phrase used to describe
President Reagan, who once was a sports broadcaster. The program showed the work
of some of the prominent sportswriters from yesterday and today, journalists who
painted pictures with words. There were the radio broadcasters whose voices
conveyed the excitement and drama to an audience relying on its imagination, and
the television announcers who embellish what we already see.

''The Great Communicators'' touched on the emergence of the reporter as a
celebrity, the relationship between the media and athletes and memorable moments
in sports and how they were covered. It also devoted 10 minutes to Howard
Cosell, who was described by the host, Bob Costas, as arguably ''one of the 10
most famous people in America.'' Such is the the adversary relationship between
newspapers and television, and among the networks themselves, that Weisman, a
35-year-old New Yorker who has an appreciation for history, should be applauded
for rising above the usual pettiness.

Sure, there were plugs for NBC, which televised the first sports event on May
17, 1939 - a college baseball game between Princeton and Columbia - and for NBC
announcers such as Vin Scully and Marv Albert, but the network gave ABC's Cosell
an unparalleled forum. It also paid tribute to ABC's Jim McKay, who displayed a
professionalism not expected of sports broadcasters when 11 Israeli athletes
were murdered by Arab terrorists during the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich.

The major failing of ''The Great Communicators'' was that it tried to cover too
much ground, which invariably sacrifices depth and results in superficiality.
Thus, provocative remarks by the sports columnist Dick Young about today's
athletes (''they've gotten rich, they're independent'') and his complaint about
today's sportswriters (''journalism is getting too wordy'') were not pursued.

The topic of female sportwriters received just passing attention. The Boston
Globe's Lesley Visser lamented that too often women remain the story when they
enter the locker room. Some case histories of the abuses women have encountered
there would have added to the segment. Perhaps there could have been a
light-hearted discussion about the absurdity of interviewing a naked athlete in
the first place.

Also, there seemed a need for Pete Axthelm, who helped edit the program as well
as serve as an interviewer and essayist, to pursue some of Cosell's inflamatory
remarks, engaging in more of a debate than merely asking questions. Axthelm,
whose backround is in print journalism, might have supported or challenged
Cosell's contention that the sports print media ''has failed on every major
issue in my lifetime.''

Cosell was referring specifically to the Curt Flood case challenging baseball's
reserve system and Muhammad Ali's refusal to be drafted into the United States
Army during the Vietnam War, which cost him his heavyweight title. Although
Cosell's accusations were generally true, certainly there were sportswriters who
shared his view on these issues. Axthelm also narrated a tribute to the late Red
Smith, the Pultizer Prize-winning sports columnist of The New York Times.
Axthelm recounted with regret that the Times had killed a column written by
Smith in support of President Carter's boycott of the Moscow Olympics in 1980
because the Times did not feel that Smith was qualified to comment on political
topics. Axthelm said yesterday that he wrote the account from memory and from
what Smith had told him.

In fact, the Times refused to publish the column because it believed it was
based on an erroneous report that the Soviet Union was transporting derelicts
and other undesirables out of Moscow in order to make the city safe for the
Games.

Mostly, the ''The Great Communicators'' was not controversial. Rather it was
intended to be what Weisman called a more positive look at sports journalism.

Because it broke new ground, Costas felt that it succeeded. He said that the
program did not pretend to be an end-all or ''who's who'' of sports journalism,
a disclaimer he mentioned twice during the telecast.

''Because this was virgin territory, you could look at it that we took the right
approach,'' Costas said yesterday. ''If the objective was to give a flavor of
sports journalism, we succeeded.

''But another reasonable argument would be to do just television and radio and
save print journalism for another show. And do the issues and other material in
a third show.''

Weisman said a program of this nature was long overdue. He is attempting to
break away from the typical anthology format, occasionally presenting a theme
show. He understood, he said, that ''The Great Communicators'' would be heavily
scrutinized by the news media. He felt, however, that it would appeal to fans
who would enjoy seeing the old film clips and reliving some of sports' finest
memories.

In the 10 market overnight averages, ''The Great Communicators'' had a 3.2
rating. Boxing on CBS had a 3.8 and the final round of the Professional Golf
Association tournament on ABC had a 6.3.

''I'm proud we attempted the show,'' Weisman said. ''We were satisfied and
frustrated because it called for so much more. Obviously, you can pick holes in
it, but we think it stimulated, informed and enlightened people. And we're going
to do more shows like this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By John Gross

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


COPS. Their Lives in Their Own Words.

By Mark Baker. 303 pages. Simon &

Schuster. $16.95. ACCORDING to Mark Baker, America has more police officers per
capita than any other nation in the world, and the public fascination with
police work is correspondingly intense. Cops are news; cops are box office; from
Joseph Wambaugh to Dirty Harry and from Hill Street to the 87th Precinct we are
glutted with images of what cops are supposed to be like, or what we would like
them to be like or - occasionally - what we are afraid they may turn out to be
like.

Mr. Baker's aim in writing ''Cops'' has been to dig deeper than the news stories
and to get at the truth behind the stereotypes. Using similar techniques to
those he employed in ''Nam,'' his collection of interviews with Vietnam
veterans, he has persuaded police officers to talk frankly (as far as you can
judge) about their attitudes and experiences, to gossip, bellyache, think aloud,
reminisce at random.

The result is a compelling tour of the badlands. In some ways it invites
comparison with James McClure's recent study, ''Cop World,'' but it complements
rather than competes with the earlier book. Where Mr. McClure confined himself
to a single city - San Diego - and to a single division of the San Diego force,
exploring it in close-up, Mr. Baker has ranged from coast to coast, interviewing
more than a hundred officers in a dozen different states, and in a
representative variety of settings, urban, suburban and rural.

He clearly did a good job at winning his informants' confidence. Not entirely,
perhaps; he was aware that even when they were at their most gregarious they
never quite let their guard down, that an element of constant watchfulness went
with the job. On the other hand the ''code of silence'' he had so often heard
about proved to be much less of an obstacle than he had expected. A few of the
officers he spoke to took refuge in yep-nope taciturnity or were unable to get
beyond spouting departmental propaganda; most of them were cheerfully talkative.

And they all had stories to tell - bizarre stories, terrifying stories,
Rabelaisian stories, stories about humanity's limitless ability to twist itself
into grotesque new shapes. Inevitably there is a touch of ''believe it or not''
about the book - the officers have a natural tendency to recall the most
freakish or frightening incidents they have witnessed and the most unforgettable
(usually unforgettably awful) characters they have met. From the dismembered
child in the refrigerator to the 18-year-old who died clutching his most
treasured possession (''He stuck me, but he didn't get my dope, man''), from the
alcoholic cop who parked his horse in the basement of a bar - it died of
asphyxiation - to the cop who pocketed a suspect's teeth that had been knocked
out during an arrest (''I'm going to have them covered in gold for a
necklace''), the reader is bombarded with a steady succession of anecdotes that
are meant to shock -and do.

As against this, there is also a great deal in ''Cops'' to remind us of the
drudgery of police work, and of the extent to which the police department is a
service organization, open round the clock to deal with every kind of disaster,
and expected to mop up social problems while the rest of us look the other way.
The average police officer, as Mr. Baker points out, spends more time with
victims than with criminals, while if he is smart he will carry ''a pair of
rubber surgical gloves in his car for handling dirt, disease and death. He uses
his gloves much more often than he uses his gun.''

Of course officers sometimes use their guns as well, and a whole section of the
book, entitled ''Deadly Force,'' is devoted to what happens when they do - the
fear (and cops are no strangers to fear in reality, however steely-nerved they
may be in fiction), the mistakes, the fast-flowing adrenalin, the moral
dilemmas. Mr. Baker reports that every single officer he spoke to who had been
involved in a shooting felt some guilt or regret about it, though you are still
left wondering a little about some of the ones he didn't speak to.

In general Mr. Baker recognizes that he had little direct contact with truly bad
officers, since ''lazy, criminal or rogue cops see anyone asking questions as a
danger to them.'' Yet one of the impressive things about his book is the way in
which he redresses the balance by quoting the testimony of other officers who
were willing to talk. From the start, his account strikes me as a balanced one,
but any suggestion of whitewash is finally dispelled by a section about the
abuse of police power called ''The Borderline, the Bad and the Ugly,'' which
more than lives up to its title.

On the other side of the ledger, there are few unqualified heroes in the book.
But there are many examples of individual acts of courage, and many more of
common decency and dependability. There are also illuminating insights into the
emotional wear and tear of being a cop, the anxiety and the ulcers, the erosion
of faith, and also into the frequent contradictions - the fact that most
officers have a fairly simple and rigid general philosophy of life, for
instance, but that at the same time in practice the job tends to make them
masters of compromise, of coping with the situation as they find it.

By and large Mr. Baker respects the men he got to know in the course of writing
''Cops,'' and he leaves you feeling that it is an unsentimental respect, based
on a firm understanding of their strengths and weaknesses. It should also be
said that there is a good deal of black humor in the book, some of it brutish
but most of it quite funny.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mark Baker

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 14, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
PLANS FOR A MILITARY DRAFT ATTRACT NEW ATTENTION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1480 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


The signs are no bigger than a sail on a distant horizon, but with the economy
improving and jobs easier to get in civilian life, service in the armed forces
has begun to look less attractive. Add to that a shrinking pool of men of
military age over the next 10 years, and talk of resuming the draft begins to
rumble.

Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, has introduced
legislation that would bring back military conscription, and Senator Gary Hart,
Democrat of Colorado, has called for national service for young people,
including military service.

The Heritage Foundation, a research organization, recently queried advocates of
a strong military and found them split on whether the volunteer force was
satisfactory.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was President Carter's national security adviser, said
he favored national service in which military service would be an option.
Senator Malcolm Wallop, Republican of Wyoming, said volunteers had taken the
middle class out of the military.

But Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York, and Gen. David
C. Jones, retired Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, favored the volunteer
force.

Among military officers on active duty, Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, commander of
American forces in Europe, has expressed in public what some military officers
say in private: that the United States, like most of its European allies, should
have a draft.

But Reagan Administration officials said the President was adamantly opposed to
a peacetime draft. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, in an interview,
reflected that position, saying, ''There isn't the slightest need for it.''

The Background

Military conscription has been a contentious issue in America since the War of
1812, when Secretary of War James Monroe proposed a draft to enable the nation
to continue the battle against Britain.

Daniel Webster helped defeat the proposal when he rose in the House on Dec. 9,
1814, to deliver a denunciation that is still considered the classic
condemnation of the draft.

''Where is it written in the Constitution,'' Mr. Webster thundered, ''in what
article or section is it contained, that you may take children from their
parents, and parents from their children, and compel them to fight the battles
of any war in which the folly or the wickedness of Government may engage it?''

Both sides used conscription in the Civil War, but the issue was not raised
again until after the United States entered World War I, when the Supreme Court
ruled that being drafted was a ''noble duty'' and not ''involuntary servitude,''
which is prohibited by the 13th Amendment.

The first peacetime draft was enacted in 1940, before the United States entered
World War II, then was dropped for a short time after that conflict. It resumed
in the Cold War days of 1948. Conscription lasted through the conflicts in Korea
and Vietnam.

The volunteer force that began in 1973 had several rough years in the late
1970's, missing recruiting quotas or meeting them only by accepting young men
who were marginally qualified.

After 1980 the military services enjoyed increasingly better years in
recruiting, achieving records in 1984 in the number of high school graduates and
in scores on the Armed Forces Qualification Test for entry. Every indicator of
good discipline was up. Recruiting so far this year has been strong, if not
quite up to the 1984 mark.

But the Census Bureau projects that the number of men who are 18 to 21 years of
age will drop to 6.6 million in 1995, from 7.8 million this year. The armed
forces in 1984 enlisted 328,500 people, of whom slightly less than 10 percent
were women.

For Conscription

Military conscription, say its advocates, is good social policy. They contend
that the white middle class is not bearing its share of the common defense but
is leaving it to members of minority groups who enlist because of economic
discrimination.

The advocates argue that the military helps democracy by mixing people of all
races, economic backgrounds and social classes. Absent a draft, they argue, many
Americans have little knowledge of the armed forces and lack the emotional
connection that would support the forces if they went to war.

Recruiting will become more difficult as the economy continues to improve, with
the services unable to compete in the labor market, advocates assert.

Demographics may force a return to the draft, proponents say, citing the
projected decline in the number of young men of military age. Coupled with that
is a need for more troops for President Reagan's military buildup.

Thus, if the draft is not reinstated, they say, the armed forces will have to
accept less-qualified people. That would mean a drop in military readiness, they
say, because the recruits would be less skilled with weapons made with advanced
technology.

Conscription would make good military policy, the advocates assert. It would be
a sign of resolve to be seen by the Soviet Union or other potential adversaries
and by allies of the United States who question American willingness to help
defend them.

If drafted, men - there is little thought given to drafting women -are paid less
than the competitive wages required now to enlist and retain soldiers, and the
cost of military personnel, which takes 20 percent of the Pentagon budget, could
be cut. Enlistment bonuses and recruiting costs would also be cut, they say.

Against Conscription

The inescapable argument against conscription, say its opponents, is that there
is no way to have a fair draft unless all eligible young men are required to
serve. No advocate of the draft contends that the services could absorb more
than one in every four or five young men.

Opponents argue that lotteries, selection by birthday or any other system is
unfair so long as some are drafted while others are not.

Socially, opponents assert, the military services are not the place to teach
civics, patriotism or duty to country to the white middle class or any other
group. Those virtues, they say, should be taught in the home, school and church.

Opponents contend that a draft would not bring racial balance to the services
unless all services, not just the Army, were required to take draftees. Even
then, a draft would not guarantee that all races would be proportionally
represented unless quotas were set.

In addition, the military services have become perhaps the best equal
opportunity employers in the nation for members of minorities. A draft could
deny a young black man a job he wanted while compelling a young white man to
serve against his will, those who oppose the draft say.

Opponents note that the military services in peacetime have historically been
channels for social gains and are serving as such today for black, Hispanic and
Asian Americans, much as they did for the Irish and other immigrants a century
ago.

As for fostering a link between the public and the armed forces, draft opponents
say that so long as the size of the military services remains as it is now, it
matters little whether young people volunteer or are drafted. The experience is
the same.

Advocates of the volunteer force assert that recruiting will go well so long as
the armed forces pay competitive wages, even as the pool of young men shrinks
into the 1990's and the economy, as expected, continues to improve. Recruiting
may become more difficult but will be manageable, they say.

On military policy, opponents say that the absence of a draft guarantees that a
President would be unable to engage the nation in a venture like Vietnam. The
volunteer force is enough for operations such as the invasion of Grenada, they
say, but a larger conflict would require the vote of Congress to resume
conscription.

Administration officials and some personnel specialists also argue that a draft
would be more costly than the volunteer force, assuming that current levels of
pay remained. The turnover and the cost of training would more than offset cuts
in recruiting costs, they say.

The Outlook

Men are now required to register for the draft within one month after turning
18. No physical examinations are given and no classifications or exemptions are
decided. Women are not required to register.  Both opponents and advocates of
conscription agree that the draft must be resumed if the United States gets into
a conflict like those in Korea or Vietnam. But short of that, public and
Congressional sentiment appears to be against it. Military officers who might
otherwise favor a draft acknowledge that it could revive the divisions and
antimilitary feelings of Vietnam, and thus they do not favor it.

Perhaps most important is the opposition of Mr. Reagan. Reflecting that feeling,
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Lawrence J. Korb, said in an
interview, ''The volunteer force is here to stay.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 15, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI HANDS OVER REMAINS OF DEAD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 14


The Government today turned over what may be the remains of 26 Americans missing
in the Vietnam War. It also indicated acceptance of a proposed visit by senior
United States officials later this month to resolve the entire issue of the
missing in action.

Today an American team took custody of the latest remains and, after a ceremony,
they were flown to Honolulu for analysis. If they can be identified, they would
represent Vietnam's largest single delivery of remains since the end of the war.

The bones given to the American delegation today were packed in 26 numbered
crates. A folded American flag was placed on top of each and they were carried
one by one onto a C-130 transport plane as 18 United States soldiers, sailors
and airmen saluted.

Vietnamese officials also provided unspecified material evidence, including
identification tags, from six other servicemen missing in action, Previously
Vietnam had handed over the remains of 99 missing, but 2,464 American servicemen
and civilians are still unaccounted for in Indochina, more than half of them in
Vietnam. The previous largest single delivery of remains was 22 sets of bones,
in 1977.

On the American visit, for which a date has yet to be set, Col. Vo Dong Giang, a
Deputy Foreign Minister, told reporters, ''I am confident in telling you that
the proposal is acceptable.''

Diplomatic sources in Bangkok, Thailand, said the United States delegation would
include Paul D. Wolfowitz, an Assistant Secretary of State; Richard L. Armitage,
an Assistant Secretary of Defense, and Richard Childress, a member of the
National Security Council staff. Mr. Armitage led a team here in February 1984.

Washington and Hanoi do not have diplomatic relations. Although the visit would
not involve recognition of the Vietnamese Government, diplomatic sources said,
it would have symbolic significance.

Colonel Giang said Vietnam would try to resolve the issue of the missing in the
next two years, exerting ''our greatest efforts to find the remains until we
believe that no matter what efforts, no more remains will be found.''

He expressed the hope that the United States would refrain from hostile
statements so that Vietnam could resolve its security problems and concentrate
on economic development.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of remains of soldiers in coffins with Ameriacn flag draped (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOMECOMING FOR SPRINGSTEEN

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words


It was 3:30, a half-hour to go on the afternoon shift at the Nestle coffee
factory in Freehold, N.J. - Bruce Springsteen's hometown - when one of the men
on the line, a Yugoslav named Nikola Nikolic, started singing. The other workers
picked it up, shouting Mr. Springsteen's anthem over the sound of the machinery:
''Born in the U.S.A. I was born in the U.S.A.'' It was the same song that one of
those workers' wives, a 30-year-old schoolteacher named Pamela Kay, was begging
to hear in the delivery room when she gave birth to her first child this summer.
It was the same song that 18-year-old Brian Kaplan was listening to on his
Walkman as he raced down West End Avenue in Manhattan on his 10-speed bicycle,
headed for his job as a salesman at Tower Records.

It was the same song that United States Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey was
playing on his press secretary's tape recorder on the air shuttle from
Washington to New York.

Bruce Springsteen's music can be heard all over America this summer. But it is
rooted in New Jersey, along the highways, in the factories, on the boardwalks of
faded seaside resort towns. And this Sunday night, the Jersey boy who grew up to
become rock's reigning superstar and is now on a nine-week concert tour, comes
home.

''The Boss,'' as he is known to his fans, opens a six-night stand at Giants
Stadium at the Meadowlands that sold out almost immediately, breaking all
records for entertainment events in the New York metropolitan area. The entire
New York Yankees team wanted to go, according to a stadium spokesman, and even
they couldn't get tickets.

As anticipation of the event builds, people are talking about Mr. Springsteen
and what his songs mean to them in extraordinarily adulatory tones, as if the
wild popularity he is now enjoying would last forever.

Mark Williams, a 30-year-old New Jersey expatriate, who like many others sees
his life as being intertwined with the music of Bruce Springsteen, will be 3,000
miles away, in Portland, Ore., where he is a lawyer. But he will be there in
spirit when the crowd erupts into ''Born in the U.S.A.,'' Mr. Springsteen's ode
to an unemployed Vietnam veteran. ''It's rock 'n' roll at its best,'' he said.
''Pure bitterness but with a hint that everything can be all right.''

''Bruce is a working man,'' Jimmy Kay, a 30-year-old label operator at the
Nestle factory, was saying on a break the other day. ''He doesn't forget. He's
regular people.''

Mr. Kay still can't get over his wife Pamela's imploring delivery-room request
for ''Born in the U.S.A.'' ''She was yelling at me, 'This is for my child! I
want that song!' '' he said, grinning.

Mr. Kay and a lot of his buddies on the line say they could be characters out of
Mr. Springsteen's songs, working the same assembly lines, driving the same New
Jersey roads, strolling the same boardwalks on summer nights.

One of his co-workers, David Ketcham, who graduated from Freehold High School in
1977, 10 years after Mr. Springsteen, says he counts on Bruce's music to get him
through the days. ''It gives you energy,'' he said. ''I play softball for
Freeman's Funeral Home, and before I go out there, I've got to hear one or two
of his songs. Every morning WNEW used to play a Springsteen song between 7 and
8. I always sat in the parking lot and waited for that song before I went in to
work.''

The Nestle factory is on Jerseyville Avenue in Freehold, less than a mile from
the weatherbeaten, gray, two-story house where Mr. Springsteen grew up poor, his
mother a secretary, his father drifting from job to job.

About 50 miles south of Manhattan and 15 miles from the Jersey shore, Freehold
is a working-class town of 10,000 people governed by Springsteen fans. Four of
the members of the Town Council went to high school with him. So did the Mayor,
Mike Wilson, who sang in a rival band, the Legends.

''I didn't have the talent Bruce did,'' said the 35-year-old Mayor, who went on
from rock to a career in real estate. ''I just enjoyed it while I could.''

It is considered a point of honor to claim some sort of connection with the
town's most famous ex-resident, who was known years ago as a shy, scruffy kid
whose life was his guitar and rock 'n' roll.

''I had a date with the same girl Bruce went out with all through high school,''
Glenn Silvert of Silvert's furniture store said. ''She was real cute.''

In order to buy tickets to Mr. Springsteen's Meadowlands concert, Mr. Silvert
waited outside the local Drug Fair, where they were being sold, from 8 P.M. all
through the night until 2 P.M. the next day.

''He's the most exciting person I've ever seen,'' said Mr. Silvert, who is
married and has two children. ''Nothing else matters when you're at one of his
concerts. You're euphoric. You're on a high for four months afterward.''

For years New Jerseyans had to apologize to outsiders for their home state,
conjuring as it did images of mobsters and chemical plants and the punch lines
to 1,000 jokes. But Mr. Springsteen, who still lives in New Jersey and regularly
visits his old haunts, like Asbury Park, has brought pride and honor to the
once-maligned state.

One of his biggest and most prominent New Jersey fans is Senator Bradley, who
keeps a Springsteen file in his Washington office, right between the file on
South Africa and the one labeled ''Strategic Petroleum Reserves.''

In an as-yet-unpublished two-page ode to Mr. Springsteen, Mr. Bradley recalled
the end of the 1980 concert in Madison Square Garden, when Mr. Springsteen
shouted, ''Yeah, O.K., New York!''

Mr. Bradley wrote: ''Who is 'New York?' It's all those people who make cheap
jokes about New Jersey and the very things that Bruce Springsteen poetizes. So
when he turns a slur on New Jersey into a lyric, we've all made it.''

His true fans are proud to say that they knew Bruce Springsteen before America
discovered him, when he played for almost nothing in bars like the Stone Pony, a
block from the boardwalk in Asbury Park.

''I've been going to see Springsteen since 1972,'' said 41-year-old Paul
Wolcott, who is assistant press secretary to New Jersey's Governor Kean. ''I've
seen him at the Pony. I've seen him at Mrs. Jay's. I've even shared the men's
room with him.''

Mark Williams, who grew up in Highland Park, N.J., first heard Bruce Springsteen
in concert 12 years ago at Rutgers University. Seven years later, Mr.
Springsteen came out with ''Cadillac Ranch.'' Mr. Williams went out and bought a
1962 sky-blue Cadillac with money he had saved from his bakery job in Eugene,
Ore.

''I really liked Cadillacs and the guy across the street had one for sale for
$200,'' he said. ''The song just iced it.''

Today, Mr. Williams drives a 1979 Pinto and works as a legal-aid lawyer in
Portland. But he still lives by Mr. Springsteen's music, and before he goes into
the courtroom, he blasts ''Born in the U.S.A.'' on his tape player. ''It works
up a good working-class anger,'' he said.

With all the attention being focused on Mr. Springsteen's music this summer, Mr.
Williams warns against over-analyzing its appeal. ''It's rock 'n' roll,'' he
said. ''It's just rock 'n' roll.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of fans

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'YEAR OF DRAGON,' CIMINO IN CHINATOWN

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


MICHAEL CIMINO has a distinctive way of making things look and sound, but he
could never be accused of having a style. If style is a director's way of
shaping and intensifying his audience's perceptions, then what Mr. Cimino has
amounts to its very antithesis. In ''Year of the Dragon,'' a busy and elaborate
film that manages to be inordinately messy, his tactics are a constant
distraction, dissipating the viewer's interest at every turn. That, even more
than excess, was the fundamental problem with ''Heaven's Gate,'' and it is still
every bit as egregious. It is no pleasure to report that Mr. Cimino's reputation
as the man who best exemplifies what can go wrong with big-ego, big-budget film
making remains unchallenged.

''Year of the Dragon,'' which opens today at Loews Astor Plaza and other
theaters, is considerably shorter than ''Heaven's Gate,'' and it is violent
enough to have more momentum. These are the improvements, and they stand alone.
Otherwise, ''Year of the Dragon'' gives the impression that some other crowded,
ornate film about New York's Chinatown has been tossed into the air and
shattered, only to have its pieces rearranged in a completely illogical way. The
hair of the leading man, Mickey Rourke, changes color from scene to scene. The
leading lady begins one sequence by stepping out of the shower to answer her
apartment door without turning the water off, and has a lengthy conversation
with her visitor, during which the water somehow stops running.

Mr. Rourke, as a police captain who is a Vietnam veteran, sometimes speaks of
the Chinese and the Vietnamese as though they were interchangeable. Mr. Cimino's
idea of embroidering the captain's character is to decorate his bedroom with a
crucifix and a statue of John Wayne.

''Year of the Dragon,'' based on a much more fast-paced and informative novel by
Robert Daley, tells what happens when this captain is assigned to Chinatown and
charged with controlling the violence of the youth gangs there. He finds that
his adversary is a handsome young businessman (played by John Lone, who had the
title role in ''Iceman'') who also doubles as an underworld kingpin.

Though Mr. Cimino shepherds the whole movie toward a closing confrontation
between these rivals, he typically deflates the ending by sapping the impact of
their earlier encounters. They never seem to meet alone, since most of their
talks take place in settings that are either overpopulated or full of
attention-getting props. The conversations they do have are interrupted by
constant and maladroit editing; indeed, the editing is so partial to
uninteresting background detail and irrelevant reaction shots that it is the
film's single worst feature. At times, Mr. Cimino further heightens his tendency
to lose the actors in a larger tapestry by shooting them with a wide-angle lens.

As for the larger tapestry here, Chinatown was built in North Carolina for the
film, and it has been recreated down to the last noodle. Production notes
explain that close attention was paid to such details as the grading of street
surfaces and the installation of pipes to vent steam from the manhole covers.
However, the effect is that of a colossal blur, since Mr. Cimino has so little
facility for focusing the attention on anything in particular. Even worse, all
this meticulousness becomes crushingly literal. Without any gift for simplicity
or shorthand, the director must spell out absolutely everything. To show that
someone is a general, he must - and does, in one particularly overscaled
sequence here - surround him with an entire army.

The actors fare particularly badly under such circumstances. Mr. Rourke, who
almost always generates a relaxed, knowing magnetism, is entirely lost in the
underwritten role of a middle-aged policeman. He must also grapple with the
flat-footed, heavily scatological dialogue that seems just as out of place here
as it did in ''Heaven's Gate.'' (The screenplay is by the director and Oliver
Stone.) Mr. Rourke is never able to give much conviction to the lines that have
him frequently comparing Chinatown's gangland troubles to the Vietnam War; this,
like the motif of gang rape here and in ''Heaven's Gate,'' appears to have more
to do with some larger vision of Mr. Cimino's than with the story at hand.

Still, Mr. Rourke manages to be more ingratiating and interesting than Ariane,
the model who plays an upscale young newscaster with whom he has an affair. She
is so ineffectual a part of the film's framework that she is even upstaged, in a
nude scene, by a glimpse of the Brooklyn Bridge.

''Year of the Dragon'' is so lacking in feeling, reason and narrative continuity
that it furthers the impression left by ''Heaven's Gate,'' and even by much of
''The Deer Hunter,'' that Mr. Cimino's insistence on working on a vast and
extravagant scale is not matched by an ability to work articulately on any
other. Inscrutable Blur YEAR OF THE DRAGON, directed by Michael Cimino;
screenplay by Oliver Stone and Mr. Cimino, based on the novel by Robert Daley;
photographed by Alex Thomson; edited by Francoise Bonnot; music by David
Mansfield; produced by Dino De Laurentiis; released by MGM/ UA Entertainment
Company. At Loews Astor Plaza, 44th Street west of Broadway; Loews Orpheum,
Third Avenue at 86th Street; Loews 34th Street Showplace, 238 East 34th Street,
and other theaters. Running time: 126 minutes. This film is rated R. Stanley
WhiteMickey Rourke Joey TaiJohn Lone Tracy TzuAriane Angelo RizzoLeonard Termo
Louis BukowskiRay Barry Connie WhiteCaroline Kava William McKennaEddie Jones
Ronnie ChangJoey Chin Harry YungVictor Wong Milton BinK. Dock Yip Fred HungPao
Han Lin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mickey Rourke

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Nan Robertson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


THE trial of Dan White, who killed Mayor George R. Moscone of San Francisco and
Supervisor Harvey Milk - the city's first avowed homosexual to hold high public
office - is coming to Broadway. That is to say, Emily Mann's play about that
riveting and polarizing 1979 trial, ''Execution of Justice,'' is scheduled to
start rehearsals Jan. 7 and begin previews early in February at a theater still
to be named.

Miss Mann calls it ''theater of testimony'' - not quite a strict documentary
recording or a stage equivalent of a television dramatization, but something in
between, adapted from courtroom transcripts and interviews. The play earned
critical praise and packed houses at Washington's Arena Stage this spring.

''It breaks down the naturalistic courtroom walls and allows a whole city and
society to give testimony,'' the 33-year-old playwright said. ''We in the
audience become the judges of the entire event.''

The Broadway producing team so far includes Lester Osterman and his wife,
Marjorie, and Mortimer Kaplan, a former Internal Revenue Service commissioner
now practicing law in Washington. Two of Mr. Osterman's productions won Tony
Awards for best play in the 1970's - ''Da'' and ''The Shadow Box,'' which also
won a Pulitzer Prize. His revival of O'Neill's ''Moon for the Misbegotten'' (the
unforgettable Jason Robards-Colleen Dewhurst version) won a special Tony in
1974.

Miss Mann wrote and directed ''Still Life,'' about the aftermath of the Vietnam
War, in a 1981 Off Broadway production that won Obies.

As in Washington, the director will be Douglas C. Wager and the set designer,
Ming Cho Lee.

The Arena, of course, is a theater-in-the-square and the Broadway house will
have a proscenium stage. A huge cube also hung over the actors in Washington on
which video and film images, some from the documentary ''The Times of Harvey
Milk,'' were projected on four sides. One problem facing Mr. Lee in the Broadway
production is whether to use a one- or two-sided screen.

Dan White, a police officer and fireman before serving as a San Francisco
Supervisor, was convicted in May 1979 by a jury of seven women and five men of
voluntary manslaughter in both killings and sentenced to a maximum seven years
and eight months in prison. The prosecution had asked for the death sentence on
a first-degree murder charge. Mr. White was released from prison on parole in
January 1984 after serving five years and one month of his sentence. He became a
free man last January.

Talk about audience participation! It's as much fun as voting whether to give
performers ''the hook'' at the Apollo Theater. But this time, the venue is the
Delacorte Theater in Central Park and the decisions are more complicated. Every
night, audiences are designing a different ending for ''The Mystery of Edwin
Drood,'' because Charles Dickens died before finishing the novel that suggested
this musical version by Rupert Holmes.

The audience is asked to make three decisions: Who is the murderer? (Seven
candidates.) Who is the person disguised as Dick Datchery? (Five possibilities.)
Which lovers are united at the end? (Three female and seven male candidates.)
The cast then completes the play according to the audience's wishes, with the
permutations already written by Mr. Holmes.

Here is how the votes have gone in the first week of preview performances. The
audiences voted on three evenings that Helena Landless, played by Jana
Schneider, was the murderer. Twice they picked the Rev. Mr. Crisparkle,
portrayed by Larry Shue. And once each they chose Princess Puffer, played by
Cleo Laine, or Rosa Bud, depicted by Patti Cohenour.

Who is Dick Datchery? Audiences chose Bazzard, played by Joe Grifasi, three
times, and Helena and Rosa twice each. Who shall be the united lovers? Six times
it was Princess Puffer and once Helena among the women; three times it was
Bazzard, twice it was Durdles, played by Jerome Dempsey; and once each Reverend
Crisparkle or Deputy, portrayed by Don Kehr.

Confused? But judging by the enthusiasm at the theater, the audience is having a
wonderful time playing author. And the possibilities are by no means exhausted.

Previews began Aug. 4. The official opening is Aug. 22, with the run scheduled
through Sept. 1.

Dressed in a ratty old bathrobe, her head bristling with pink curlers, Kathy
Bates looks as seductive as a tank as she shuffles onstage in Sam Shepard's
''Curse of the Starving Class.''

In Marsha Norman's '' 'night, Mother,'' which won her a Tony nomination in 1983,
Miss Bates was the lumpish, shy, dull-eyed daughter who announces to her mother
that she is going to kill herself as the evening begins.

By now, critics feel that at the age of 37, she has become one of the finest
character actresses in America. No matter: She wants to change her image. ''It's
not that I don't want to do these roles - it's just that I don't want to limit
myself,'' she says.

She is dieting. She has stopped drinking and smoking. She is exercising. She
found herself ''skipping like a goat across the mountains, with headphones on my
ears'' this summer at Robert Redford's Sundance Institute in Utah. She is moving
this fall from New York to California, which has beautiful bodies on its brain.

Miss Bates says with a sigh that she has been playing mothers and grandmothers
and ''all the wheelchair and bedridden parts like the old ladies in 'Night Must
Fall' and 'Sorry, Wrong Number' '' ever since White Station High School in
Memphis.

''The ones with any talent had to do those parts,'' she said. ''The sweet and
pretty roles went to other girls.''

Then, at Sundance this summer, she got ''the first chance I've ever had to play
a love interest -and it was wonderful,'' she said. ''Most of the roles I'm asked
to play have no sexuality at all.'' She was in a new play called ''Deadfall''
opposite J. T. Walsh and ''I got to do a lot of hot scenes,'' said the actress,
her eyes sparkling. ''I'd like to do more of that.''

Circle in the Square is 35. It will open its 35th season (the 14th uptown) Oct.
10 with ''The Marriage of Figaro,'' the classic comedy by Beaumarchais,
translated and adapted by Richard Nelson. Anthony Heald, who has convulsed
audiences in roles ranging from the deranged clerk in Shaw's ''Misalliance'' to
the wildly imaginative visitor in Larry Shue's ''Foreigner,'' will head the cast
as Figaro. Dana Ivey will be the Countess and Caitlin Clarke, Cherubino. Andrei
Serban is directing the new adaptation in its New York premiere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 17, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI TO END EFFORT TO SEAT ITS CAMBODIAN ALLY AT U.N.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 16


Vietnam's Foreign Minister said today that Hanoi would not fight to seat the
Phnom Penh Government at the United Nations General Assembly this year. For more
than five years, Hanoi has been trying to gain United Nations recognition for
Phnom Penh.

''It is useless,'' the Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told journalists after
a two-day meeting here of the Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

In another development, the Foreign Minister said he expected high-level talks
to take place in Hanoi with United States officials by the end of the month. Mr.
Thach said he had proposed that the meeting begin on Aug. 28. [In Washington,
the State Department announced that a delegation would travel to Hanoi for talks
on Aug. 28-29 and that the meeting would focus ''exclusively'' on the issue of
Americans missing in action in Indochina.] No U.S.-Vietnam Diplomatic Ties The
United States lists 2,464 Americans as missing in Indochina, with more than
1,300 of them in Vietnam.

Washington does not have diplomatic relations with Hanoi. The Reagan
Administration has made improved ties contingent on resolution of the M.I.A.
issue and withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.

Vietnam supports the Government of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh, which it installed
in 1979 after invading Cambodia. Three Cambodian groups - the Khmer Rouge, the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front and a group that supports a former
Cambodian leader, Prince Norodom Sihanouk -are fighting the Vietnamese and
support a coalition government led by Prince Sihanouk.

It is the coalition that is recognized by the United Nations.

Among the officials of the Khmer Rouge is Pol Pot, who was the leader of
Cambodia until he was ousted by the Vietnamese. At least a million Cambodians
are believed to have been killed by the Khmer Rouge while Pol Pot was in power.

After saying that it was useless to continue fighting for Cambodia's seat, Mr.
Thach added: ''Pol Pot is at the U.N. This will be a heavy burden for the
prestige of the United Nations.''

Driven Out of Cambodia

Envoys from the guerrilla coalition have already fanned out through the third
world to campaign for votes to hold their seat.

The coalition was driven from its bases inside Cambodia last year, and diplomats
in Asia have suggested that the coalition will be hard pressed to defend its
seat because of that loss.

Other Issues Discussed

A communique said that these were among the other subjects the Foreign Ministers
discussed:

* Vietnam will actively try to revive talks with China on the resumption of
normal, friendly relations between the two countries.

* Hanoi will withdraw all its troops from Cambodia by 1990 but will retain the
right to ''take appropriate measures'' if any anti-Phnom Penh factions take
advantage of the withdrawal. Western analysts put the number of Vietnamese
troops in Cambodia at more than 150,000.

* The three Indochinese Communist countries expressed willingness to talk with
Thailand about a nonaggression treaty. Thailand has permitted anti-Phnom Penh
rebels to use its territory for support bases.

Earlier in the day, the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, said at a news
conference after the two-day meeting that his Government would be prepared to
begin internationally supervised talks with the guerrilla coalition battling
Phnom Penh if those talks were limited to Cambodians.

The Prime Minister said talks to end the war could begin immediately if the two
non-Communist factions in the guerrilla coalition broke away from the Khmer
Rouge, the third faction.

The leaders of the Khmer Rouge, which is the largest of the groups with some
30,000 guerrillas, are Pol Pot, Ieng Sary and Khieu Samphan. Son Sann, the
former Cambodian Prime Minister, leads the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front, a group that is thought to have 15,000 to 20,000 guerrillas. Prince
Sihanouk heads the third force, with about 5,000 rebels.

''If Sihanouk and Son Sann are ready for a dialogue tomorrow,'' said Mr. Hun
Sen, who is also Foreign Minister, ''then I am ready the day after tomorrow to
go to a convenient place to talk with them.'' ----U.S. Announces Visit
WASHINGTON, Aug. 16 (UPI) - A United States delegation will visit Hanoi later
this month to discuss Americans missing in action in Indochina from the Vietnam
War, the State Department announced today.

The visit was announced by a State Department spokesman, Charles Redman, who
said the Vietnamese Government informed American officials in Bangkok today
''that they accept our proposal for a P.O.W.-M.I.A. delegation in Hanoi and they
have proposed the delegation visit Aug. 28 and 29.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 17, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, AUGUST 17, 1985

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words




International

Prospects for peaceful change in South Africa were ''virtually nil,'' Bishop
Desmond M. Tutu said in response to President P. W. Botha's speech Thursday. He
said the nation was ''on the brink of a catastrophe, in reaction to what he,
many other blacks and other opponents of Pretoria's racial poliicies view as a
dismaying lack of significant policy changes in Mr. Botha'a address in Durban.
[Page 1, Column 6.]

Mr. Botha's speech disappointed Reagan Administration officials because of its
lack of major concessions to South Africa's black majority. But they cited
several considerations that contributed to the restrained United States
response. [4:1.]

Feeding bread to pigs cost a Soviet collective farm chairman his job and
membership in the Communist Party. Such carelessness with bread is almost
sacrilege in the Soviet Union, where in the phrases of songs and poems often
heard, bread is gold, the motherland, the hard work of the masses, life itself.
[1:4.]

Hanoi is giving up its fight to seat the Phnom Penh Government at the United
Nations General Assembly. At a meeting in Phnom Penh of the Foreign Ministers of
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, Vietnam's Foreign Minister said Hanoi would not
fight for the seat this year. For more than five years Hanoi has been trying to
gain United Nations recognition for Phnom Penh. [3:5.]

Boeing advised 70 airlines using the 747 that they might want to inspect the
tail section of the plane. Boeing's advice followed the crash of a Japan Air
Lines 747 in Japan Monday. Officials of four of the 12 American airlines that
operate 747's said they had begun inspections on their own. [3:1.]

National

Homebuilding fell a sharp 2.4 percent in July, the Commerce Department reported.
The drop in this important economic indicator, added to mounting evidence that
the economy is not rebounding from the disappointing first six months of this
year. The steep decline from June surprised many analysts. The steady recent
fall in interest rates had been expected to buoy the housing sector. [1:3.]

Huge corn crops will be reaped this year, and E. W. Dixon, of Plattsburg, Mo.,
is looking forward to one of the best crops he has ever produced because he
signed up last spring for a Federal program that helps to offset a slump in
prices. But the size of the national crop is dismaying news for Government
policy-makers, who must increase farm price supports to keep pace with the crop.
[1:1.]

Alarms at Union Carbide plants must be set off by managers at the first hint of
a release of toxic material and ''apologize later'' if the evacuation proves
unnecessary, the company's top executive said. In announcing the new procedure,
Warren M. Anderson said that ''life has changed'' in the chemistry industry,
since the disaster that killed 2,000 people in Bhopal, India, last December.
[6:1.]

Allegations that V.A. employees took money and gifts worth as much as $50,000 or
more from Smith Kline & French Laboratories Ltd. are being investigated by the
Veterans Administration, according to sources close to the inquiry. [6:1.]

The Army is aiding family problems with programs such as day-care centers for
abused children at Fort Ord, Calif., and other military bases. Officers say that
child abuse is only one of the products of the strains of Army life, that have
also led to alcoholism and divorce. [8:1.]

Metropolitan

John J. McLaughlin resigned as president of the New York City Health and
Hospitals Corporation after disclosing he was under criminal investigation by
the Manhattan District Attorney. A spokesman for the District Attorney would not
say what the inquiry was about, but Thomas J. Puccio, Mr. McLaughlin's lawyer,
said he believed that it ''does not involve Mr. McLaughlin's position in city
government.'' [1:2.]

More electricity is available to the utilities serving lower Manhattan and North
Jersey despite the power blackouts there Thursday than they are likely to need
this summer, officials of the utilities said. System-wide blackouts are not
likely they said, explaining that, even if parts of the distribution system
failed to handle the load, there was enough generating capacity and enough
transmission lines to provide power where it was needed. But the power
disruptions that occurred Thursday could become more frequent, they said. [1:1.]

20,000 employees got the day off because major Federal and city office buildings
in lower Manhattan had remained closed following the power shortages Thursday.
Repair work on the cables continued. [27:4.]

Donations to the Republican Party by Nassau County government employees were not
viewed as coerced by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, according to testimony he gave
in a suit in Federal District Court in Uniondale, L.I. The Republican Senator,
who is a former supervisor of the Town of Hempstead, said, however, that ''in
hindsight, I suppose there were those who probably felt there was some undue
force to contribute.'' The class-action suit was brought by employees of Nassau
County who say they were required to contribute 1 percent of their salaries to
the party. [25:6.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AIDES SEE NO POSSIBLILITY OF U.S. ACCORD WITH SANDINISTAS

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1947 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


Reagan Administration officials involved in Central American policy say United
States differences with Nicaragua cannot be resolved as long as the Sandinistas
remain in power, and some indicate they favor the overthrow of the Sandinista
leadership.

Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser, said in
response to a query that it was ''absolutely not'' the policy of the United
States to overthrow the Sandinistas. But other officials, including some
assigned to oversee and foster activities of anti-Sandinista rebels, said they
saw no way to satisfy the concerns of the United States, the rebels and other
Central American nations with the Sandinistas remaining in power.

In interviews in recent days, these officials described United States backing
for the rebels in such terms as a chance to ''win one for Reagan'' and to ''push
Communism out of one country'' or as a test case in what they called the global
confrontation with the Soviet Union. All said they did not advocate using
American troops for the purpose.

''The ultimate objective is to assure a democratic outcome in Nicaragua,'' said
an Administration official who works closely with the rebels. ''This goes beyond
Nicaragua. If these people can stand up and throw off Communism, it goes beyond
Managua. It goes to the gut of our national interest.

''The way to go after the Soviet Union is through the colonies,'' the official
said. ''We have to find ways to help democratic resistance movements without
sending troops.''

Force an 'Eventual Option'

There is nothing specifically on record from either President Reagan or
Secretary of State George P. Shultz that calls outright for the overthrow of the
Sandinistas. The President came close last February when he said that his goal
was to ''remove'' the ''present structure'' in Nicaragua and that he wanted the
Sandinistas to ''say uncle.''

In May, Mr. Reagan sent a classified report to Congress in which he said the use
of United States military forces in Nicaragua ''must realistically be recognized
as an eventual option, given our stakes in the region, if other policy options
fail.''

Elliott Abrams, the new Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs,
said the Administration felt the Sandinistas would never abide by a commitment
not to support insurgencies in neighboring countries. He said the only way to
satisfy the security concerns of the United States was with what he called a
democratic government in Nicaragua.

Mr. McFarlane, in an interview Wednesday, said American policies ''remain to
support the freedom fighters and in parallel to work for a diplomatic
solution.''

But in recent months diplomatic efforts have encountered many roadblocks. The
Central American peace efforts of the so-called Contadora countries came to a
standstill in June when Nicaragua demanded that the participants take up the
issue of Washington's support for the anti-Sandinista forces. The United States
refused last month to resume talks with the Sandinistas at Manzanillo, Mexico.

Meanwhile, the Administration's emphasis on support of the rebels, known widely
by the Spanish term contras, has grown steadily.

Officials hedged their comments about whether and when the contras might be able
to defeat the Sandinista army, estimated at 64,000 men including active
reservists. Some said the rebels could not win an outright victory, but would
have to rely on a combination of other factors, including internal
dissatisfaction, to bring about the collapse of the regime.

''There is not much validity to the rationale for a specific timetable,'' said
one man who has been a key Central America policymaker. ''Nobody thinks about
how long it will take to overthrow the Sandinista Front.''

Gen. Paul F. Gorman, former commander of the Panama-based United States Southern
Command, said in February in testimony to a Congressional committee just before
finishing his assignment in Panama that the rebels were incapable of
overthrowing the Sandinistas ''in the foreseeable future.''

Rebels Get New Help

The rebels have gone on the offensive in recent weeks, however, after an
infusion of equipment and supplies made possible by as much as $25 million in
private and foreign donations, plus the expectation of $27 million in
nonmilitary aid from the United States Government.

They have penetrated deeper into Nicaragua than ever before. The main group,
known as the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, has nearly doubled in size to about
16,000 in the last year, and its leaders predict it will double again in the
coming year.

Officials said the Administration had gone through constant internal debate in
recent years about whether to try to work out a ''Yugoslavia'' situation in
Nicaragua, meaning an understanding that the Sandinistas would remain in power
in exchange for not promoting insurgencies elsewhere or being a military threat
to their neighbors.

''We go around 180 degrees on the subject all the time,'' said one participant
in the debate, ''but we always come out thinking that we'd be kidding ourselves
if we thought we could solve our problems that way. One of the articles of faith
in the Administration is that there cannot be a Yugoslavia solution. One reason
is these guys are self-described revolutionaries.''

Another Cuba, Another Vietnam

The parameters that have evolved for the policy, he said, are to avoid ''another
Cuba'' in this hemisphere and ''another Vietnam,'' that is, having American
troops bogged down abroad. ''Those parameters are like a chute,'' he said, ''and
you play for breaks as you go through. If the Sandinistas collapse internally,
so be it.''

The conceptual limits have developed over the last couple of years, he said, as
the majority of members of Congress have become more critical of the
Sandinistas. This has made it politically possible for the Administration to
drop the argument that it was supporting the Nicaraguan rebels as a means of
interfering with the supplying of the guerrillas fighting the Washington-backed
Government in El Salvador.

Some Administration officials maintained that a negotiated settlement of the
conflict in Nicaragua might be possible if it was acceptable to the Nicaraguan
rebels and to the other Central American nations. But anything acceptable to
those groups and governments, they said, would require so many changes in the
Sandinistas' internal and external policies that the Sandinista Front would no
longer be the same organization it is today.

They said any negotiated settlement would have to be a multilateral agreement,
for instance through the Contadora talks, involving the Nicaraguan opposition,
armed and unarmed, as well as the other Central American countries. They
virtually ruled out any possibility of reaching a bilateral peace agreement with
Nicaragua.

'Approximation' Is Acceptable

''We ought never to think a negotiated solution is not possible,'' one official
said. ''We accept the fact that any agreement that all those parties would agree
to would be an approximation of what we would want. It is not going to be
radically different. Honduras, for example, would want some agreement on the
balance of arms with Nicaragua. That's their main concern. ''It's true that you
could solve the security issue without internal reconciliation, but what do you
do then about 20,000 contras in Honduras?''

The Sandinista leadership has proposed agreements with individual Central
American governments in recent months that would address some of the concerns of
each of them, asking, in turn, that the other country abandon or soften its
demand for internal changes in Nicaragua.

The strongest Sandinista offer was made to El Salvador informally in April.
Salvadoran officials said that the Sandinistas had sent a mid-level official to
El Salvador, and that he had said the Sandinista Front was willing to take
several steps. They included expelling from Managua the leadership of the
Salvadoran guerrilla organization, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation
Front, other unspecified actions to halt or reduce support for the Salvadoran
rebels and resettling permanently into Nicaragua a large number of pro-guerrilla
Salvadoran refugees now in Honduras.

Contadora Is Emphasized

The vehicle through which El Salvador and other Central American nations would
be expected by the Sandinistas to extend tacit acceptance to their Government is
the proposed Contadora agreement, named for the Panamanian island on which
discussions began among Mexico, Venezuela, Panama and Colombia. In all of the
draft agreements that have so far emerged from the discussions, ''internal
reconciliation'' has been a key element.

American officials said the Sandinista proposal to the Salvadorans was a
variation on an offer Managua made to Washington after United States troops
landed in Grenada in October 1983.

''I don't think these bilateral deals will sell to Central America,'' Mr. Abrams
said, ''basically because the Central Americans understand that the Sandinistas
are Communists and that such agreements are lies and will be used to destroy the
contras. After that, the Sandinista Front would be back at its historical
mission of subverting these countries.''

He and other Administration officials said the primary reason Nicaragua's
neighbors might consider such arrangements is not so much that they really want
to make separate agreements with the Sandinistas but that they fear the United
States will abandon the anti-Sandinista cause at some point and leave them out
on the limb.

A Message to Other Nations

The main reason for the economic embargo imposed against Nicaragua in May,
according to an American source who took part in the decision, was to send a
message to El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica, and, to a lesser extent,
Guatemala, telling them that the United States was not abandoning the issue. It
was always recognized, he said, that the economic impact amounted to ''just a
few bananas.''

He added, ''They want constant reassurance that we are with them.''

High-level Administration officials who analyze statements on Nicaragua by the
President said that despite his lack of a clear public stance, they are struck
by the fact that he ''keeps coming back to internal democratization and national
reconciliation.''

They interpret that to mean that the Sandinistas must go and that the United
States cannot settle for anything like a ''Yugoslavia solution.'' Several
officials pointed out that those who favored exploring such an option have
either left the Administration or fallen silent. Secretary of State Shultz is
counted among the silent.

Trust Is Ruled Out

''I think there is interagency agreement on Nicaragua policy now,'' a senior
official said. ''The prevailing view in the Administration is that you cannot
negotiate a deal with Communists that is based on good will or trust. You could
negotiate only on the basis of a correlation of forces.''

Mr. Abrams asked: ''Why do we insist on internal reconciliation? Because the
only guarantee that security agreements that are made will stick is internal
democracy.

''The view that the democracy issue has been put on the table in order to trade
it off is false,'' he added. ''It is preposterous to think we could sign a deal
with the Sandinistas to meet our foreign policy concerns and expect it to be
kept.

''If, say, three months after such an agreement, the contras were disbanded, the
guerrillas would begin to reinfiltrate into El Salvador within a month. What
would we do about it then? Send in marines? One thing this Administration agrees
on is that we are not going to sign a phony agreement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert C. McFarlane (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN - ROCK'S POPULAR POPULIST

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1752 words


A quarter of a million people will hear Bruce Springsteen perform in the
six-night stand that he starts tonight at Giants Stadium in New Jersey. If past
tours are a guide, Mr. Springsteen will hear them, too, because Mr.
Springsteen's fans sing along with every song in his three-hour-plus concerts -
not just choruses, but every word. They care, passionately, about what his
lyrics say.

Between the chiming, stomping rock of Mr. Springsteen's E Street Band and his
own marathon, full-tilt performances, his concerts deliver extraordinary
entertainment. Yet what gave Mr. Springsteen a tenacious cult following from the
start and currently makes him the star of 1985 - not even the Jacksons featuring
Michael Jackson played four nights at Giants Stadium -are the stories his songs
tell. Like every rock megastar, he has crystallized something millions of people
are thinking about.

The songs on Mr. Springsteen's latest and hugely popular album, ''Born in the
U.S.A.'' are about laid-off workers and towns shutting down. The album suggests
that many Americans in and out of the working class are uncertain and
disillusioned. While Mr. Springsteen's own career has been on a fairly steady
climb for a decade, the massive popularity of ''Born in the U.S.A.'' stems from
the album's quality, a well-planned marketing effort and a larger public's
willingness to pay attention. He has clearly struck a nerve.

''Born in the U.S.A.,'' Mr. Springsteen's seventh album, released in 1984, has
sold 7.5 million copies in the United States alone - more than twice as many as
''Born to Run,'' the 1975 album that first established Mr. Springsteen
nationwide. He has a dedicated following after more than a dozen years on the
road; his least popular LP, the bleak ''Nebraska,'' has sold 775,000 copies. But
''Born in the U.S.A.'' signals the onset of what might be called Brucemania, the
kind of recognition that keeps expanding on sheer momentum, with continuing
record sales and fanatical efforts to obtain concert tickets. The album has
stayed in the Top 10 for more than a year, and five hit singles have been drawn
from its 12 songs, with a distinct possibility of more to come. The album has
also made Mr. Springsteen known beyond the rock audience. In his 1984
re-election campaign, President Reagan invoked Mr. Springsteen during a New
Jersey campaign speech, although he was careful not to claim that Mr.
Springsteen supported him. Despite the title of ''Born in the U.S.A.'' and its
all-American cover - a red-white-and-blue color scheme and Mr. Springsteen
sporting a cowboy belt and a baseball cap - its lyrics are by no means
jingoistic.

In the title song of ''Born to Run,'' Mr. Springsteen hopped on a motorcycle
with his sweetheart and declared, ''We're pulling out of here to win.'' Winning
hasn't figured much in his songs since then. ''Born in the U.S.A.'' opens with a
thunderclap of drums, a fanfare of synthesizer and a shout, ''Born in the
U.S.A.!'' But that shout, it becomes clear, is one of despair rather than
exultation. The song's narrator is a Vietnam veteran with no job and little
hope: ''Come back home to the refinery hiring man says son if it was up to me
went down to see my V.A. man he said son don't you understand now.''* Song after
song, using the pared-down narrative style Mr. Springsteen turned to in the late
1970's, is set in the unhappy towns of blue-collar, smokestack America. In fact
the closing song, ''My Hometown,'' sketches the decline of a factory town during
a single generation. ''Now Main Street's white-washed windows and vacant stores
seems like there ain't nobody wants to come down here no more They're closing
down the textile mill across the railroad tracks Foreman says these jobs are
going boys and they ain't coming back to your hometown.''

The characters Mr. Springsteen invents for ''Born in the U.S.A.'' are on the
losing end of economic change; they are working-class victims of forces they
can't even imagine controlling.

Unemployment is a constant. In ''Dancing in the Dark,'' the narrator's first
words are ''I get up in the evening''; in ''Darlington County,'' a tale of a
spree gone awry, ''Me and Wayne'' are ''looking for some work on the county
line.'' In ''Downbound Train,'' the opening line's past tense tells the story:
''I had a job, I had a girl.'' Mr. Springsteen's characters don't expect things
to look up; in ''No Surrender,'' ''Bobby Jean'' and in a song called ''Glory
Days,'' the glory days are receding into memory. As the chorus of ''Glory Days''
goes, ''Glory days well they'll pass you by.'' His way out of the impasse is
personal and conditional: ''Maybe we could cut someplace of our own with these
drums and these guitars.''

In other words, Mr. Springsteen takes an old-fashioned populist approach - he
speaks, and sings, for the inarticulate and disenfranchised. But unlike a
politician, he offers no program for new glory days. Character study by
character study, he simply maps an all-American despair. Meanwhile, the vitality
of his performances and the E Street Band's music - ''Born in the U.S.A.''
includes some of the most exuberant noise ever captured in a recording studio -
lends his music an unspoken optimism, hope despite the odds. Most songs have
triumphant anthemlike melodies bolstered by ringing guitars and a walloping
rhythm section.

Mr. Springsteen's mixed messages would hardly seem destined for mass
consumption, much less the sold-out stadium concerts. Up in the commercial
stratosphere, he is flanked by pop figures who have deliberately made themselves
one-dimensional: Prince the naughty adolescent, Madonna the calculating flirt,
Tina Turner the tough older woman. There's also Michael Jackson, whose lyrics
exude fear and paranoia but whose words seem almost incidental to his status as
a dancing, singing, glittering pop phenomenon.

While Mr. Springsteen's good-guy grin and bulging biceps are certainly part of
his appeal, his songs refuse to oversimplify and - even more heretical - don't
revolve around pleasure. Yet the search for work and self-respect, and the
frustration and disillusionment of growing up, are also parts of everybody's
lives, and Mr. Springsteen has the conviction to turn these themes into
memorable songs.

Although his characters are at the mercy of economic forces, Mr. Springsteen
himself has considerable clout. For ''Born in the U.S.A.,'' he decided to
harness the marketing forces - television and radio airplay and publicity - that
can turn a rock musician into a household name. Without compromising his
message, he went to work to make ''Born in the U.S.A.'' a commercial
blockbuster.

His opening gambit was the album's first single, ''Dancing in the Dark,'' not so
much a love song as a statement of desperation: ''I ain't nothing but tired Man,
I'm just tired and bored with myself hey there baby I could use just a little
help.''

Although the lyrics are somber, the arrangement is buoyant. The song uses a
synthesizer riff that edges toward current dance rock; Mr. Springsteen approved
the release of a dance-floor remix of the song, aimed at clubs and urban (or
black) radio. On the single's jacket, he even strikes a bent-kneed,
lapel-gripping Michael Jackson pose. He also participated for the first time in
a rock video clip (he had allowed a video clip based on ''Atlantic City'' from
''Nebraska'' to be made but he did not appear in it). Naturally it was a
performance video - staged but still capturing some of Mr. Springsteen's
on-stage charisma.

Three of the next four singles released from the album - ''Born in the U.S.A.,''
''I'm on Fire'' and ''Glory Days'' - were also promoted with video clips. (One
common feature of the blockbuster albums of the 1980's is a previously
unheard-of number of hit singles, three and up.) Synthesizers and video clips.
What else? Media. Mr. Springsteen submitted, briefly, last year to a spate of
television and magazine interviews before returning to his habit of refusing all
requests. He also participated in 1984 in a contest on MTV, the cable
music-video channel; true to his working-class sympathies, it offered the winner
the chance to tour with Mr. Springsteen as a roady, or equipment hauler.

Video clips and media exposure are standard marketing steps for potential hits.
And in some cases, they can substitute entirely for public appearances, as in
the recent successes of Madonna and Michael Jackson's ''Thriller,'' the
best-selling album of all time, which made its sole initial impression with
video clips.

The video clip allows a more sophisticated version of early Hollywood studio
starmaking through typecasting. A performer can choose an image, fabricate it,
and hide behind it, but where rock's commercial elite, for the most part, choose
simple, cartoonlike images, Mr. Springsteen is something more than a
working-class Everyman. The ''Born in the U.S.A.'' video clip features
performance footage by a haggard-looking Mr. Springsteen with a montage of
working-class Americans, including a one-eyed veteran. ''I'm on Fire,'' which
includes dialogue, is a mini-movie about a rich woman who tempts a mechanic, a
comment on class differences. And ''Glory Days'' counterpoints rock and roll
with calm family life. Instead of serving a pre-established image, the videos
serve the song - although they do show Mr. Springsteen's better profiles.

Mr. Springsteen doesn't need to hide behind his videos. He thrives on performing
and on audience contact. Last year, when ''Born in the U.S.A.'' was released, he
chose to play 10 nights at the 20,000-seat Brendan Byrne Arena in New Jersey
rather than more lucrative stadium shows.

Mr. Springsteen's career suggests that the old trajectory toward stardom, based
on live music rather than marketing artifacts, still has a lot to recommend it,
although he has vastly expanded his audience with the campaign behind ''Born in
the U.S.A.'' He has fans who come to hear him rather than the latest pop
sensations and fans who pay attention to the words as well as the wardrobe.

It often seems that in the 1980's the music business is geared to produce ever
more intensively marketed, ever more distant, ever more superficial performers.
With Mr. Springsteen, however, the same music business mechanisms result in the
widest possible distribution of thoughtful, danceable music. There's nothing
wrong with the process, and by using it, Mr. Springsteen has put his songs to
the ultimate test. He has made a populist message genuinely popular.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bruce Springsteen (Andrea laubach/Retna)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Hanoi Turns Over Remains of 26

BYLINE: By Richard Levine, Milt Freundenheim and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


Vietnam took a step last week toward improving relations with the United States.
It turned over the remains of 26 people who may have been among the 2,464
American servicemen missing when the Vietnam war ended in 1974.

A Vietnamese doctor said that, with the help of photographs, the remains of 20
of the men had been identified as Americans. No photographs had been available
to identify five others, he said; the 26th person was an ethnic Asian. The
remains were flown to Honolulu for analysis. Vietnam also turned over
identification tags and other evidence from six other missing servicemen.

Until last week, Hanoi had returned remains of only 99 of the men missing in
action in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. Some American officials have suggested
that Vietnam is holding the remains of 400 others in hopes of negotiating
concessions from the United States.

Vietnam also indicated last week its readiness to talk to a delegation of senior
American officials in Hanoi on Aug. 28-29. Paul Wolfowitz, an Assistant
Secretary of State, Richard Armitage, an Assistant Secretary of Defense, and
Richard Childress, a National Security Council aide, are expected to go.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz recently said he wanted to work on clearing
up the issue of the missing servicemen ''as promptly and as decisively as
possible.'' The United States has refused to establish diplomatic relations with
Vietnam until the issue of the missing servicemen is resolved and until Vietnam
ends its occupation of Cambodia. There has been no discernible progress on
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of U.S. loading remains of M.I.A.'s onto plane in Hanoi(AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN ANCIENT DISEASE ADVANCES

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, the Sudan


In Ethiopia, the authorized term is ''acute diarrhea.'' In the Sudan, the
favored euphemism is ''severe gastroenteritis.'' Western physicians and medical
workers say, however, that there is no longer any doubt that the disease that
has spread across the Horn of Africa in the last nine months is cholera.

They are particularly worried because it has reached at least three important
urban centers, Addis Ababa, Khartoum and Port Sudan, cities with large slum
areas, where the bacterial illness, which spreads mainly through water and food
contaminated by feces, is likely to be difficult to contain.

Thousands of Ethiopians and Sudanese are believed to have died of cholera this
year. Children have been the chief victims. ''It seems that 50 percent of the
kids who get it die,'' said Samir Sanad Basta, the Unicef representative in the
Sudan. ''Perhaps that's because they have been so badly weakened by
malnutrition.''

Cholera is an ancient disease, associated with poverty, filth and ignorance, and
linked in the popular imagination with other dreaded killers such as bubonic
plague and smallpox. In possibly the worst cholera epidemic on record, one
million people are thought to have died in Russia in 1848. Cholera strikes
suddenly and advances swiftly. An untreated victim may die within hours, of
dehydration caused by diarrhea and vomiting. Others carry and spread the disease
while exhibiting no symptoms. Last weekend, the United Nations Disaster Relief
Agency reported that in Mali, a famine-stricken West African country, 500 of an
estimated 2,500 cholera victims have died this year.

However, with prompt public health and medical responses, a cholera epidemic no
longer necessarily brings high death tolls. Patients can be saved if body fluids
are replaced intravenously and antibiotics are administered. In South Africa,
2,742 cases were reported to the World Health Organization up to Aug. 2, but
only four people had died from the disease.

W.H.O. says cholera is now present in 12 African countries including two of
Ethiopia's neighbors, Djibouti and Somalia, and in Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Burundi, Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, South Africa
and Tanzania. (Experts say the disease also is a problem in Bangladesh, parts of
China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam.)
Officials of the World Health Organization claim to know nothing of cholera in
Ethiopia and the Sudan, reflecting a provision in the organization's charter:
Unless a government formally reports an outbreak, W.H.O. does not acknowledge
its existence. In Khartoum last week, relief agencies met to discuss measures to
combat the cholera epidemic. Officials of W.H.O. and the Sudanese Ministry of
Health did not attend. ''It's a scandal,'' a senior relief agency offical said.
''They refuse to even talk about it.''

Many aid workers in Ethiopia and the Sudan are also reluctant to discuss cholera
openly for fear of governmental retaliation. ''It's a real dilemma,'' one said.
''We're caught between the necessity not to get kicked out and the insistence of
the public in the U.S. and Europe who want us to be more forthright.'' But some
aid agencies have spoken up or have at least named the disease in
nonconfidential reports and documents. They include the French voluntary agency,
Doctors Without Borders, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
United Nations Children's Fund, and Care. The Federal Center for Disease Control
in Atlanta has also determined that cholera is spreading in the Horn of Africa.
''We know cholera is there,'' said Billy Griggs, a C.D.C. expert. ''But there is
no mechanism for compiling data on how many cases there are or at what rate it's
spreading. Only W.H.O. could do that.''

Cholera began to show up in December at the famine relief camp in Asayita, in
eastern Ethiopia. It spread east to Djibouti and Somalia and west to other
Ethiopian camps and later appeared in parts of southern Ethiopia and in the
northern regions of Tigre and Eritrea. Travelers returning from rebel-controlled
areas of Tigre tell of victims lying on hillsides to provide rudimentary
drainage for diarrhea, with intravenous units suspended from tree limbs to hold
tubes connected to their arms.

Antibiotics for Pilgrims

Refugees from Ethiopia carried cholera into camps in eastern Sudan, where relief
workers have now brought it more or less under control. Little is known about
the situation in nearby villages. Until recently, cholera was rarely seen in the
cities, but in the last month, hospitals in Addis Ababa, Khartoum and Port Sudan
have become crowded with cases. In Addis, hastily erected tents and metal sheds
are serving as isolation units. In Khartoum, Moslems boarding planes for the
pilgrimage to Mecca are being given the antibiotic tetracycline as a precaution.
In Port Sudan, the central market has been closed to prevent further
transmissions.

Why do some governments disguise so serious a problem? ''That's not for me to
answer,'' said Gino Levi, a W.H.O. spokesman in Geneva. Sudanese and Ethiopian
officials are equally unresponsive. One reason may be fear of losing customers
for exports. In fact, experts say, it is unlikely that cholera has ever been
transmitted by East African products such as coffee, cotton and hides. Others
speculate that governments want to avoid the image of squalor that cholera
suggests and the limitations that acknowledgement of an epidemic imposes.
Population movement would be restricted, interfering with Ethiopia's
resettlement plans for one million people from the north. ''Cholera doesn't need
to be quite so devastating if it is approached rationally and sensibly,'' said
Dr. A .D. Brandling-Bennet, a Nairobi-based physician who has worked with the
disease in Africa and Asia. ''The fatal error is not to admit it'' is present.
Health workers predict that the fatality total will indeed be large. ''By the
end of the year, we can expect 5,000 to 10,000 dead in this country alone,''
said Dr. Didier Patte, Unicef's emergency officer in the Sudan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map showing current outbreaks of cholera around the world (Source: For
most countries, National Centers for Disease Control; for Ethiopia, sudan,
Bangladesh and southern China, various relief agencies)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAS MOSCOW OUR REAL TARGET?

BYLINE: By Gaddis Smith; Gaddis Smith, a professor of history at Yale
University, is finishing a study of American diplomacy under President Carter.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1779 words


ATOMIC DIPLOMACY: HIROSHIMA AND POTSDAM The Use of the Atomic Bomb and the
American Confrontation With Soviet Power. Expanded and Updated Edition. By Gar
Alperovitz. 427 pp. New York: Elisabeth Sifton Books/Penguin Books. Paper,
$7.95. WAS the detonation of the atomic bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki the
culmination of World War II or the beginning and principal cause of the cold
war? Japan was the literal target and victim, but were the bombs used primarily
to send a threatening message from the United States to the Soviet Union? In
1965, 20 years after Hiroshima and in the midst of the escalating controversy
over the American war in Vietnam, the first edition of this book appeared with
some startling answers to these questions.

Seldom has the first work of a young historian (the book was the 28-year-old
author's doctoral dissertation) achieved such instant fame or notoriety.
''Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima and Potsdam'' was simultaneously acclaimed for its
challenging insights and denounced as a travesty of the historical record. Since
its publication almost everyone who has written about the beginning of the
atomic age has praised or denounced the book, depending on his or her beliefs.
The republication of the original text, together with a new 60-page introduction
by the author, provides an opportunity to reflect both on Mr. Alperovitz's
argument and on the reasons the original version of this book caused such
consternation.

''Atomic Diplomacy'' challenged President Truman's and the historical
establishment's contention that dropping the atomic bombs saved hundreds of
thousands of lives by inducing Japan to surrender before its home islands were
invaded. Mr. Alperovitz argues that President Truman and his advisers knew that
Japan, for all practical purposes, was defeated by the summer of 1945. He makes
a convincing case that neither an invasion nor the bombs nor the Soviet Union's
entry into the war was necessary to induce Japan to surrender. The only obstacle
was the refusal of the United States to give Japan an assurance that the
institution of the Emperor could be retained. (This assurance, in fact, was
given after the bombs were dropped.) Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower opposed using the
bombs against Japan as immoral and militarily unnecessary. So did Adm. William
D. Leahy, Truman's chief of staff. Yet Truman approved the bombing without
hesitation, without even contemplating an alternative. Why? Mr. Alperovitz does
not pretend to supply all the answers. Instead, he focuses exclusively on one
segment of the problem - the impact of the bomb on American thinking about
relations with the Soviet Union. He argues that the bomb emboldened Truman and
his Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes, to reverse President Roosevelt's policy
of accommodation with the Soviet Union and attempt to roll Soviet influence back
from Eastern Europe in violation of the implicit sphere-of-influence agreements
Roosevelt made at Yalta.

Mr. Alperovitz argues that Truman deliberately postponed the Potsdam summit
conference with Stalin and Churchill until mid-July, when the bomb would be
ready. Craftily and deliberately, he shifted from tough talk in April to sending
Harry Hopkins, formerly Roosevelt's chief aide, on a conciliatory mission to
Stalin in May - all to buy time until the scientists of the Manhattan Project
had completed their work. After the first bomb was successfully tested at
Alamogordo, N.M., and the second and third were dropped on Japan, Truman and
Byrnes were filled with brash self-confidence. They then directed a diplomatic
offensive against the Soviet sphere in Eastern Europe, with the atomic bomb as
an implicit but very obvious potential instrument. The Russians, Mr. Alperovitz
believes, were ready for a settlement provided they could have the security of
friendly regimes in Eastern Europe. But the United States appeared bent on
undermining that security - and thus the cold war began. The short-lived
American monopoly of atomic weapons did not force the Soviet Union to retreat;
it made them impose a tighter grip on their satellites.

Mr. Alperovitz is careless in the use of quotations. He stretches conclusions
over gaps in the evidence, ignores what does not fit the pattern of his argument
and assumes every chance remark was part of a grand design. In his speculations
about the Russians, his portrait of Stalin errs in the direction of the benign.
These, however, are flaws common to many young historians eager to prove a case.
He is certainly far from a model of meticulousness, but his mistakes are
relatively minor. They tarnish his argument but do not destroy it.

The strong reaction to the book in the 1960's had relatively little to do with
Mr. Alperovitz's technical use of evidence but a great deal to do with the
ideological climate in the United States during the Vietnam War. ''Atomic
Diplomacy'' appeared in the year the United States began ground combat and
bombing on a large scale in Vietnam. In the same months and years that the book
was being read and discussed, the country was becoming divided over the morality
of the war. Although ''Atomic Diplomacy'' never mentioned Vietnam and dealt only
with events taking place during six months in 1945, its assumptions about
American behavior were either repugnant or welcome to participants in the great
debate over Vietnam.

President Johnson and his supporters justified the war by proposing a secular
religion based on the idea that America was morally pure. To them the United
States was and always had been the selfless defender of freedom, the brave foe
of evil aggression. They believed the nation was fighting in Vietnam for the
same reasons it had fought Hitler, protected Western Europe against Soviet
expansion and defended Korea. In this view, American motives and behavior in
Vietnam, being the same as they always had been, were beyond reproach.

Conservative dissenters like Senator J. William Fulbright also extolled the
earlier record of the United States. But they argued that circumstances in
Vietnam were different, being rooted in anticolonialism and civil war, not
global aggression, and that therefore it was wrong to act in the same way.

Radical dissenters agreed with another aspect of President Johnson's argument:
that there was continuity between past and present American behavior. The
radicals contended that the United States was aggressive and imperialistic by
nature, that it provoked conflict more often than it defended the helpless. For
those who held this view, American behavior in Vietnam was obviously barbaric
and immoral - but it was in the American tradition. A generation of revisionist
historians developed these assumptions by revisiting every era from the 18th
century to the present. No moment of the past, however, was more emotionally
charged than the beginning of the atomic age. T HUS Mr. Alperovitz's message
that Truman callously and deliberately incinerated the population of two
Japanese cities primarily to apply more pressure on the Soviet Union fitted
conveniently into a radical ideology that assumed inherent American wickedness.
''Atomic Diplomacy'' became required reading for radical dissenters, a respected
confirming text for their assumptions. Conversely, the book was anathematized by
the defenders of the faith of American morality. By even suggesting that the
decision to drop the bombs flowed from mixed motives and that the Soviet Union
had reason to feel threatened by the United States, the book undermined the
assumption that the United States was always beyond reproach and morally pure.

In 1985 ''Atomic Diplomacy'' seems less startling. The old flaws remain, but the
preponderance of new evidence that has appeared since 1965 tends to sustain the
original argument. It has been demonstrated that the decision to bomb Japan was
centrally connected to Truman's confrontational approach to the Soviet Union.
And after Vietnam the nation has been accustomed to the idea that American
foreign policy is not always faultless. The experience of the last 20 years has
not totally eradicated the view that the contest between the United States and
the Soviet Union is an unalloyed struggle between good and evil, but it has made
most Americans ready to accept the idea that both sides bear responsibility for
the present peril.

In the introduction to this edition, Mr. Alperovitz says Truman acted
impulsively, in secret and without contemplating the larger consequences of
inaugurating the atomic age. Ethical questions were raised, notably by
Eisenhower and Leahy, but Truman and Byrnes ignored them, so taken up were they
with the belief that atomic bombs would provide the United States with an
invincible negotiating position against the Soviet Union. Mr. Alperovitz
concludes, ''The Hiroshima story teaches how easy it is for decision makers to
lose sight of deeper questions of ethical and global significance in the absence
of express public concern and clear citizen constraint.'' That should be the
abiding lesson of the tragic decision of 1945. THE 'MASTER CARD' Intercepted
cables demonstrating Japan's rapid deterioration flowed in. A number of the most
important military officials . . . recognized that from a strictly military
point of view the bomb was not necessary to prevent an invasion [of Japan]. The
difficulty lay primarily with those who were deeply involved with diplomacy -
for they had embraced the assumption the bomb would be used, and indeed,
developed an overall theory that it would be critical to their diplomacy vis a
vis the Soviet Union. . . . It is not so much that top decision makers
calculatedly decided to use the weapon, but, rather, that it became central to
their thinking, probably in ways they did not fully understand themselves. It
appears that some of them came to be so bound up in the idea the bomb would be
the ''master card'' against the Russians that they simply could not grasp the
implications of the evidence that Japan could be forced to surrender without the
new weapon. Or possibly . . . at least some of the major figures seemed to know
that the war was over but wanted to use the bomb anyway. In either
interpretation the Russian factor . . . is the key to the puzzle. . . . We still
do not have answers to all the questions, of course, and it is possible that the
President and [Secretary of State James F.] Byrnes believed they were simply
carrying out traditional policies and got so carried away with their desire to
end the war that they didn't stop to think. But it is hard to sustain this
interpretation in the face of the evidence. - From ''Atomic Diplomacy: Hiroshima
and Potsdam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


Aug. 18, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 9 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 2 5 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 3 3 22 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 4 4 13 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 5 5 13 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) A restless explorer
scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

* 6 6 8 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West larger than life.

* 7 7 14 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 8 8 30 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 9 9 5 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 10 16 5 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.

* 11 1 THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $14.95.) Romance,
scandal and murder in New York's high society.

* 12 11 9 A CATSKILL EAGLE, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence,
$14.95.) The private eye Spenser joins hands with Federal agents to bring down a
powerful scoundrel.

* 13 12 22 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.

* 14 13 16 CHAPTERHOUSE: DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $17.95.) A desert
world rises from the Old Empire's ashes in the science fiction series.

* 15 14 25 THINNER, by Richard Bachman. (NAL Books, $12.95.) In this
pseudonymous novel by Stephen King, a lawyer is mysteriously wasting away.

* 16* 15 16 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members of the class of 1958 after they left Harvard. Nonfiction

* 1 1 6 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to first man
to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 42 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 15 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 20 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 5 4 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankee baseball
star.

* 6 6 5 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis star.

* 7 7 7 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 8 8 14 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 9 1 THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men
seek the 1984 Olympic single-sculling championship.

* 10 14 2 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 11 1 THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing
pieces about pursuing pleasures in the great outdoors.

* 12* 10 3 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding
the 1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 13* 9 51 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.''

* 14 13 5 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
previously unpublished chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 15 12 50 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' tells of his search for a true love.
And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE ART OF CAPTAIN COOK'S VOYAGES, by Rudiger Joppien and Bernard Smith. Volume
One: The Voyage of the Endeavour, 1768-1771. Volume Two: The Voyage of the
Resolution and Adventure, 1772-1775. (Yale University, $50 each.) The work of
artists who accompanied Cook and introduced the romantic image of the South Seas
to Europe; handsomely produced and scholarly.

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EUROPEAN JEWS, by Raul

Hilberg. (Holmes & Meier, three volumes, $159.50.) A revised, expanded and
apparently final edition, by the pre-eminent scholar of the Holocaust, of his
magnum opus, first published in 1961. HENRY VIII, by Jasper Ridley. (Viking,
$24.95.) A briskly narrated version of Henry's reign which dispenses with the
legend of the frank young king turned tyrant in middle age; he was ever thus.
OPERA & IDEAS: From Mozart to Strauss, by Paul Robinson. (Harper & Row, $22.95.)
In showing how attitudes toward society, culture and politics shape great
operatic works, Mr. Robinson places opera firmly in the intellectual history of
Europe. FIRST LOYALTY, by Richard Lourie. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.)
In this chilly and often original literary suspense novel, a Russian poet who is
also a K.G.B. agent comes to New York to recover the formula for a drug that
extends human life. FRIENDS ALONG THE WAY, by Julia Markus. (Houghton Mifflin,
$15.95.) The friends of Betsy Lewis, a 28-year-old American woman in Rome, are
guides as well; they point her toward self-knowledge in this energetic
coming-of-age story. UNDER THE BANYAN TREE and Other Stories, by R. K. Narayan.
(Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) Simple observation for its own sake is at the
heart of these 28 benign, even-tempered, elegant stories by the distinguished
Indian English-language novelist. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 10 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 1 WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's, $14.95.)
How to find the right man and maintain a happy relationship with him.

* 3 3 20 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 4 4 37 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book.

* 5 2 6 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives. The listings above
are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every
region of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all
bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that
point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a longer
list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that
its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
NEW ISSUE RECOGNIZES VETERANS

BYLINE: By John F. Dunn

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words


While the media focuses on the 40th anniversary of the conclusion of World War
II, the United States Postal Service has been recognizing veterans of other
wars.

On Aug. 26, a 22-cents commemorative will be issued in Milwaukee, Wis. to honor
the veterans of World War I. This follows by exactly one month the release of a
Korean War veterans issue. A Vietnam Veterans Memorial stamp also was issued
last Nov. 10.

John L. Ryan, a governor of the Postal Service, will be the featured speaker at
the first day of issue ceremony to be held during the Veterans of World War I
annual convention. Of the 4.7 million Americans who served in ''the war to end
all wars,'' more than 360,000 were killed or wounded. Some 248,000 veterans
survive. The war began in 1914 with the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand of
Austria-Hungary and ended in 1918, approximately one year after the United
States entered the fighting. Richard Sheaff of Needham Heights, Mass. based his
stamp design on a drawing, ''The Battle of the Marne.'' The area adjacent to the
Marne River in northeastern France was the site of some of the fiercest fighting
of World War I. The original was drawn by Captain Harvey Dunn, one of eight
official artists for the American Expeditionary Force. The artist tried to
portray the harsh reality of war, although this particular portrait appears tame
compared to the horrors of war that have been brought into millions of American
homes by television cameras and photographic journalism.

Deadline for ordering first day cancellations is Sept. 25. Collectors are
encouraged to purchase stamps at local post offices before submitting envelopes
for cancellation. The Postal Service gives preferential treatment to such
requests which should be addressed to Customer-Affixed Envelopes, World War I
Veterans Stamp, Postmaster, Milwaukee, Wis. 53201-9991. No remittance is
required.

Covers without stamps affixed should be sent to World War I Veterans Stamp,
Postmaster, Milwaukee, Wis. 53201-9992. Orders should be accompanied by payment
of 22 cents per stamp, payable by check or money order to a maximum of 50
covers. Postage stamps are not acceptable as payment.

King Arthur Set

The legends of King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table will be
commemorated on a set of four stamps to be issued by the British Post Office on
Sept. 3. The set celebrates the printing 500 years ago of one of the most
popular works of English literature ''Le Morte D'Arthur,'' written by Sir Thomas
Malory and printed by William Caxton.

Sir Thomas drew from two main sources in writing the most memorable version of
the legends. French stories of chivalry and the Round Table were blended with a
history of British kings written in 1136 by Welsh monk, Geoffrey of Monmouth.
Despite the fact that Sir Thomas did his work while serving a prison sentence
during the War of the Roses, ''Le Morte D'Arthur'' thrills the reader with its
poetic imagery.

The legends tell of how King Arthur unified Britain with the help of the wizard
Merlin; how the Round Table came to ruin when Sir Lancelot fell in love with
Queen Guinevere and how King Arthur received a deadly wound in a battle with his
nephew, Modred. While the stories are not completely factual, there is little
doubt that King Arthur did exist. Cadbury Castle in west England is attributed
by some as the site of the lost Camelot where Arthur was born.

The stamps exemplify the fine crayon drawings of freelance illustrator Yvonne
Gilbert who designed the set of four. The 17-pence stamp shows King Arthur
consulting with Merlin; the 22-pence depicts the Lady of the Lake with the
sword, Excalibur; the 31-pence illustrates Sir Lancelot and Queen Guinevere
fleeing from Camelot; and the 34-pence shows Sir Galahad praying during his
quest for the Holy Grail.

Swiss Bread

Each year Switzerland issues a set of ''publicity stamps.'' The Swiss are one of
the most conservative nations in their stamp-issuing policies. While other
nations are expanding their stamp issues, the 1985 publicity set has been
reduced to three stamps from its customary four, since this year only three are
needed to meet the postal rates now in effect in Switzerland. Issue date is
Sept. 10.

The 50-centimes issue marks the centennial of the Swiss Master Bakers' and
Confectioners' Federation, founded in Zurich Sept. 13, 1885. While Americans
might have favored Swiss chocolate on this stamp, the breads of Switzerland are
equally famous. Designed by graphic artist Andre Bovey of Lausanne, the stamp
depicts a baker putting a loaf of bread into a brick-lined oven.

The 70-centimes issue publicizes the 50th anniversary of Swiss Radio
International. The organization has been broadcasting news of events within
Switzerland and of achievements by its citizens overseas. The design by
Roger-Virgile Geiser, also of Lausanne, shows the Swiss crest with communication
lines extending to the furthest reaches of the world.

The 80-centimes stamp honors the World Congress of the Postal, Telegraph and
Telephone International, to be held in Interlaken, from Sept. 16 to 21. The
organization includes 160 trade unions with a total of 350,000 members from more
than 80 countries. The stamp features the emblem of the politically neutral
association in a symbolic design by Willi Wermelinger of Geroldswil,
Switzerland.

On the same date, Switzerland also will release a 50-centimes official stamp for
use by the World International Property Organization (W.I.P.O.), a group that
protects the rights of authors, artists and other creators. The new value was
necessitated by the increased postal rates for domestic first-class mail and
joins the original four issued in 1982 for use by W.I.P.O.

Japan Friendship

The Solomon Islands were the scene for some of the fiercest battles of World War
II. These south Pacific islands - most notably Guadalcanal - were seized by the
Japanese in 1942 and surrendered to the United States after heavy fighting in
1943. Wreckage of the fighting remains in the waters around the islands and in
undiscovered jungle arsenals, but peace and harmony have returned.

The Solomons were a British Protectorate and were governed by Australia as a
United Nations trust territory, gaining independence July 7, 1978. The islands
enjoy a trade surplus with the Japanese. To emphasize the new spirit of
cooperation, on June 28 the Solomon Islands issued a set stamps to commemorate
Japan's Tsukuba Expo '85.

The set includes a 12-cents value depicting the Japanese Peace Memorial shrine,
a 25-cents stamp picturing digital telephone exchange equipment used in the
Solomons by Nippon Electric Company of Japan, a 45-cents value showing a fishing
boat owned by Solomon Taiyo Ltd., a cooperative venture of the Solomon Islands
government and Taiyo Fishery Company of Japan and an 85-cents stamp illustrating
a quiet coastal village at sunset.

Frajola Auction

Most major cover dealers and general auction houses include some stampless
covers in their offerings. One of the houses that pays special attention to the
field is Richard C. Frajola, Inc. The company's next auction is scheduled for
Sept. 7 at the Danbury Hilton Inn, Danbury, Conn. Copies of the auction
catalogue are available from Richard C. Frajola, Inc., Moody Lane, Danbury,
Conn. 06810.

Stampless cover sections in the Sept. 7 auction will include manuscript
markings, western express covers and packet boat markings. Also offered is the
C. A. Fricke collection of first issue postal cards and the Fred Faulstich
collection of Cival War material.

Greetings

Plans by the United States Postal Service to issue a 14-cents ''Greetings''
stamp Oct. 11 in conjunction with the Nojex Show in Secaucus, N. J., have been
canceled. Although attributed in some quarters to deficit-cutting measures
within the Postal Service, the official announcement blames the cancellation on
the heavy stamp production schedule in 1985.

The Greetings stamp was intended for use on postcards mailed during the holiday
season, much the same as the 1982 Puppies and Kittens 13-cents stamp issued in
1982 had been used before this year's rate increases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of stamps

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

65,000 SPRINGSTEEN FANS WELCOME SINGER HOME

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., Aug. 18


After 13 months on the road - after playing to sellout crowds in Australia,
Europe, Japan and cities all across America - Bruce Springsteen came home
tonight.

The New Jersey boy who grew up to be the current king of rock-and-roll was
welcomed back by more than 65,000 of his fans, on their feet in Giants Stadium,
fists in the air, screaming every word of his first song of the evening, ''Born
in the U.S.A.''

''All my people out there!'' he shouted before one number. ''How have things
been here in New Jersey?''

Judging from the crowd's response, things couldn't have been better. They
belonged to him from the moment he and his E Street band took the stage, shortly
after 8 P.M., for the first of six concerts here. Until about midnight, Giants
Stadium was transformed into an enormous outdoor dancehall as his fans danced in
the aisles, embracing one another every time Mr. Springsteen went into an old
favorite.

''Brrruuucccce! Brrruuucccce! Brrrruuucccce!'' they kept screaming. Their
enthusiasm was shared by the performer. the Garden of Eden, he said, had been
moved, and now was in New Jersey.

During the raucous ''Thunder Road,'' Neil Jiorle, 29, of Long Branch, N.J,
grabbed his wife, Lisa, 25, and spun her up and down the aisle. They had gone to
hear Bruce Springsteen at honky-tonk bars more than 10 years ago, long before
anyone dreamed he would play Giants Stadium.

Mr. Springsteen returned to New Jersey an international rock star, an American
symbol, a favorite of politicians (Governor Kean and Mayor Koch both attended
tonight's concert) and a married man.

''But he's still the same old Bruce,'' said 26-year-old Beverly Snow.

And he still wore the same old bandana headband, blue jeans and T-shirt - a
uniform repeated on thousands of young men in the crowd - as he filled the
stadium with his tales of disillusioned factory workers, out-of-work Vietnam
veterans and madly-in-love young men and women driving Jersey roads on hot
summer nights.

Glory Days Were There

''This is a song about getting old,'' Mr. Springsteen said before singing
''Glory Days.'' ''And I'm old. I'm 35. Yeah.'' He was all over the stage
tonight, dancing up and down the steps, mugging with the saxophonist Clarence
Clemons and, at one point, falling on his back in mock exhaustion. Mr.
Springsteen was not old tonight.

''Glory Days'' is a tale of good times long gone for a former high school
baseball star. Tonight the glory days were in Giants Stadium.

At the end of the first set, Mr. Springsteen gave a brief sermon on caring for
the less fortunate. ''If you say you're from New Jersey,'' he said, ''you have a
responsibility to your state.''

He went on to say that the Community Food Bank of New Jersey and the Food and
Hunger hot line of New York both had representatives in the audience and needed
support. ''In every state people are going to be hungry,'' he said. ''A lot of
people are falling though the bottom. They ain't getting caught in no safety
net. They're hurting and they need some help.

''Remember New York and New Jersey,'' he continued, ''this is your hometown.''
The crowd cheered.

While there was a smattering of celebrities in the audience - Raquel Welch could
be seen furiously eating an apple during the first set - this was a kind of
''just folks'' crowd, caught up in a spirit that was more like a rock-and-roll
revival than a 1980's rock concert. Limousines and fancy cars were far
outnumbered by Chevrolets, vans and pickup trucks.

No Punk or Glitter

This was blue jeans and cowboy boots, not glitter and punk haircuts. And while
no one could doubt their enthusiasm, officials praised the fans as particularly
well behaved.

Tommy Bartley, a 24-year-old ironworker from Nutley, N.J., was here. So was his
friend Jimmy Frotton, a 23-year-old bartender from the same town. So was John
O'Neill, a 21-year-old heating and air-conditioner installer from Kearny, N.J.
So was his friend, 22-year-old Jim Keim, an electrician from Kearny. So was Paul
Cardenas, a 21-year-old handyman from Queens. And so was Ron Kovic, a paralyzed
Vietnam War veteran who wrote about his war experiences in the book ''Born on
the Fourth of July.''

''I've been sitting in this wheelchair for the past 18 years,'' said Mr. Kovic,
a friend of the singer. ''And I can only thank Bruce Springsteen for all he's
done for Vietnam veterans. 'Born in the U.S.A.' is a beautiful song that has
helped me personally to heal.''

Among those paying homage to the singer was Jeff McCutchen, 20, who drove from
Albany with three friends, 15 Springsteen tapes and a map of New Jersey. Before
the concert they made a pilgrimage through their idol's working-class hometown
of Freehold, his new town of Rumson as well as Asbury Park that Mr. Springsteen
immortalized in his first album.

''It was like going to Jerusalem,'' Mr. McCutchen said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

4 Join Agent Orange Board

BYLINE: By United Press International

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 96 words


Four Vietnam veterans have been named to serve as members of an advisory board
to help administer a $180 million Agent Orange settlement fund, a Federal judge
said yesterday. The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in
Brooklyn, named Donna-Marie Boulay, a lawyer in Minneapolis; Albert Dandridge
3d, a corporate lawyer in Philadelphia; Vincent Martin Jr., a financial planner
in Paramus, N.J., and John McElrath, a project manager for a data-processing
company in Fairfax, Va. Charles Hagel was appointed July 11 to be chairman of
the five-member board.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BOOKS OF SMALL PRESSES KEY SOURCE OF REPRINTS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words


Major publishing houses, which have started trade paperback programs in recent
years, are increasingly turning to small presses in their search for books to
reprint. As a result, the little presses - including some mom and pop operations
that may publish no more than one title a year - are beginning to have an impact
on the American book business far out of proportion to their size.

The major houses would also like to acquire reprints from university presses,
but the big academic presses are refusing to part with most of them.

''Our philosophy is that unless we get an extraordinary advance for a book, we
reprint it ourselves,'' said Tina C. Weiner, marketing director of Yale
University Press. ''And since commercial publishers are no longer paying huge
advances, we would rather keep control over our own books.''

Some Strike It Rich

Thus the small presses are stepping in that void, and some are striking it rich.
Consider just these recent transactions:

Harper & Row paid $210,000 for reprint rights to Evan S. Connell's ''Son of the
Morning Star,'' published by North Point Press of Berkeley, Calif.

Ballantine Books paid $150,000 for ''Raney,'' a first novel by Clyde Edgerton,
published by Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, N.C.

Warner Books paid $65,000 for ''Lesbian Nuns'' by Rosemary Curb and Nancy
Manahan, published by Naiad Press in Tallahassee, Fla.

Avon Books paid $50,000 for ''Heaven in the Eye'' by Clyde Rice, an acclaimed
first novel from Breitenbush Books of Portland, Ore.

Berkley paid almost $50,000 for Tom Clancy's ''Hunt for Red October,'' the only
original novel ever published by the Naval Institute Press.

Dell paid about $25,000 at auction for ''Natural Acts'' by David Quammen, a
collection of columns co-published by Nick Lyons Books and Schocken Books, two
New York companies.

Viking Penguin paid $5,000 for another Nick Lyons/Schocken title, ''Up on the
River'' by John Madson, a description of the creatures and characters of the
Upper Mississippi River.

Changing Marketplace Noted

''Small and regional presses have always been a fruitful source of reprints, and
they are especially valuable now with the marketplace changing,'' said Susan
Moldow, Dell's editor in chief. The small presses can print and promote books
that might otherwise get lost on the lists of bigger publishers, she said, and
once they are established the larger houses can add to the attention.

About a year ago Dell published ''A Thousand Pieces of Gold'' by Ruthanne Lum
McCunn, a Chinese immigrant whose book was originally published by Design
Enterprises, a San Francisco company headed by Mrs. McCunn and her husband.
Forthcoming Dell titles include ''Fathers Playing Catch With Sons'' by Donald
Hall, a book of poetry published by North Point, and ''Earth to Earth'' by Jay
Cornwell, published by Ecco Press of New York.

Ecco, like North Point, has a reputation for publishing quality books. Among
them: ''The Barracks Thief'' by Tobias Wolff, a collection of stories that won
this year's P.E.N./ Faulkner Award for Fiction. Bantam Books will publish the
Wolff novel next year, and it has acquired a number of other reprints from small
and regional presses.

In recent months Bantam reprinted a book published by Texas Monthly Press and
reprinted an epistolary novel from Paul S. Eriksson of Middlebury, Vt. Other
reprints on Bantam's list are from such small publishers as McPherson & Company,
Whatever Publishing, the Center for Spiritual Healing and Karz-Cohl.

Mary Ellen's Lucrative Hints

Warner Books bought ''Mary Ellen's Helpful Hints'' in 1979, a self-published
book that has since gone through 10 printings and more than 3.3 million copies.
Warner's has printed 400,000 copies of ''How to Master the Art of Selling'' by
Tom Hopkins, published originally by Champion Press of Phoenix. It will soon
reprint books from Peachtree Publishing in Atlanta, the American Psychiatric
Press in Washington and Seven Locks Press in Cabin John, Md.

Gnomon Press of Frankfort, Ky., published only three titles in 1984 and at that
time had only 14 titles in print. But Avon bought two Gnomon books for its
forthcoming Southern Writers Series: ''Some Sweet Day'' by Brian Woolley, a
portrait of life in a Texas prairie town, and ''Kinfolks'' by Gurney Norman,''
stories about members of an eastern Kentucky family.

''It means a lot to a small publisher to have a big sale to the reprint houses
or the book clubs,'' said Louis D. Rubin, president of Algonquin Books in Chapel
Hill, N.C. ''We found after we sold our first reprint there was a lot more
interest on the part of the paperback houses.'' Two Algonquin novels by Jill
McCorkle, ''July 7th'' and ''The Cheerleader,'' both published in the same
season, have been purchased for reprint by Penguin.

Resistance in Academia

Despite all these purchases, however, the big houses still have their eyes on
university presses. They have managed to acquire a number from the smaller
presses, but have been much less successful with the big academic presses. And
the biggest of them all, the University of Chicago, not only sells few titles to
the commercial houses but it reprints a number of books that the commercial
houses published originally.

Recently, for example, Chicago reprinted ''Books: The Culture and Commerce of
Publishing'' by Lewis A. Coser, Charles Kadushin and Walter W. Powell (Basic
Books), and it is bringing back into print ''White Waters and Black'' by Gordon
MacCreagh, a travel classic published in 1926 by the Century company that has
been out of print since 1970.

Harvard University Press is also holding on to most of its titles. ''We're
becoming more competitive with the commercial paperback houses, so there really
isn't any reason to sell most paperback rights,'' said Claire Silvers, Harvard's
publicity manager. Nevertheless, it did sell ''One Writer's Beginnings'' by
Eudora Welty to Warner Books for $50,000. And it sold Derek Freeman's ''Margaret
Mead and Samoa'' to Viking Penguin, which will publish it next February.

In the biggest recent sale by a university press, and one of the biggest ever,
Harper & Row paid the University of California Press $100,000 for ''Habits of
the Heart'' by Robert N. Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann
Swidler and Steven M. Tipton.

''Normally our paperback editor fights tooth and nail not to sell the rights to
our books, but there the money was so big that we reluctantly decided to sell,''
said Dan Dixon, head of rights and permissions for the California Press.

California also sold Vintage the paperback rights to ''Geisha'' by Liza C.
Dalby. ''It wasn't a great deal of money involved, and it was an agonizing
decison, but Vintage was persistent,'' Mr. Dixon said.

Several smaller university presses have done quite well selling reprint rights.

After reading a newspaper article last spring about a Vietnam War book published
by the University Press of Kentucky, Dan Green, then the president of Simon &
Schuster's trade publishing division, acquired reprint rights to ''The 25-Year
War: America's Military Role in Vietnam'' by Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr. It will be
issued next month by Touchstone, Simon & Schuster's trade paperback imprint.

The University of Texas Press sold ''The Origins of Faulkner's Art'' by Judith
Sensibar to Avon and sold a book about Texas cooking to Ballantine. The
University of Arkansas Press sold ''In the Land of Dreamy Dreams,'' a collection
of Ellen Gilchrist's short stories, to Little, Brown.

One of the major successes in publishing history was achieved by G. P. Putnam's,
which two years ago republished in hard cover Helen Hooven Santmyer's ''. . .
And Ladies of the Club,'' a novel first published by Ohio State University
Press. Soon afterward Harper & Row republished in hard cover Miss Santmyer's
''Ohio Town,'' a nonfiction book that had also been published previously by Ohio
State.

An article yesterday about major publishing houses buying reprint rights
misstated the amount Ballantine Books paid Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, N.C.,
for ''Raney,'' a first novel by Clyde Edgerton. It was $15,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 20, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
August 20, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GRAPHIC: photos of paperback novels

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Remembering Vietnam

BYLINE: By Irvin Molotsky and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


The Luxembourg pottery maker Villeroy & Boch has produced a commemorative plate
to honor Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam War, and the plate will have
its official unveiling at a reception at the Luxembourg Embassy Sept. 4.

According to Myriam Norris, the company's Washington district manager, the plate
carries reproductions of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington plus an
American eagle and 50 stars.

She said the plate was intended to carry a retail price of $30 and would be sold
at first at military PX's, then at stores in Washington and later at stores
operated by the National Park Service, which has jurisdiction over the Vietnam
memorial site.

Mrs. Norris also said part of the proceeds from the sale of the plate will go to
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund to help pay for the upkeep of the monument.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 21, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

APPEALS COURT ORDERS CBS TO PAY HELMS'S FEES IN SUIT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 339 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 20


A Federal appeals court today ordered CBS to pay attorney fees to Richard Helms,
a former Director of Central Intelligence, for what the court said were the
''groundless litigation tactics'' used by the network in the libel suit of Gen.
William C. Westmoreland.

The ruling by a panel of the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia involves one of the residual legal issues of the suit,
which was dropped by General Westmoreland before it went to the jury.

Writing for the court, Judge George MacKinnon said that CBS should refund Mr.
Helms the attorney fees and appeal costs incurred when he defended a
contempt-of-court motion. No estimate of the amount of money involved was
mentioned.

James Noonan, a spokesman for CBS, said the network's attorneys had not yet been
able to review the ruling and had no comment.

Refused to Be Videotaped

CBS charged Mr. Helms with contempt when he refused to be videotaped during a
pretrial interview, even though he had consented to questioning in the presence
of a stenographer.

''This case illustrates the need for imposing judicial sanctions against
groundless litigation tactics,'' the appeals court said. ''In seeking to have
Helms found in contempt of court here, the petition was ill-founded'' and
violated trial rules.

The Westmoreland trial began in Federal District Court in Manhattan on Oct. 9,
1984. It ended 18 weeks later with General Westmoreland withdrawing his claim
that CBS libeled him in a 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception.''

The documentary stated that General Westmoreland's command conspired to
underestimate reports of enemy troop strength before the Tet offensive in
January 1968. General Westmoreland was the commander of United States troops in
Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

CBS had wanted to question Mr. Helms about the issue. Mr. Helms, who served as
C.I.A. director from 1966 to 1973, showed up for the scheduled interview at CBS
offices, but left when he found television cameras awaiting him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge George MacKinnon (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 21, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE POP LIFE

BYLINE: By Robert Palmer

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words


WHEN an American rock ''underground'' first emerged as a viable alternative to
''Top 40'' radio back in the mid-1960's, the musicians, fans, disk jockeys and
other participants in the new scene found themselves face to face with a basic
and rather perplexing issue. The costs of equipping themselves, producing rock
records and staging rock concerts were well beyond the means of the average band
or would-be rock entrepreneur. ''The magic's in the music, and the music's in
me,'' audiences exulted. But who was going to pay the bills?

In the 60's, only one alternative proved viable. A group signed a contract with
a major record label, asked for a large cash advance to pay for equipment,
touring and time in the recording studio, and insisted all the while that the
band and its manager or its record producer retain total artistic control. For a
while, this system worked. But how long can a band or producer retain creative
independence when a conglomerate like RCA or CBS is paying the bills?
Suggestions are made, hints are dropped. And sometimes groups that aren't
selling records get eliminated from record-company rosters.

These days, a growing number of new bands, nightclubs, college radio stations,
fan magazines, new-music tip-sheets, independent record labels and progressive
distributors and stores make up a loose but effective network for playing,
recording and disseminating contemporary rock. Sometimes this underground can
serve as a farm team for the major labels: R.E.M., which started a few years ago
as an underground band from Athens, Ga., now has an album in the Top 30, for
example.

But despite problems with recording budgets too small to get acceptably modern
guitar and drum sounds, and album covers that sometimes look distinctly
homemade, America's contemporary rock underground is producing recordings of
outstanding quality and originality. Here are some recent releases by bands from
New York City, New Haven, Louisville, Austin, Chicago, San Francisco, and Los
Angeles - compelling bands with fresh ideas and forceful ways of presenting
themselves.

Sonic Youth's innovative guitar textures and use of droning harmonics to create
alternating moods of mysticism and mayhem are showcased on a new five-song
12-inch disk, ''Death Valley '69'' (Homestead Records, P.O. Box 570, Rockville
Centre, L.I. 11571). The title tune, which features added vocal intensity
courtesy of Lydia Lunch, is taken from ''Bad Moon Rising,'' the excellent Sonic
Youth album that Homestead released early this year; the other four tunes are
taken from earlier records and make this 12-inch disk a sort of ''Greatest
Hits'' collection, a concentrated introduction to a startlingly original band.
With a state-of-the-art recording console, a staff of first-rate engineers and a
big enough recording budget to spend more than a week in the studio, Sonic Youth
could turn the rock world upside down and inside out.

Mofungo and the Scene Is Now, two New York bands represented by recent album
releases, are somewhat incestuous; two musicians, Chris Nelson and Philip Dray,
play in both groups. But each band has its own distinct personality. Mofungo's
''Frederick Douglass'' (Coyote/Twin Tone, 2541 Nicollet Avenue South,
Minneapolis, Minn. 55404) continues this group's longstanding involvement in
political and social issues. ''Vietnam Vet'' and ''Ronnie Thinks That He Can
Rock and Roll'' are savage satires on the current political scene, but there's
nothing funny about Mofungo's plea to friends and neighbors caught up in heroin
addiction on the Lower East Side, ''Don't Shoot That Junk Into Your Arm Again,
Please.''

''Burn All Your Records'' by the Scene Is Now (Lost Records, 361 Canal Street,
New York, N.Y. 10013) uses pots, pans and a bicycle wheel along with more
conventional guitar and keyboards. The songs get right to the point, often with
the sort of zany humor one might expect to find in some netherworld between
Tristan Tzara and Spike Jones. The instrumental juxtapositions are consistently
surprising, often hilarious, but there is no novelty for novelty's sake. Every
sound has its place, and despite the music's mercurial strangeness, ''Burn All
Your Records'' is one disk that will linger in your memory long after the rest
of your collection has gone up in flames.

Like R.E.M., which it superficially resembles, the New Haven quartet Miracle
Legion has attracted a great deal of attention with a single independently
produced record, in this case ''The Backyard,'' a six-song EP (Incas Records,
817 Chapel Street, New Haven, Conn. 06510). Almost 30 years after Buddy Holly
put together one of the first successful rock quartets consisting of a singer,
guitarist, bassist and drummer, bands like Miracle Legion are still proving this
format is far from exhausted. Expertly crafted songs about childhood, dreams and
myth-making, an astringent-sounding, sharp-edged guitar attack, and a loose,
almost jazzy, rhythm section are some of the ingredients that make ''The
Backyard'' worth looking for and Miracle Legion worth watching.

The New York club scene in the early 1980's was enlivened by the Babylon Dance
Band, a group from Louisville that generated more joyous energy than any of its
contemporaries on the circuit. Tara Key, the slim, slight-looking woman who
turned into a whirling dervish when she picked up her guitar, and Tim Harris,
whose bass pulse sometimes seemed to be all that was keeping the Babylon Dance
Band from blowing itself to pieces, recently got together with two other
musicians and formed Antietam, named for a particularly bloody Civil War battle.
''Antietam,'' the album, is prevented from jumping right off the turntable by a
murky recording job; otherwise, it's a promising debut. One suspects that from
this talented crew, the best is yet to come.

Zeitgeist, from Austin, Tex., and the Effigies, from Chicago, are two more bands
with fresh perspectives on the voices-guitars-bass-drums format. Zeitgeist's
''Translate Slowly'' (DB/ Landslide Records, 450 14th Street, Suite 201,
Atlanta, Ga. 30318) deploys the very different voices of the two guitarists,
John Croslin and Kim Longacre, in rough counterpoint, sandpaper harmonies and
just enough melodious sweetness to persuade the listener that the more abrasive
sounds are matters of choice, not chance. ''Fly On a Wire,'' the second album
from the Effigies, finds the band expanding its musical range with more varied
song structures, while continuing to plunge into every song with an emotional
commitment that is unmistakably genuine. The Effigies care about the people they
sing about and sing to, and that's the kind of commitment that can't be faked.

Meanwhile, magazines in search of a ''shocking'' story and cheap thrills have
recently begun paying attention to California's ''death rock'' scene. Morbidity
in rock is hardly new. Back in the 60's, Procol Harum recorded more than its
share of funereal music, and earlier still, Nervous Norvus enlivened his
car-crash hit ''Transfusion'' with lines like ''slip the crimson to me,
Jimson.''

''Corridors of Gender'' by the San Francisco band Fade to Black (C.D. Presents
Ltd., 1230 Grant Avenue, Suite 531, San Francisco, Calif. 94133) and the
Christian Death album ''Ashes'' (Nostradamus, c/o Important Record Distributors
of California Inc.) are superficially similar. Tempos tend to be funereal, and
both bands use instruments like violin, cello, and electronic keyboards to weave
brooding, hypnotic textures.

Fade to Black's principal lyricist, known only as Bradley, constructs his lyrics
from mythologies as ancient as the Fisher King and Ophelia, and as current as
William S. Burroughs's war-cry ''Towers Open Fire!'' from ''Naked Lunch.'' Most
of the music is dark and despairing, but Christian Death's ''Ashes'' evokes a
broader range of moods, from laments on mortality to a surprisingly tender love
lyric: ''She spread lilacs on the sheets/Perfumed his hair with white
Powders/Removed the bitter taste left on his cheek.''

The real importance of these and other independent bands and record releases is
that they offer a genuine alternative to the polished and all too often
eviscerated sounds of today's pop mainstream. None of them may ever attract the
attention of a major label, but in the record business, stranger things have
happened.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Australia Says Defoliants Did Not Harm Soldiers

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia, Aug. 22


An official study made public today has ruled out defoliants such as Agent
Orange as factors in ill health among Australian veterans of the Vietnam War and
their children.

The inquiry, which cost $2.66 million, was conducted over two years by Royal
Commissioner Phillip Evatt on the use and effects of chemical agents on
Australian personnel in Vietnam.

''The Commission does not find anything untoward in the mortality rates being
experienced by Vietnam veterans in Australia,'' Mr. Evatt said in a 3,000-page
report.

About 47,000 Australians were sent to the Vietnam War between 1963 and 1973.
More than 1,500 of them have claimed compensation for ill health and birth
defects in their offspring, saying they were caused by chemical defoliants.

Many expect to receive payments from an out-of-court settlement, now worth about
$200 million, that was agreed to last year by chemical makers in the United
States to settle claims, now totaling 200,000, from American, Australian and New
Zealand veterans and their relatives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.S. BUSINESS ROLE IN SOUTH AFRICA

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


To the Editor:

The emotional anti-South African mood prevailing in some U.S. circles during
these times seems to provide a fertile soil for rhetorical excess. Such, for
instance, is the statement by Representative Jim Leach, ''Ending apartheid in
this century is just as important as ending slavery was in the last'' (news
story, Aug. 2).

When Mr. Leach makes such comparisons, he should not turn a blind eye to the
history of his own country. While South Africans emancipated their slaves
voluntarily, Americans fought a bloody civil war over the issue. Even after the
war had ended, it took America almost a century to grant full and formal civil
rights to its black population.

There are in addition vast differences in world politics and international
morality between now and the time when America practiced slavery and
systematically reduced its indigenous Indian population to an unimportant
minority. At the time of slavery in America, or when Americans acted so brutally
against the Indians, there was no international public opinion, no public
diplomacy, no international bill of rights, no United Nations and no
interference by other states over these matters. Vietnam gave America its first
real experience of what it was like to be at the receiving end of world opinion.
But America could save itself by its own power and internal political dynamics.

Even so, morality and human rights cannot be subsidiary to either power or time.
South Africa has neither the power nor the time America had to transform itself
into a more just society. Nor can it afford to transform itself from an
apartheid society into something better by revolution. A revolution is sure to
make way for a type of Marxist or semi-Marxist regime like those one finds today
all over the southern part of Africa. These regimes offer no solution to the
problems of human rights. Or are Americans more interested in the introduction
of black rule per se?

South Africans of the middle ground are interested in lasting and stable
democracy. Thus, the South African Government is fighting a two-front war
against leftist revolutionaries and right-wing reactionaries to dismantle
apartheid and to make the country safe for democracy.

Bringing about a new order of things in South Africa is in the hands of South
Africans, and Americans should not start thinking of a ''holy war.'' Anyway,
American interference seldom has a predictable outcome, which simply means that
America cannot guarantee that its role to end apartheid can lead to a democracy
where human rights are honored as they are in America. GERRIT C. OLIVIER Boston,
Aug. 5, 1985 The writer, professor of political science at the University of
Pretoria, is on a visit to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CLERICS DEBATING ETHICS OF GIVING SANCTUARY TO ALIENS

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2057 words


Although providing sanctuary to those in danger is a tradition as old as the
Bible, religious leaders are debating whether American churches and synagogues
are justified in harboring aliens from Central America.

More than 200 churches and synagogues, from Grace Baptist Church in San Jose,
Calif., and Riverside Church at 122d Street in Manhattan, to Temple Beth El in
Madison, Wis., have declared themselves sanctuaries for such people in this
country illegally.

Supporters argue that those involved have reclaimed an ancient tradition to meet
the needs of people fleeing the turmoil in El Salvador and Guatemala. Many
sanctuary workers acknowledge they are breaking United States laws but argue
that they are involved in a form of civil disobedience in keeping with a higher
religious law.

American Tradition Cited

''The glory of the American immigration tradition is that we opened the Golden
Door to people of many different persuasions,'' said the Rev. Dr. Donald W.
Shriver Jr., president of Union Theological Seminary in Manhattan. ''If the
Golden Door is being unjustly closed, then we feel obliged to open the church
door to them.''

But critics say the idea of sanctuary is being subverted for political purposes
by opponents of the Reagan Administration's immigration and Central American
policies. In a democracy, these critics say, religious people should work to
change laws rather than break them.

''You should not pull out all the sacred stops on the churchly organ for every
little partisan cause you want to advance,'' said the Rev. Richard John Neuhaus,
a theologian, author and Lutheran minister. ''It makes people cynical about the
church.''

The arguments on both sides have been laid out in journals and church documents
with restraint and a good measure of sympathy for the refugees and those who
have helped them. While several national religious organizations have spoken out
on the issue, the majority of local churches and synagogues have not taken
sides.

There are 237 houses of worship that have declared themselves sanctuaries,
according to the Chicago Religious Task Force on Central America, a national
coordinating body that helps match refugees with interested churches or
synagogues. About 1,000 aliens, often traveling as families, have been sheltered
since the first church declared sanctuary in March 1982, according to the task
force.

Religious workers provide the aliens with food, clothing and other personal
needs, such as arranging medical services and schooling for youngsters. Families
often take up residence in the basement of the house of worship and venture out
with the assistance and protection of members of the congregation. After a time,
the refugees may either move on to another sanctuary or be absorbed into a local
community where many illegal aliens are already living.

In the handful of cases in Texas and Arizona where sanctuary workers and aliens
have been arrested, agents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service have
apprehended the suspects in transit to or from the sanctuary. Duke Austin, a
spokesman for the immigration service in Washington, said the agency's
longstanding policy had been to avoid going into churches to make arrests. ''We
know we could,'' he said. ''Legally, there is no question. But we do not think
it is productive. We have enough illegal aliens outside of churches.''

Policy on Arrests

Sanctuary advocates, however, say the Federal agency is trying to protect its
image. ''The I.N.S. doesn't want to mess with the bad publicity that it would
bring if they went into sanctified buildings and pulled people out,'' said Lee
Holstein, a staff member at the Chicago task force.

Twelve church workers are scheduled to stand trial in October for transporting
aliens and sheltering them in an Arizona church. In a ruling last month in
Phoenix, Federal District Judge Earl H. Carroll said he would not allow
religious motivation as a defense.

There is no statute that makes churches a place of refuge, according to Ignatius
Bau, a San Francisco lawyer who has just completed ''This Ground Is Holy,'' a
book on the history of sanctuary to be published by Paulist Press.

The defendants in the Arizona case, like those in a case in Texas, contend that
their actions are protected by their right to free exercise of religion under
the First Amendment, a point supported by Dr. Shriver of Union Theological
Seminary.

Religious Point of View

''The religious point of sanctuary is that no human being belongs completely to
the secular order,'' said Dr. Shriver. ''The religious order has responsibility
for protection where the secular fails.''

Dr. Shriver said he supported the sanctuary movement because of what he called
an inconsistency in the application of the immigration laws that grants asylum
for refugees from certain countries like Vietnam or the Soviet Union but not
from El Salvador or Guatemala.

Advocates of offering sanctuary say Central American refugees should qualify
under the Refugee Act of 1980, which grants asylum on the grounds of
''persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution'' at home. The United States
Government, which contends that the aliens are basically fleeing poverty, not
persecution, has deported many of them to their countries of origin.

The sanctuary tradition has its roots in biblical times, when people being
pursued in vengeance found safety in special ''cities of refuge'' established by
Moses. In the Middle Ages, criminals were safe even from kings when they entered
the gates of the monastery. In the days before the Civil War, runaway slaves
were protected in the churches that were links in the underground railroad.

Providing safe haven for those in danger is such an integral part of religious
tradition that it takes its name from the most sacred part of a church - the
sanctuary.

View of Holocaust Survivor

The author Elie Wiesel, a survivor of the Nazi Holocaust, said sanctuary had its
roots in the Book of Numbers, where Moses is commanded to set aside ''cities of
refuge'' for a person who kills another by accident and has to flee relatives
bent on vengeance.

''These six cities,'' the Bible says in Numbers 35:15, ''shall be for refuge for
the people of Israel, and for the stranger and for the sojourner among them,
that any one who kills any person without intent may flee there.''

Mr. Wiesel said that he had ''great compassion'' for the Central American
refugees, adding, ''I, too, was a refugee.''

But, Mr. Wiesel said he did not favor breaking United States law by harboring
the refugees in places of worship. ''We should walk within the law and, if need
be, change the law,'' he said. ''In fascist countries it is legal and adequate
to break the law, but we have not reached that point.''

The mainstream Protestant churches, led by the 32-denomination National Council
of Churches, support the sanctuary movement. Among the denominations that have
passed resolutions in favor of sanctuary are the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A),
the Disciples of Christ, the United Methodist Church, the United Church of
Christ, the American Lutheran Church and the American Baptist Churches.

The National Conference of Catholic Bishops has expressed sympathy for the
suffering of Latin American refugees but has not taken a position on sanctuary.

Attitude of Archbishop

Some Roman Catholic bishops, such as Archbishop Rembert Weakland of Milwaukee,
have declared their churches sanctuaries. ''Sanctuary is not really a way of
avoiding justice,'' the Archbishop said, ''but a holy respite so that true
justice can eventually be done.''

Archbishop Weakland, who once served as the head of a Benedictine monastery,
said he was strongly influenced by his religious order.

''The Benedictine tradition from its beginning in the sixth century was to
accept all those who knocked on the door of the monastery seeking shelter and
food,'' he said. ''No questions were asked, and one was to treat each guest as
Christ.''

In the Middle Ages, the institution of sanctuary, while sometimes abused, helped
prevent an excessive use of capital punishment, sometimes for minor crimes, and
safeguarded against execution without trial. Sanctuary was seen as protection
from the absolute rule of kings.

Christian sanctuaries were first recognized by Roman law toward the end of the
fourth century. This was later adopted into English common law. In English law a
person accused of a felony could take refuge in a church for up to 40 days,
after which time he would have to confess or face trial. The provision was
abolished in the 18th century.

The National Association of Evangelicals, representing 42 denominations, also
has not taken a formal position on sanctuary. ''Unofficially, I think that our
people would not support the sanctuary movement,'' said the Rev. Billy A.
Melvin, executive director of the association. ''Evangelicals feel that there is
a proper way to address the problem - through the law.''

Defiance of Slavery Acts

Sanctuary advocates point out that those Northerners who defied the Fugitive
Slave Acts in the days before the Civil War were also operating outside the law.
Churches were an important part of this secret network of stops in flight from
slavery in the Southern states to freedom in the North or Canada.

During the Vietnam War there were several instances when draft evaders and
military deserters found refuge in churches. But the aegis of the church did not
always inhibit the civil authorities.

In May 1968 Federal marshals carried a convicted draft evader away from the
altar of the Arlington Street Church in Boston. The man, Robert A. Talmanson,
had been given sanctuary several days before by officials of the Unitarian
Universalist Church.

Pastor Neuhaus said the parallels with slavery and the Vietnam War were not
fully accurate. The sanctuary workers, he said, are not principally interested
in sheltering people but rather want to ''score points'' against the Reagan
Administration. In so doing, he said, a few aliens are exploited and the safety
of tens of thousands of others here illegally is jeopardized by the added
publicity about their presence.

Experience in Bedford-Stuyvesant

Despite his criticism, Mr. Neuhaus said there were times when the granting of
church sanctuary was valid. For example, he said, when he was a pastor in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn in the 1960's and early 1970's, there
were instances when a suspect in a drug case would seek refuge from the police
in his church.

''The church placed itself in a mediating role between the individual and the
legal authorities,'' he said, ''not to help the person escape due process, but
in order to take the harsh edge off the immediate justice and to temper that
hard edge.''

Sanctuary advocates vigorously reject the assertion that they are motivated more
by politics than charity. They say theirs is a grass-roots movement that spread
from the local to the national level.

The Rev. John M. Fife, pastor of the Southside Presbyterian Church in Tucson,
Ariz., who is one of the defendants in the Phoenix case, said his church became
active after refugees crossed the border, knocked on the church door and asked
for help. The church, which is not far from the Mexican border, later put up a
sign in Spanish that read, ''This is a sanctuary for the oppressed from Central
America.''

Peggy Hutchison, another defendant in the case from the Tucson area, said: ''We
didn't think we were doing anything superhuman. We are not heroes. All we were
doing is what our tradition taught us.''

In 1984, the Rabbinical Assembly, which represents more than 1,200 Conservative
rabbis around the world, passed a resolution favoring sanctuary. Among the
reasons for the action, the resolution noted, was that ''millions of Jews were
murdered by the Nazis because the nations of the world, including the United
States, did not open their gates to those fleeing the Nazi onslaught.''

Rabbi Wolfe Kelman, executive vice president of the assembly, said sanctuary
must be provided even if there is some open questions about what fate aliens
might face if they were deported. ''If there is a reasonable doubt on matters of
life and death,'' he said, paraphrasing a Talmudic dictum, ''the doubt must be
resolved in favor of life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Salvadoran refugees in San Benito, Tex. (NYT) (page B16)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Peter Kerr

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


Friday The faces seem stunned by a vision just out of view, haunted by a war
barely out of mind. And yet the black and white portraits of people visiting the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington never show the memorial itself. They
only record, in stark expressions, the reactions since 1983 of Americans
confronting their recent past. The 13 photographs by Judith Ross are part of a
new exhibition of the work of four young American photographers at the Museum of
Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, that will be on display until Dec. 3. The
exhibition of 40 photographs includes still lifes, technical experiments, and an
autobiographical portfolio by Antonio Mendoza, a Cuban-born photographer. The
other photographers represented are Zeke Berman and Michael Spano. Admission to
the museum is $4.50 for adults, $3 for students, and $2 for the elderly. Weekend
hours are 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. today through Sunday. Information: 708-9400. This
will be the last weekend to see an exhibition of eight large pieces designed to
show the potential for ceramics in architecture at the American Craft Museum II
at the International Paper Plaza, 77 West 45th Street. The museum is closing
this Sunday after three years of exhibitions. A new Craft Museum is scheduled to
open next year at 40 West 53d Street. The pieces on display are meant to
demonstrate how ceramics can be used with rooms, doors and walls, and include a
patterned tile floor, a satirical wall mural of a contemporary urban landscape,
and a painted entranceway swirling with miniature nudes. The museum is open 10
A.M. to 5 P.M. today and tomorrow. Admission is $1.50; 75 cents for children,
students and the elderly. Information: 391-8770.

Saturday

A body is discovered. The village is thick with suspects, alibis, anonymous
letters and strange phone calls. And who should appear but Miss Marple, the
Agatha Christie character inextricably linked to the whodunit. This is the plot
of ''Murder at the Vicarage,'' and fans of the Christie mystery may want to take
in a play of the same name based on the famous novel. Adapted by Moie Charles
and Barbara Toy, it will be performed by the Apple Corps Theater Company tonight
at 8 and tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Tickets are $8. Reservations:
929-2955.

The Puccini opera ''Turandot,'' about a prince who arrives in Peking in
legendary times and must solve three riddles to win the hand of a princess, has
its season premiere at the New York City Opera on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the New
York State Theater. The performance features Linda Kelm singing the title role,
and sets and costumes by Beni Montresor. The City Opera music director,
Christopher Keene, will conduct. Tickets range from $5 to $37. Information:
370-5600. It will be Oktoberfest time a bit early in New Jersey this year, as
the management of Action Park, an amusment park in McAfee, brings out freshly
baked pretzels, German beer brewed on the spot, dancers, Wiener schnitzel,
alpine horn blowers and plenty of oom-pah-pah at ''an authentic Munich Fest
Haus,'' between 10 A.M. and 10 P.M. Saturday and Sunday. Admission is $7. The
park can be reached by taking the Lincoln Tunnel to Route 3 west to Route 46
north to Route 23 north. Then take Route 94 north and drive about five miles.
The park is on the right side. Information: (201) 827-2000.

Sunday

A classic film trilogy by the Indian director Satyajit Ray will mark the opening
of a monthlong ''Rediscovering World Cinema'' festival at the Carnegie Hall
Cinema. The ''Apu Trilogy,'' three two-hour films that trace the life of a young
man coming of age in a remote Bengali village, will be shown twice Sunday,
starting at 2 and 6 P.M. Each of the films can be viewed separately or in
sequence. Other films to be shown this month include the works of Federico
Fellini, Milos Forman, Werner Herzog, Renoir, Truffaut and Sternberg. Admission
to the Carnegie Hall Cinema, at 887 Seventh Avenue, between 56th and 57th
Streets, is $5. Information: 757-2131.

It is hard enough these days to see a falcon in New York City, but to see one
fitted in the working bird attire of the Middle Ages is truly rare. From 1 to
2:30 P.M. Sunday, the Medieval Festival Guild of New York will be presenting
just such a scene in a demonstration of the craft of medieval falconry. Visitors
will see an expert show how the birds were used to hunt for food and for sport,
adorned elegantly with bells and leather jesses. The demonstration, designed for
children and adults, will be held at the Apple Orchard near the Cloisters in
Fort Tryon Park. Admission is free. Information: 927-3700.

A play and art exhibition that blends Greek tragedy with cartoon-like skits, all
in a West Side landfill site? Just such a show will be performed Sunday at 6:30
P.M by Creative Time, an organization offering a series of visual and
performance art exhibitions under the title ''Art on the Beach.'' This
performance, ''Oedipus in the Mouth of the Dragon,'' will feature a
dragon-sphinx structure as the setting for short skits based on the destinies of
characters in the Greek myth. The event, which should run about an hour and a
half, takes place at Chambers and West Streets, Gate 18 of the Battery Park City
Landfill. Admission is $6. Information: 619-1955.  The food, entertainment and
arts of Jamaican, Peruvian, Portuguese, Scottish, Italian, Indian and other
ethnic residents of New Rochelle, N.Y., will be available Sunday in a festival
held on the edge of Long Island Sound in the Westchester County city. The
Festival of Nations, at Five Islands Park, will be open from 2 to 7 P.M, with
concessions operating at noon. There is no admission charge and parking is free.
To get to the festival, take the New England Thruway to Exit 16 at New Rochelle
and follow signs to North Avenue. Turn left on North Avenue and then take a left
onto Main Street. Travel one mile to LeFevre Lane, just before Salesian High
School. Information: (914) 632-2021, extension 210.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 24, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TEAM ON MISSING PUTS OFF TRIP TO HANOI

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


A United States delegation scheduled to meet with Vietnamese officials to
discuss the fate of missing American servicemen postponed its departure for
Hanoi today after learning that Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach would not be
present for the meetings next week.

The Vietnamese Government announced in July that it was prepared to resolve
within two years the question of Americans missing in action, and wanted to hold
high-level talks to discuss it. Nearly 2,500 Americans are listed as missing in
the Indochina war, more than half of them in Vietnam.

The American delegation that had been scheduled to leave Saturday planned to
spend two days in Hanoi and half a day in Laos.

A State Department statement said only that the delegation ''may have to
reschedule'' the trip because of ''some difficulty in scheduling participation
on the Vietnamese side.''

A senior Administration official said Mr. Thach's participation was considered
crucial. Mr. Thach was in Indonesia this week and there were unconfirmed reports
he had gone on to Moscow. The official said there was hope that the Vietnamese
would offer ''clarification'' and that the delegation could leave with a delay
of only a day or two.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 24, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MANVILLE CAN SUE U.S., JUDGE RULES

BYLINE: By STEVEN E. PROKESCH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


In a decision hailed yesterday by the Manville Corporation, a Federal judge
ruled that the company could sue the Government to recover asbestos-related
damages it paid to a naval shipyard worker.

The ruling came in a pretrial action on Wednesday, when the judge denied a
motion to dismiss Manville's suit. In an interview yesterday, a Government
official emphasized that the decision was preliminary, but G. Earl Parker,
Manville's senior vice president for law and public affairs, said the denial
''could be very significant if the Government is ultimately forced to help
compensate the thousands of people injured by asbestos in Government
shipyards.''

Manville recently offered to pay $2.5 billion or more to settle pending and
future asbestos health claims.

In the case in District Court in San Francisco, Manville is suing the Government
for $45,000 it paid to John C. Robinson, who contracted an asbestos-related lung
disease while refitting ships and removing asbestos in naval shipyards in
California. It is one of six similar suits that Manville has brought to force
the Government to help settle asbestos-health claims.

Manville contends that the Government legally required the company to supply
products containing asbestos to build and repair ships during World War II and
the Korean War. It also contends that the Government was negligent, because it
knew of the health dangers that asbestos could cause, but failed to take proper
precautions to safeguard shipyard workers.

'A Very Early Stage'

Robert Willmore, United States Deputy Assistant Attorney General, minimized the
importance of Chief District Judge Robert Peckham's denial of the Government
motion to dismiss the suit. ''It is possible that this case will never go to
trial,'' he said. ''It is a preliminary decision at a very early stage of the
litigation.''

Mr. Parker said that Manville had so far paid $40 million in damages to
government and private workers who were employed in government-controlled
shipyards. About half of the 16,000 cases pending against the company in August
1982, when it filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy
Act to deal with mounting asbestos claims, involve such workers, he said.

Manville and other companies have also been lobbying Congress for legislation
that would have the Government help pay for asbestos injury claims, because of
the Government's past involvement.

Eagle-Picher Industries, another maker of asbestos products facing huge
personal-injury claims, also saw the decision as an important one.

'We Are Very Pleased'

''We are very pleased,'' said James A. Ralston, Eagle-Picher's general counsel.
''It has always been Eagle-Picher's objective to bring the U.S. Government into
court in these asbestos lawsuits, to respond as if they were a private company,
and have a court determine what their responsibility is.''

A spokesman for the Dow Chemical Company noted that the Manville suit seems
similar to one that Dow has filed against the Government to force it to help
compensate Vietnam War veterans exposed to Agent Orange, a defoliant. Dow and
six other companies that produced the chemical have established a $180 million
fund to settle veterans' claims. But Lisa Ziettlow, the Dow spokesman, noted
that a suit had been filed to force the Government to reimburse the companies.
Last May, a district court ruled that the Government could not be sued, but the
decision is being appealed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING AND DREAMING OF SUMMER NIGHTS ON SPEEDWAY

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: ROCKFORD, Ill., Aug. 22


For years now, Gary Kiefert has had a private little dream.

Like thousands of men and women and children sitting in the stands at local
speedways throughout the Middle West on summer nights, the 36-year-old machinist
would watch the amateur race cars roar around the quarter-mile oval.

He would watch the crashes and spinouts and the wheel-to-wheel racing into the
turns. He would watch the frantic waving of the checkered flag and the awarding
of the winner's trophy. He would hear the rumble of more-or-less tuned engines
and the cheers of the crowd. And he would wonder what it would be like to sit in
the driver's seat surrounded by all the noise of competition and the fumes from
high-octane fuels and emotions. Now he knows. ''It's fantastic!'' said the
Rockford Speedway's newest driver, ''I'm making memories right here and now.''

'I Really Enjoy Life'

Gary Kiefert is not famous, even though the announcer did call Mr. Kiefert's
name over the track's loudspeaker system. And he is unlikely ever to make the 10
P.M. local news. Few people beyond his family and his neighbors on Renrose
Avenue know of his efforts. The Vietnam veteran just wanted to do something
different to add a little excitement to his life, maybe a trophy to his shelf
and a little summer satisfaction to his mind while the warm weather lasts.

''I really enjoy life,'' he said, ''Being in Vietnam taught me that.'' And an
August night seemed like a good time to try something special.

Recently the diminutive Mr. Kiefert began hanging around the raceway pits of
other working men who put in a couple of hours' labor on their cars each evening
in preparation for weekend and midweek combat. He learned to set different tire
pressures for each wheel on the oval track and to remove the alternator to gain
about 5 horsepower.

Then in June a friend wanted to get rid of an old car, a rusted 1971 Caprice
with 90,000 miles. It was a far cry from the shiny $12,000 fiberglass beauties
that whine and growl in the late model division here. But it did not cost
anything. ''Today,'' said Mr. Kiefert, ''it's worth a little more than that.''

Mr. Kiefert, who is not a trained auto mechanic, used books and friends and a
little backyard ingenuity to tune the engine in his garage. He also had a
3-year-old helper, his son, Matthew, who learned about counting and fractions
from the wrenches and screwdrivers.

Working and Thinking Racing

Mr. Kiefert rewired the starter to work in any gear. Lucky's Bar got its name on
the right rear fender for a $75 donation, which went toward a new battery. A
bank's $60 went for new tires. Ed's Auto Parts chipped in items. Mr. Kiefert
borrowed safety goggles from the National Can Company, where he works, and dug
out his old motorcycle helmet. His wife, Darla, gave him a $125 fireresistant
racing suit for his birthday.

At dawn Wednesday Mr. Kiefert was mulling an innovation on a can-loading machine
at work. But after work he was thinking racing. By 5:30 he and a friend, Randy
Triplett, were at the track, long before any of the average crowd's 3,000
spectators paid their $5.

There are two worlds co-existing at these little tracks scattered around the
region. One, beneath the bright lights, is full of faceless drivers, familiar
numbers and loud cheers for that night's good guys and bad guys.

The other, way back behind the tall pit wall, is dominated by greasy fingers,
frantic repairs and not a few butterflies as these automotive gladiators gird
for competition. There, the distant cheers for good moves and the dull thuds of
bad ones wash over the wall as Mr. Kiefert and others wait their turn to drive
the dented chariots up the dusty ramp to the starting line.

'They're Really Hitting Tonight'

Wham! And sparks fly up from an unseen brush with the wall. ''They're really
hitting tonight,'' said Mr. Kiefert. 8:54: ''Gentlemen, you should be lining up
for the road runners' first heat race.'' 8:55: Mr. Kiefert flips the switch and
his old engine roars to life. He smiles. 8:59: Twelve cars ease onto the track.
Mr. Kiefert, in car No. 91, is on the inside fourth row. On the first lap No. 59
slams the wall and drops its gas tank. 9:03: A restart. On the first lap Mr.
Kiefert moves into sixth place, then fifth and third. But No. 29, Steve Lloyd, a
friend who gave Mr. Kiefert a seatbelt harness, looms in Mr. Kiefert's mirror.
He sails past Mr. Kiefert, who falls to fourth.

On the next lap, pushing to close in on third place, Mr. Kiefert spins into the
infield and finishes eighth. ''Well,'' he says back in the pits, talking
excitedly, ''I learned another lesson: Don't be greedy.''

''Hey, Gary,'' shouts Mr. Lloyd, ''Did I hit you? I didn't mean to.''

'Some Real Desperadoes'

That is not always the case. Some drivers are known for their glee in crashes,
leading to disputes, grudges and car wars.

''The race track and the world has some real desperadoes working out anger from
somewhere else,'' says Mr. Kiefert, ''Me, I did my fighting a long time ago
somewhere else. I'm just out here to have fun.'' Pause. ''And winning is a lot
of fun.'' He straps his baseball cap into the car for the official photograph in
case he wins. ''You never know,'' he says.

By 9:50 No. 91 is lined up, third row outside, for the night's semifeature. At
the first corner, Mr. Kiefert cuts around one car, later takes another on the
straightaway and hangs on to finish third.

''This is great!'' he says back in the pits, his face dirty, his engine smoking,
his hands shaking.

For this he earned a $7 prize, just enough to cover gas for that night and one
evening's practice. He got a smile and kiss from his wife. ''Way to go, dad,''
said Matt. And the car was not wrecked.

To celebrate, Mr. Kiefert shared a Coke with Mr. Triplett. Then he towed the
rusty race car home, tucked his boy into bed and stayed awake in the dark,
dreaming of second place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gary Kiefert making a pit stop; Photo of Kiefert and Randy
Triplett preparing the car before the race (NYT/Stive Kagan)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA FEARS RICE SHORTFALL FROM DROUGHT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 22


A Cambodian official said today that if a drought now scorching the paddy fields
of several provinces did not end within the next month, the country could face a
million-ton rice shortage.

The official, Nhim Vanda, Deputy Minister of State Planning, spoke at a news
conference outlining the country's first five-year plan, which will be
introduced at the Cambodian Communist Party's fifth congress at a still secret
date in the near future.

Agricultural improvement will be at the heart of the plan, he said. In the
increasingly integrated economies of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, this country
appears to have been designated the producer of food and raw materials like
rubber and timber.

Last year, drought and flooding combined to cause a 400,000-ton shortfall in
milled rice, according to Phnom Penh. That was considered very serious by the
Cambodian Government, which asked for food relief from international
organizations.

Mr. Nhim Vanda said today that Cambodian farmers were now being told to plant
substitute crops, especially corn and sweet potatoes, in drought-damaged areas.

He said Cambodia had begun exporting corn and beans to Vietnam, the Soviet Union
and other Communist nations. But he added that if rains did not come and food
became scarce, those exports would have to end.

The official stressed that his worst-case projection of a million-ton shortfall
in milled rice was his own, and not based on scientific analysis. He added that
however bad the crop, officials did not fear a recurrence of the famine that
swept Cambodia beginning in the brutal Pol Pot years from 1975 to 1978. The
famine reached disastrous proportions immediately after the Vietnamese invasion
of Cambodia, culminating in Hanoi's installation of Heng Samrin Government here
in January 1979.

Then, many who had been unable to escape the Khmer Rouge took the opportunity to
flee, leaving untended fields behind.

From 1975 until 1982, hundreds of thousands of Cambodians died of disease and
starvation, accoring to United States estimates. From 1979 to 1982, Unicef and
the World Food Program contributed about $400 million in food aid to Cambodia,
almost $100 million of it from the United States.

Last year, according to James Ingram, executive director of the World Food
Program, a United Nations agency, 16,000 tons of food were donated to Cambodia,
with 54,000 tons more for Cambodian refugees along the Thai border.

Mr. Ingram, speaking to reporters on a visit to Thailand in June, said he feared
the Cambodian food situation would worsen this year. But he also said that
because estimates of food shortages could not be made independently, it was
difficult to be certain of the size of the problem. International agencies are
not allowed to travel freely in Cambodia.

Cambodia's statistics on food shortages - like its figures on population, now
given as 7.4 million - have been a source of controversy in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. Some officials in the Asean nations of Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines say they believe the
figures are inflated to bring in the largest aid subsidies.

The problems of Cambodian agriculture are easy to see, however, for a visitor
who makes even the limited allowable trips out of Phnom Penh into the rural
areas. According to international aid organizations working in Cambodia, the
lack of water management is a major contributor.

This is vividly illustrated by the appearance of a healthy seedling rice crop
knee-deep in ground water only a few hundred yards from rice plants dying in
parched earth.

Oxfam, among other international groups, is trying to drill wells to insure a
better water supply. There are few dams and reservoirs in Cambodia, so heavy
rainfalls are a menace.

Today, Mr. Nhim Vanda acknowledged that Cambodian irrigation systems, where they
existed, were also inadequate and in poor shape, ''In this country,'' he said,
''we still depend on the sky.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA TAKING LARGER WAR ROLE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 22


Pressed by the Vietnamese to take a more active role in defending their country
against attacks from three guerrilla armies, Cambodians are building ''strategic
fences,'' planting mines and training ''suicide commandos'' for service on the
Thai border, according to officials here.

Civilians, apparently in substantial numbers, are being drafted into border
labor groups to supplement the country's 30,000-man army, officials acknowledge.
The three guerrilla forces are thought to total more than double that number -
the war against them has been waged mostly by about 160,000 Vietnamese troops.

A Cambodian Communist Party official told reporters this week that it was now
the ''duty'' of citizens of Phnom Penh, a city of 500,000, to go to the border
to aid in the clearing of land and the construction of trenches, bamboo fences
and other defensive barriers.

Cambodian refugees reaching Thailand have said civilians are also being used as
''human mine detectors.''

High Regard for Khmer Rouge

A staff director of Cambodia's national Military Training School told reporters
last Saturday that what he called ''manual'' mine detection was being carried
out along the border. The director, Suos Someth, who is in charge of political
education at the school, said this was necessary because Khmer Rouge forces had
planted plastic mines that could not be found with mechanical devices. He did
not elaborate.

Cambodian officials dismiss the abilities of two of the three guerrilla armies -
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front and the forces of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk. But the same officials regard the Khmer Rouge under Pol Pot as a
potent force.

One civilian official this week described the Khmer Rouge forces as tough and
loyal fighters.

Mr. Suos Someth revealed the existence of the suicide-squad training in
explaining the military school's curriculum to reporters visiting it last
Saturday. He said suicide squads had taken part in last winter's Vietnamese-led
attacks that emptied guerrilla bases near Thailand.

Four Programs of Study

He would not say how many suicide commandos the Cambodian Army had trained since
instruction began in 1981, or how many had died in the assaults.

The training of suicide squads is one of four programs operated by the Military
Training School, Mr. Suos Someth said. The others are a general course in border
defense and specialized courses in artillery and antiaircraft weaponry.

Hanoi has been saying since early this year that it expects to be able to
withdraw its forces in five years. But there have been reports of Vietnamese
concern about the ability of Cambodian forces to hold off the guerrillas.

At the Military Training School, Mr. Suos Someth said there were no courses in
counterinsurgency because the army considered that its problems with what are
called ''Pol Pot remnants'' or ''Khmer reactionaries'' were matters of border
defense alone.

The Military Training School, housed in the Lon Nol Government's military
academy, trains students on artillery and antiaircraft weapons and in the use of
rockets, he said, adding that most of the equipment is Soviet-made.

Staff of 76 Instructors

The school's students, who range from 17 to 29 years old, according to Mr. Suos
Someth, are drawn from military units around the country. They become company
commanders in charge of about 200 men at the end of 3-month, 6-month or 12-month
courses, Mr. Suos Someth said.

He added that the courses were sometimes shortened if more officers were needed
at the border.

Mr. Suos Someth would not say how many students were at the school now, or how
many had graduated since it opened in 1979. He said the school had a staff of 76
instructors, all Cambodians trained in the Soviet Union, in Vietnam or at the
school itself.

Two Vietnamese military ''experts'' remain at the school, which was established
by Hanoi soon after the Vietnamese toppled the Khmer Rouge Government six years
ago.

''In 1979 we knew nothing of military training,'' Mr. Suos Someth said through
an interpreter. ''We had to learn from the brotherly Vietnamese.''

Stress on Political Education

The school was turned over to Cambodians in 1982, he said. In addition to the
central Military Training School, each province has a smaller military training
center.

Mr. Suos Someth said 40 percent of the military school's curriculum was devoted
to political education, the only courses to which women are admitted.

Political training includes courses in Marxism-Leninism, ''revolutionary
morals'' and ''characteristics of army life,'' Mr. Suos Someth said. He said
Communist Party membership had been increasing every year in the student body.
He said he joined the party in 1982.

Visitors to the Military Training School saw only a small portion of the
school's equipment and installations.

Fewer than 100 troops were on parade. Most of the young men had no boots and
wore only sandals with their olive-drab uniforms. Those who wore battered boots
or shoes frequently had broken or missing shoelaces.

Visitors were not able to talk with the Cambodian students, a group of whom
gathered near an open pavilion where reporters were being briefed. When the
journalists began to photograph them, the students were dispersed by their
instuctors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN PANANMA, U.S. BRIGADE PRACTICES CANAL DEFENSE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 636 words

DATELINE: FORT CLAYTON, Panama


In the dense jungle only a few hundred yards from the Panama Canal, American
paratroopers in full battle gear pulled themselves through green slime
hand-over-hand on a rope, with only their helmets and rifles sticking out of the
water.

Close by, more paratroopers rigged waterproof rafts of ponchos and pup tents,
then eased them into the murky backwater. One soldier towed a raft with a string
in his teeth, while another pushed from behind.

Still other paratroopers in the humid jungle lashed field packs onto an 11-man
rubber boat and, after chasing off a couple of nosy alligators, launched the
boat into a brackish pond and paddled away in a stealthy crossing.

The paratroopers, members of the 193d Infantry Brigade, were training to defend
the Panama Canal against guerrilla attacks, which the authorities in the United
States say they fear may come from Cuba and Nicaragua, and to prepare for
contingencies anywhere in Latin America.

Very Versatile Unit

In addition, the 193d has recently been reorganized to make it perhaps the most
versatile unit in the Army. New medical, engineer, signal and military
intelligence units are intended to make it more effective in training Latin
American armies.

Since 1911, during the construction of the canal, which connects the Atlantic
and the Pacific, the main mission of American troops here has been to defend the
waterway. But that role has recently changed in two ways.

First, under the treaty that began turning the canal over to Panama in 1979, the
United States remains responsible for defending the canal, but with an
increasing role by Panamanian forces until the year 2000, when Panama assumes
full responsibility.

Second, for years the danger to the canal was expected from an overland invasion
or a seaborne attack. Today, officers here said, the main threat is from
terrorists who might try to destroy the locks that raise and lower ships as they
move across the isthmus. ''In training,'' an officer said, ''we never simulate a
conventional threat.''

Led by Veteran Commander

The brigade of 9,300 soldiers, which is the size of a light division and the
only American combat force on long-term duty in Latin America, is commanded by
Maj. Gen. Fred F. Woerner, a veteran of two tours in Vietnam and a specialist on
Latin America.

Its combat forces include the parachute battalion, a light-infantry battalion
and a battalion of Special Forces, or Green Berets, who specialize in
counterinsurgency and counterterrorist operations.

Soldiers here spend a good bit of time on waterborne training like that of
Lieut. Col. George B. Utter's paratroopers. Defending the canal, officers said,
does not mean standing guard next to the locks but going out into the
countryside filled with streams and ponds to search for guerrillas.

''We want to engage the guerrilla as far away from the canal as we can,'' an
operations officer said.

Wide Area for Training

Right after the treaty with Panama was signed, American forces were confined to
shrunken areas by a Panamanian Government eager to assert sovereignty. Officers
said that attitude had changed and American forces were allowed to range over a
wider area for training.

A shift in training with Panamanian troops has also taken place, the officers
said, with American and Panamanian officers planning maneuvers together.

Outside Panama, troops from the 193d Brigade have been sent to El Salvador to
stand watch on Tiger Island, where the United States operates a radar and other
electronic intelligence-gathering equipment. Soldiers from the 193d have also
maneuvered in Honduras; some are there now in a counterinsurgency exercise.

To help Latin American armies, the 193d Brigade is a primary source of mobile
training teams, especially those from the Special Forces battalion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR TROUBLED VIETNAM VETERANS, NEW HELP

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y.


Five years after the Vietnam War ended, Tom Eiss, a former marine, drove off a
cliff.

''I was just sitting home one day in the living room,'' he recalled the other
day, ''and that's the last thing I remember.

''My family said I put on some of my old Vietnam clothes, got on a motorcycle
and drove out of the garage, mumbling something about finding the P.O.W.'s and
the M.I.A.'s.''

The incident left him with a fractured skull, and he had to spend two months in
Buffalo's Veterans Administration Hospital. He also lost his job.

Now, 10 years after the war's end, Mr. Eiss is working with Sharon McGrath, a
former nurse at a Veterans Administration hospital who has opened a residence
for former veterans such as himself.

Stress Syndrome Cited

The Veterans Administration estimates that 700,000 men suffer from a syndrome,
first officially recognized by psychiatrists five years ago, called
post-traumatic stress disorder.

The disorder, whose symptoms in veterans of earlier wars had been called ''shell
shock'' or ''war neurosis,'' can have debilitating effects on a person years
after a traumatic event.

Mrs. McGrath said that when the residence, called Copin House, for Care of
People in Need, opened on July 8, it was the realization of a dream.

During her 17 years at the Veterans Administration, the last seven of them at
the psychiatric ward of the hospital in Buffalo, she said, she had become not
only a healer, but also a friend and a counselor to many of the men she treated.

''She was through work at 4:10,'' said her husband, John, ''but she'd stay at
the hospital until 9, 10 o'clock at night, just talking to these guys.'' When
she wasn't at the hospital, the veterans knew they were always welcome to call
or stop by her home.

In and Out of Hospital

Many of them, she said, were continually in and out of the hospital as their
problems with nightmares and flashbacks - or alcoholism and drugs - became
acute. But what the hospital was missing, Mrs. McGrath believed, was a way to
help them understand their problems and to readjust to the world outside the
hospital.

''You're looking at a group of young veterans,'' she said, ''who were out in the
work force until their problems got so great that they couldn't hold jobs.''

She said she hoped Copin House would serve as a halfway house, helping the men
deal with the often incapacitating mental aftershocks of the war. It is crucial,
she said, that the veterans know there are many others like themselves. The
house can take in 15 veterans at a time, and 11 are now in the program.

While at Copin House, the veterans have group as well as individual
psychological counseling, and sessions on drug and alcohol problems, veterans
benefits, education, careers and, if needed, physical therapy. The Veterans
Administration screens the veterans for medical problems and pays the program's
cost of $46 a day, Mrs. McGrath said.

A Way to Help Each Other

''The vets are going to be with each other,'' said Mr. Eiss, who helps Mrs.
MaGrath with the various details of running Copin House. ''They'll be able to
talk to each other when they feel like they're going off the edge.''

Since 1980, the Veterans Administration has opened 153 storefront Readjustment
Counseling Centers for veterans, and 11 special-stress treatment centers in
psychiatric wards of Veterans Administration hospitals.

Officials of the Veterans Administration said Copin House was one of only two
halfway houses for victims of the disorder.

In the month since the residence has opened, the constant stream of veterans in
and out of the house, looking for help, advice or just someone to talk to, has
increased, said Mr. McGrath.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN TRANQUIL TIMES YIELD GREAT WORKS?

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3677 words


''Novelists are like vultures,'' the Peruvian author Mario Vargas Llosa once
said. ''We feed off decaying societies.'' His simile explains a great deal about
the dilemma of American creative artists in the 1980's. Two generations of
writers, film makers, musicians and visual artists have come of age since World
War II ended. Born into comfort, most of them, these creators now live in a
decade that is the apotheosis of affluence, the time when, as the novelist Jay
McInerney put it, ''there's no cultural consensus beyond the idea that a Porsche
or a Rolex are considered legitimate goals in themselves.''

In their own material ease, and in that of the milieu they often convey, postwar
artists stand in contrast to their peers in more turbulent countries and to
their forebears in America, who were shaped, indeed defined, by the national
cataclysms of two world wars and the Great Depression.

The earlier American artists had poverty and political upheaval to stoke their
furnaces; today's artists admittedly live amid less want and unrest and rarely
recognize their existence at all. That is not to say the equation is simply
experience equals art; but it does mean that, in the absence of great, galvanic
events, these artists must find other means and subjects to stir their passions.

Some, like the playwrights David Mamet and Sam Shepard, have immersed themselves
in the underclass in the manner of Hemingway or O'Neill. The film directors
Stephen Spielberg and Lawrence Kasdan have left the fantasy vehicles that
typified their careers for more probing, naturalistic work. The playwright
Christopher Durang and the film maker Susan Seidelman have posed their questions
about the status-conscious way of life through satire. Dramatists like David
Rabe and novelists such as Bret Easton Ellis and Mr. McInerney have reacted with
direct revulsion to the narcissism of the age, forging what might be called a
literature of outrage. But the unifying factor for almost all these artists is
the sense, perhaps expressed best by Mr. Durang, that the suburban generation
has a tale to tell that does not depend on having endured gunfire or breadlines.

''There's a line from 'Endgame': 'You're on earth, there's no cure for that,' ''
said Mr. Durang, author of the bitterly comic plays ''The Marriage of Bette and
Boo'' and ''Sister Mary Ignatius Explains It All for You.'' ''It applies as much
to someone on a suburban street as someone on a freighter. I don't think my
writing is a response to the suburban experience; it's a response to life.''

But as Mr. Durang continues talking he raises the other side of the argument:
''It is true that if one was worried about getting food on the table we wouldn't
have as much time to worry'' about one's own psyche. The social historian
Christopher Lasch put it similarly in his book ''The Culture of Narcissism'':
''Economic man has given way to the psychological man of our times - the final
product of bourgeois individualism. The new narcissist is haunted not by guilt
but by anxiety.''

It is true over the span of history that the well-fixed and well-born have
produced inspired and innovative art; indeed artists for centuries imagined and
executed at the sufferance of the church or the crown. Even amid outward
security there can be the inner struggle central to art. Emily Dickinson, for
instance, rarely left her house for a 20-year period during which she produced
some of America's greatest poetry. Beyond that is a hard reality: today's
American artists, without vast patronage, must survive in the marketplace as
well as the salon.

But the contemporary view, as expounded by Mr. Llosa, is that great upheaval,
great issues and great conflict give birth to great art. Who can deny the power
in the films of the Pole Andrzej Wajda, the plays of the South African Athol
Fugard, the paintings of the German Anselm Kiefer, the novels of the Mexican
Carlos Fuentes and the Czech Milan Kundera -power that seems absent so often in
their American counterparts.

The contrast is equally extreme between America past and America present. The
parents and grandparents of current American artists, in both literal and
metaphoric senses, fused modernist style with social and political engagement.
Hemingway, the scion of suburban bluebloods, went to war and came out calling it
''something quite irreplacable'' for a writer. William Faulkner and Tennessee
Williams married their personal visions to a social landscape: the demise of the
planter aristocracy in the South. During the Depression, W.P.A. programs thrust
into a sea of poverty artists including the writers Nelson Algren, James Agee
and Studs Terkel, the photographers Walker Evans and Margaret Bourke-White and
the painter Ben Shahn. In New York, the Group Theater united the dramatists
Clifford Odets, Sidney Kingsley and Irwin Shaw with the directors Cheryl
Crawford, Harold Clurman and Lee Strasberg.

''Never were writers so militant in their challenge or so conscious of what was
wanted, so anxious to participate in society and to liberate it,'' the critic
Alfred Kazin wrote of the 30's in ''On Native Grounds.'' ''Never were they so
much at the mercy of all the social pressure and so driven by public events.''

In the boom decades following World War II, however, American artists began
looking in much more than out. Many of them grew up with parents who had scraped
to rise from Depression deprivation into the middle class and who made freedom
from need the rule of domestic life. At the same time, modern America grew so
large and complex as to dash the 30's ideal that one good person could change
the system; Mr. Smith would not go to Washington in the 80's, except perhaps as
a lobbyist.

The Vietnam War only briefly provoked the deep self-examination that the world
wars did for writers like Hemingway, Faulkner, Norman Mailer and Joseph Heller.
For one thing, college deferments from the draft spared thousands of future
artists any first-hand exposure to the war or the issues it raised; most of the
directors who conveyed Vietnam on screen - Francis Ford Coppola, Michael Cimino,
John Milius - spent the war attending film school. Certainly exceptions existed
in the writers David Rabe (''Pavlo Hummel,'' ''Sticks and Bones'' and
''Streamers''), Michael Herr (''Dispatches'') and Timothy O'Brien (''Waiting for
Cacciato''). But now, only a decade after the war, their hard questions have
been shunted aside as the nation at best craves a conciliatory communion on the
plight of the Vietnam veteran and at worst embraces the cartoon-style
revisionism of ''Rambo.'' Artists without any ghosts and with a short memory of
even their own times can easily enough produce a static culture - a cultural
terrain that often appears barren. If the stock character of social realism was
Odets's cabbie named Lefty then his equivalent today is Ann Beattie's publisher
named Hildon. Other novelists simply write novels about being novelists. As
Donald Barthelme observed in his own fiction: ''Another story about writing a
story! Another regressus ad infinitum! Who doesn't prefer art that at least
overtly imitates something other than its own processes? That doesn't constantly
proclaim 'Don't forget I'm an artifice!' ''

Many of the major films, both critically and commercially, were fantasy
adventures like ''E.T.'' and ''Star Wars.'' Popular film fare, meanwhile, can
seem like a procession of so many ''Ghostbusters,'' ''Goonies'' and
''Gremlins.'' The contemporary films on larger social and political topics are
disproportionately the work of writers and directors with roots in the
Depression - Martin Ritt, Sidney Lumet, Haskell Wexler, Horton Foote. These men,
in their 50's and 60's, serve as the heirs to John Ford, King Vidor, Preston
Sturges and Frank Capra. It remains to be seen who their heirs will be.

If there is an overriding issue for visual artists, it is the media. Important
artists such as Robert Longo and Cindy Sherman have created their most urgent
work in examining how the popular media, particularly television and film, shape
people's responses both to society and to themselves. The work of an artist like
David Salle expresses the difficulty of sorting through the innumerable,
often-contrary images of an electronic culture.

The art world, especially in New York, functions like an interchange of
celebrity and commerce, transforming the Julian Schnabels and Keith Harings from
scuffling eccentrics to wise investments in months. ''There's such a thing as a
modernist ego ideal for the artist: you do one outrageous thing and suddenly
you're important,'' said Perry Meisel, an associate professor of English at New
York University and the author of a upcoming book on modernism. ''Let's take
Elvis and Mailer. Both of them at least acquired their cults in progress. Young
artists like Eric Fischl are celebrities on arrival.''

The same is often true of popular music. Given exceptions like Bruce Springsteen
(most clearly on ''Nebraska,'' an album deeply influenced by the work of Woody
Guthrie), Randy Newman (''Good Old Boys'') and Stephen Sondheim (''Follies'' and
''Pacific Overtures'' particularly), the most talented songwriters have directed
their scrutiny inward, producing memorable work only as long as their romances
or general angst could yield sufficient grist. The punk movement that resounded
with political dissidence in England gave America mostly fashion.

One counter-argument to the state of so much American art is that it reflects
only too acutely the life around it. ''In the 60's,'' said Howard Stein, the
chairman of the graduate theater program at Columbia University and a longtime
professor of playwrighting, ''the plays reflected the country's examination of
itself, a coming to terms with our own ugliness. I would use Arthur Miller's
'All My Sons' as a model for those kinds of plays. But as soon as the 60's were
over, the social issues went down the drain, or were done in TV dramas. I don't
know what the artistic subject became, except the scream for help, which is a
private story.''

The Search for Meaning

Works like Arthur Kopit's ''End of the World'' and Larry Kramer's ''The Normal
Heart'' do carry on the tradition of the play of ideas, but their respective
ruminations of nuclear war and AIDS stand like lonely sentries. Is that solely
the artists's fault? The fact is that, without a king's coffers behind them or
even the governmental largesse of most modern European nations, American artists
often must balance the creation of serious work with the need to make a living.
Probing art, difficult art, rarely pays the rent.

If anything, the idea of political commitment merits mostly parody and
skepticism in the 1980's. Early in the film ''Risky Business,'' for instance,
several students from an affluent suburban high school are comparing the annual
incomes of different professions. ''Doesn't anyone want to accomplish anything?
Or do we just want to make money?'' one student abruptly puts in. ''Make
money,'' another responds. ''Lots of money.''

''The Big Chill'' generated a great deal of controversy, particularly on the
political left, for suggesting that social ties rather than shared political
values bound a group of friends who attended the University of Michigan during
the 60's. The antiwar rallies in which they participated, one felt, could just
as well have been fraternity parties. But Lawrence Kasdan, the director, says
that rather than endorsing his generation's retreat from the barricades he was
ironically observing it. ''People thought I was saying the characters's beliefs
were insincere,'' he said. ''It's just that their concerns changed over time and
their political concerns didn't stand the test of time. I never meant that they
were all phony, but you have to look at where those people are now.''

At the same time, there exists among young people a sincere, if inchoate, desire
to connect - to some cause or at least to a life with some grit to it. The
massive response to the Live Aid concert attests to the longing, as does the
activism on college campuses on the South African divestment issue. It also
helps explain the massive appeal of Bruce Springsteen, who can sing to a crowd
of kids in Lacoste shirts about a jobless auto worker. The playwright Mark St.
Germain captured the phenomenon in ''Out of Gas on Lover's Leap,'' which was
produced in New York last season by the WPA Theater. One of Mr. St. Germain's
characters, a senator's son attending a New England prep school, wants to move
to the Jersey shore towns that spawned Mr. Springsteen. ''How can you even
mention Seaside Heights and Malibu in the same breath?'' the boy asks his
girlfriend. ''Seaside Heights is real, it's for real people, regular working
people. The only thing you work for in Malibu is a tan.''

That wistful, naive yearning for working-clas s roots is familiar to many
artists who grew up in the middle class. ''I had this feeling for a long time
that it was a handicap,'' said Mr. McInerney, the author of ''Bright Lights, Big
City,'' the screenplay for its film version and a new novel about American
expatriates in Japan, ''Ransom.'' ''I felt that I had to be a bartender or
something, that the grittier strata of American life was the repository of truth
and vision. And I did feel obliged, when I graduated college, to go across the
country doing odd jobs - a real Kerouac number. I'm not saying I changed my
class stripes, but there was an attempt not to be just another clean,
well-educated white boy. But ultimately I decided I had to write out of my own
experience. I couldn't just cobble up a persona from scratch. I had to trust who
I was or the writing wouldn't be authentic.''

Artists' Responses in the 80's

David Mamet personifies the writer who can literally penetrate the working-clas
s and even criminal worlds. Mr. Mamet, who grew up in both a middle-class
Chicago neighborhood and a suburb he calls ''New South Hell,'' shipped on a
Great Lakes ore boat, did clerical work in a seamy real-estate office, played
cards with ex-convicts and taught writing in a prison. His experiences informed
such muscular plays as ''Lakeboat,'' ''American Buffalo'' and ''Glengarry Glen
Ross,'' and even when Mr. Mamet has written about white-collar characters, as in
the play ''Edmond,'' he has had them seeking a truer life by burrowing into the
underclass or the underworld. If the temptation is to assume that Mr. Mamet
contrived to harvest experience, he insists the process was more accidental.

''I don't think any writer worth anything goes out trying to gather material,''
Mr. Mamet said. ''The mark of a great writer is that his writing and his life
are one.'' As for his succession of odd jobs, Mr. Mamet said, ''I did it to pay
the rent, so what I gained from it was being able to pay the rent.'' By which he
means something more: ''People who grew up as I did and became accountants or
lawyers or doctors never experienced that. They're the people for whom society
paid the rent. Which is why I didn't write about them for a long time. There's a
basic feeling of self-worth that's lacking. It's not because you live on a
tree-lined street; it's because you have an institutionalized profession.''

Few other contemporary artists, except Sam Shepard and Bruce Springsteen, have
matched Mr. Mamet's affinity for the outcast. In the case of directors like
Stephen Spielberg and Lawrence Kasdan, artistic growth can be measured simply in
the movement from fantastic or extra-terrestrial characters to humans. Mr.
Spielberg, who established himself as one of the most renowned and most popular
film makers with his science fiction features ''E.T.'' and ''Close Encounters of
the Third Kind,'' is currently directing the screen version of Alice Walker's
''The Color Purple'' - a Pultizer Prize-winning novel about two black sisters
that is both earthly and earthy.

Mr. Kasdan built his Hollywood reputation writing ''Return of the Jedi'' and
''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' films that largely evoked the adventure movies he
had seen during childhood. But more recently, with ''Body Heat'' and ''The Big
Chill,'' Mr. Kasdan has shown an inquiring mind to match his technical wizardry.
''Both films,'' he said, ''dealt thematically with the same thing - the distance
between a person's values and their behavior. It's just that one was a melodrama
and the other was more naturalistic and satiric. It's a struggle to live
honorably, and that struggle fascinates me.'' It is also a struggle, Mr. Kasdan
adds, that has little to do with one's financial status. ''I don't think
hardship of experience makes a better artist,'' he said. ''You're limited by
your abilities and they're not going to be expanded because you went through
trauma.''

Mr. Durang and Susan Seidelman illustrate an alternative, a way of using satire
both to entertain and to critically comment. ''There's an ironic tone that has
to do with living in the 80s,'' said Miss Seidelman, the director of
''Smithereens'' and ''Desperately Seeking Susan,'' ''and that has to do perhaps
with the over-idealism of the 60's, the notion that everything could be changed.
The 60's weren't suitable for irony. Everybody was so sincere.''

These two satirists's specific methods, however, differ widely. Miss Seidelman
takes a gentler tone, accenting the ridiculous in deadpan style. ''Desperately
Seeking Susan,'' for instance, trades heavily on advertising and artifice. Her
characters seek romance in the personals ads and fame in television commercials;
even the hero of sorts, Des, lives in a realm of illusion. He works as a film
projectionist and the movie-within-a-mo vie that he shows, Miss Seidelman points
out, ''isn't 'Wild Strawberries' but a B-movie called 'Time Travelers.' ''

Mr. Durang favors black comedy drenched in Catholic guilt and rage. ''The
Marriage of Bette and Boo'' has alcoholism, cancer and a series of stillborn
babies; in ''Sister Mary Ignatius'' the former students of a nun confront and
then kill her; the title character in ''Baby With the Bathwater'' barely moves -
except to try to commit suicide by running in front of a bus.

Because so much of Mr. Durang's work centers on the familial chemistry, he has
been placed in the heart of the debate about modern American writing. The critic
Benedict Nightingale consigned Mr. Durang to the purveyors of ''diaper drama'' -
plays about grown-ups who are still coming to terms with their own parents. Mr.
Durang himself maintains that looking at family life is inherently political,
because it turns on the idea of one generation repeating another's mistakes.

Robert Brustein, writing recently in The New Republic, made a similar argument
in praising ''Bette and Boo.'' The way the couple relive their parents's errors,
he said, ''suggests how we can elect a Reagan after suffering a Nixon, how we
can contemplate intervention in Nicaragua after failure in Vietnam, how we can
again neglect our poor, how Bitburg is possible after Buchenwald.''

But part of the problem for irony, satire or world-weary detachment -all
familiar viewpoints in the art of the 80's - has always been in being taken as
seriously as fury. And fury is the currency of the literature of outrage, a body
of work that responds to the ever more conspicuous consumption. ''When you're
writing about decadence and the apathy that leads to it, you're looking at a
complete lack of spirituality,'' said Bret Easton Ellis, the 21-year-old author
of ''Less Than Zero,'' a novel about the sybaritic children of California.
''That's America in the 80's and especially the new generation. There's never
been more stress to gain style and stature and wealth. There's never been more
emphasis on fashion and style for its own sake.''

David Rabe's play ''Hurlyburly'' is a prototype for such literature - one of its
first works and one of its most enraged. His principal character is Eddie, a
movie casting director who was passionately political in the past but who, faced
with the failure of both his ideals and his marriage, is determined to
anesthetize himself with drink, drugs and sex. What torments Eddie most, it is
clear, is not being able to reconcile himself to hedonism.

With strikingly different approaches, Mr. McInerney and Mr. Ellis have grappled
with the same question. Mr. McInerney's ''Bright Lights, Big City'' is on the
surface a picaresque jaunt along the cocaine trail of New York nightlife. The
heart of the novel, however, is a cry against the excess and a realization by
the central character that he must ''learn everything all over again.'' Mr.
Ellis's ''Less Than Zero'' follows a college student as he returns on Christmas
break to his Los Angeles home. With a frighteningly subdued style, Mr. Ellis
catalogues alcoholism, cocaine and heroin use, omnivorous sexuality, pornography
and homosexual prostitution. When the narrator, Clay, decides to return to
college, it comes as nothing less than a decision to live rather than die - a
sort of terrifying, urban updating of another California coming-of-age story,
George Lucas's ''American Graffiti.''

What is perhaps as striking as the literature of outrage itself is the
difficulty audiences have facing it. New Yorkers tended to distance themselves
from ''Hurlyburly'' by viewing it as a play about California rather than about
narcissism. Both Mr. McInerney and Mr. Ellis have been struck by how many
readers, and friends, take their novels as baedeckers of the night.

''The irony in the book,'' Mr. McInerney said, ''was often missed. It's become,
unfortunately, a sort of hot consumer item in itself, and some people take it as
an endorsement of the values it critiques.''

''A lot of the people the book is based on,'' Mr. Ellis said, ''either aren't
reading it because they don't read or are reading it as a travel guide to L.A.
nightlife. They take it as a kind of advocacy for their lifestyle. I've gone to
a few clubs lately and people come up to me and say, 'Did you really go there
and do that? Sounds like fun.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Henry Fonda; Photo of William Hurt and Glenn Close; Photo of
Joan Allen, Richard B. Shull and Grham Beckel (Martha Swope) Photo of ee J. cobb
(Graphic House, INC.); Photo of Randy Newman (Charlyn Zotnik); Photo of Woody
Guthrie; Painting by Ben Shahn; Work by Keith Haring

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GALLERY VIEW;
A SCULPTURE PARK FOR DI SUVERO'S LADDERS TO THE SKY

BYLINE: By Michael Brenson

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1695 words


Mark di Suvero is one of the most seductive and ambitious sculptors alive. His
welded and bolted steel constructions recline, strut, sniff the ground, shake
their heads and write and draw themselves in space. We can swing on them, bang
them, spin them, climb them and play them, like a street musician plays tubs and
pans. As soaring and menacing as they can seem, di Suvero's sculptures are
always, in the end, welcoming and friendly. Anyone visiting his retrospective at
the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville, N.Y., is likely to have a good time.

Di Suvero's approach to sculpture is inclusive and utopian. He is trying to
build a sculptural world that will make room for industry, the natural world and
almost every form of animate life. He has worked on both a modest and a large
scale; he has hugged the earth and tried to build ladders to the sky, sometimes
in the same piece. He has incorporated found objects like rafters, planks,
steamrollers and tank cars. He wants to involve us physically, but he also wants
us to circle his work several times and consider each visual perspective as a
different stop on a journey. In addition, with his ability to manipulate massive
steel beams as if they were lines on paper, he encourages us to consider his
constructions in terms of vision.

But this very American body of work, which asks us to imagine a future in which
individual and industry, worker and intellectual, high and low culture will be
united, also raises questions. Di Suvero, who is 52 years old, exploded on the
art scene with an exhibition at the Green Gallery in 1960. His work has one foot
in the Abstract Expressionism of the 1950's and another in the Minimalism of the
60's. It straddles the heroic period of American art, still rooted in Europe and
self-expression and searching for the largest possible totality, and a period
that was determined to leave Europe, multiple references and the cult of
personality behind. Liberated from the past, art could point toward a future
that could be what anyone wants to make it.

The difficulty of making these orientations compatible can be suggested by di
Suvero's different approaches to scale. A sculpture by David Smith, who is
identified with Abstract Expressionism, is largely self-contained. Scale is
built into it so that we can experience it in pretty much the same way no matter
where we see it. Minimalism, on the other hand, reacted against the idea of a
self-contained work of art, often creating sculpture that gains its sense of
scale from its relationship with its environment.

Many of di Suvero's large sculptures combine internal and external scale. When
we are on the swing in ''Arichidea,'' for example, the work seems vast, ominous
and complete. When we walk around it, our sense of its content and power shifts,
depending upon its relationship with its surroundings - which in Storm King are
grass, hills, trees and sky. In other words, the sculpture wants to be both
independent and interdependent at the same time. While the political ambition
suggested by this and other works is serious and challenging - trying to respect
equally both individual and context - the two kinds of scale diminish the sense
of urgency and resolve.

''Mark di Suvero: 25 Years of Sculpture and Drawing,'' through Oct. 31,
commemorates the 25th anniversary of Storm King, the 200-acre sculpture park 65
miles from New York City where large sculptures by Alexander Calder, Isamu
Noguchi, Robert Grosvenor, Louise Nevelson and others swell like hills and
sprout like trees. It took 14 trucks to transport almost 50 di Suvero sculptures
and five weeks to install them.

The show includes several bronze sculptures from the late 1950's and early 60's
whose main subject is the hand. They are bruised, defiant and tormented works
that leave no doubt as to Di Suvero's eagerness to compete with the giants of
modern sculpture. There are also a number of table-top pieces that reveal his
familiarity with Cubism and Surrealism. There are several important large
sculptures, as much as 40 feet long and 40 feet high, such as ''For Lady Day''
(1969) and ''Mother Peace'' (1970). A number of works, including the 1981-82
''Arichidea,'' the 1984-85 ''Huru'' and the 1985 ''Gateway,'' are being
exhibited for the first time.

David R. Collens, the director of the center and curator of the show, has
selected more than 50 drawings and collages. They suggest the artist's
commitment to process and gesture. Some are directly related to sculptures. Some
are complete in themselves. Some are figurative drawings that demonstrate di
Suvero's gift for line and his fascination with large numbers of people being
swept together by events or moods.

This is the first major di Suvero exhibition since the retrospective at the
Whitney Museum of American Art in 1975, which was spread over five boroughs.
While that show provided an opportunity to see the artist's industrial forms
within urban settings, his works are now in one spacious rural site, spread out
over grass and fields and framed by forests and hills. We may never again see as
many Di Suvero's with as much of a sense of privacy and leisure.

But the exhibition also has problems. Because of gaps in the selection, it is
not easy to make the link between the earlier works inside the Storm King
gallery and the large steel sculptures outdoors. In addition, reflecting the
desire in the works to go beyond logic, the installation is not chronological or
developmental. We are asked to consider the works in stylistic groups and in
isolation.

Furthermore, the setting is so complete that it can make almost anything
man-made seem subservient or extraneous. One exception is the sculpture of David
Smith, who worked in a similar landscape. There are some outstanding Smiths at
Storm King, in the midst of the di Suveros. In short, the show is spectacular
and fun, but it does not make a great deal of sense, and it magnifies the
artist's weaknesses.

Mark di Suvero was born in Shanghai in 1933. His father was an Italian naval
attache. Both parents were of Sephardic Jewish descent. In 1941, the family
migrated to San Francisco, where di Suvero grew up. At the University of
California at Berkeley, he studied philosophy. He moved to New York in 1957.
Months before his 1960 show, he was nearly killed when an elevator on top of
which he was moving lumber did not stop its ascent. Although he kept on working,
it was five years before he walked without crutches, which surely explains the
sense of exhilaration that is often communicated when his steel beams stride
through space. The artist has also lived in Europe, where he exiled himself in
1971 because of America's involvement in Vietnam.

Di Suvero's work is in some way about movement. It refers to trains and planes.
It is filled with references to ships and sea. His cables suggest rigging. For
surefooted people without vertigo, many of his tall pieces can be climbed and
scaled like booms and masts. On a given day, di Suvero's longtime dealer Richard
Bellamy may be seen scampering up precipitous sculptures as easily as a child
running up a slide. Standing atop ''For Lady Day,'' he looked like a sailor on
watch at sea.

Di Suvero's work leads us through cultures, through the history of art and
through time. There are numerous references to the Orient. His works have titles
like ''Atman'' and ''Huru.'' There are suggestions of Oriental weapons, tortures
and calligraphy. There are frequent references to seals and stamps, which are
more important in the East than in the West. And by pinging the steel we can
produce the hollow sound of gongs.

But we can also produce chimes. And the sculpture also refer to Handel, Bach and
Billie Holiday. While some shapes bring to mind ancient scripture, other
sculptures of di Suvero acknowledge Rilke, Blake and Marianne Moore. There are
many references to the history of art, from prehistory to the present. Di Suvero
has created homages to van Gogh, Picasso, Kandinsky, Brancusi, Giacometti and
Matisse.

The effectiveness of this constant, restless movement depends, in part, upon di
Suvero's mastery of drawing. As bulky as the works are, they invariably seem in
the midst of being adjusted, still near the beginning of a process that had a
beginning, but that has no end. Di Suvero has described his sculpture as
''painting in three dimensions with the crane as my paintbrush.'' His beams are
suspended on cables in a way that suggests transience - as if a crane operator
had just suspended his assignment for lunch. The works are finished and yet di
Suvero wants us to feel that everything is still to be done.

With all this curiosity, skill and intelligence, the question remains why in the
midst of such abundance there is also a sense of absence. With de Kooning or
Pollock, or to a somewhat lesser degree with Kline - the Abstract Expressionist
who most influenced di Suvero - gestures have a searching quality. Lines and
strokes pour out of the self, which the artist knows in turn is molded by his
culture and age. For Abstract Expressionism, a key medium was the artist's hand.
Di Suvero's drawing in space has always been gestural, but he uses industrial
materials, which he works and maneuvers with tools and cranes. Once he stopped
making those gnarled, pierced hands in the early 60's, his ''hand'' has been
absent.

Part of what seems to be missing from the work is a sense of di Suvero himself.
With all the elements in the work that relate to the artist's personal history,
there is little sense that there is something essential at stake. Because images
and references seem to be simply included rather than explored or developed, the
sculptures can seem, for all their energy and movement, strangely static. As a
result, some of the compelling issues raised by this work - including the
possibility of not renouncing anything and of making private experience and
utopian thinking compatible - remain unresolved.

The Storm King Art Center sculpture park is open from noon to 5:30 P.M. and the
museum building from 2 P.M. to 5:30 P.M. every day except Tuesday. For
information and directions call (914) 534-3115.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Di Savero's

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
AFTER 'HEAVEN'S GATE,' 'DRAGON' DOESN'T LOOK BAD

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1690 words


In 'Year of the Dragon,'' Michael Cimino's first film since he nearly bankrupted
United Artists with ''Heaven's Gate'' in 1980, Mickey Rourke plays - with a good
deal of skill and intensity - Stanley White, a police captain, ''the most
decorated cop in the history of the New York Police Department.''

Stanley White is a driven man. Assigned to clean up the youth mobs that are
giving Manhattan's Chinatown a bad name and spoiling tourism, Stanley decides to
go after more important fish - the supposedly respectable members of the
Chinese-American business community who are, he says, the nation's biggest
importers of heroin.

Almost immediately he comes into confrontation with Joey Tai (John Lone), the
urbane, handsome young man who is soon to take control of the major crime
families in Chinatown. Joey tries to bribe Stanley, but Stanley isn't for sale.
Joey warns Stanley that the cop will soon hear from him. He does.

Joey is on hand when a fancy Chinatown restaurant is shot up by two hired
hoodlums, who succeed in murdering not only some of Joey Tai's rivals but also a
large number of innocent patrons. Later Stanley and his long-suffering,
estranged wife, Connie (Caroline Kava), are attacked by Joey's boys in what
should be the sanctity of their house in a lower-middle-class section of
Brooklyn. Stanley is profoundly miffed because the attackers have cut his wife's
throat.

Still later, toward the end of the film, four of Joey's boys make a late-night
visit to Stanley's girlfriend, Tracy Tzu (Ariane), a well-known New York
television reporter, and rape her - something that Stanley himself has done
earlier but only, apparently, because he loves her. Under the circumstances, you
might think that the boys might also have murdered Tracy, but they don't.

You might also think that Stanley White has the patience of Job. In spite of
everything that has gone before, Stanley only now seems to get Joey's message.
Following Tracy's rape, he says with a severity that is ludicrous, ''This time
[Joey's] gone too far.''

I describe these details at some length because they define the short-circuited
psychology operating within Stanley White as well as in ''Year of the Dragon''
itself, a movie that is arresting to watch even when it goes wrong with a
lunatic inconsistency that may be contagious.

''Year of the Dragon'' is not a great film. Even though I can sympathize with
everyone who hates it, I feel a terrible compulsion to defend it and Mr. Cimino.
I'd almost be ready to start a Friends of Michael Cimino Defense Fund, except I
suspect that if any such fund comes into being, Michael Cimino himself will be
its founding chairman. Mr. Cimino is not shy.  Following the debacle of
''Heaven's Gate,'' he is fair game. Only if he had come up with a film of the
stature of, say, ''Citizen Kane'' might he have been able to expect sympathetic
treatment from the press. ''Year of the Dragon'' is light-years away from being
a classic, but then it makes no pretense at being anything more than what it is
- an elaborately produced gangster film that isn't boring for a minute, composed
of excesses in behavior, language and visual effects that, eventually, exert
their own hypnotic effect.

''Year of the Dragon'' is almost refreshing, coming, as it does, in the middle
of a season in which film titles have become as interchangeable as their plots:
''Day of the Dead,'' ''The Return of the Living Dead,'' ''Fright Night,'' ''Teen
Wolf,'' ''Weird Science,'' ''My Science Project,'' ''Real Genius,'' ''The
Heavenly Kid,'' ''The Coca-Cola Kid,'' ''National Lampoon's European Vacation,''
plus two films, ''Summer Rental'' and ''Volunteers,'' whose display ads both
feature the rotund John Candy charging into what is promised to be a comic
situation.

As the late Bill Greeley of Variety once observed of the dozens of look- and
sound-alike rock groups coming onto the music scene, the only way to tell them
apart is by using swatches of material. It's not a major virtue in itself, but
''Year of the Dragon'' doesn't look or sound quite like any other film available
at the moment.

There is something of the professional imposter about Mr. Cimino. With just
three films, he established three entirely different reputations. As the
writer-director of ''Thunderbolt and Lightfoot,'' starring Clint Eastwood (also
the film's producer) and Jeff Bridges, he made his debut in 1974 as a new young
film maker of robust wit and cinematic economy.

The Michael Cimino who directed the Oscar-winning ''Deer Hunter'' appeared to be
someone else. Here was a film maker with a rare appreciation for the lives of
blue-collar Americans, a man who, using the novelist's freedom to digress,
explored the particular pathos of people attempting to cope with honor in
situations they didn't understand and over which they had no control.

When ''Heaven's Gate'' opened, it seemed that Mr. Cimino had - as they used to
say 50 years ago - ''gone Hollywood.'' With an arrogance that might have been
comic had it not been so fatally expensive, he behaved as if he were a
contemporary equivalent to Mark Twain's ''Duke'' in ''The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn,'' conning gullible Hollywood bookkeepers into giving him
unlimited funds with which to play at the possibility of making an epic western,
which, instead, turned out to be a ''Royal Nonesuch.''

In addition to being an artist, Mr. Cimino is a con artist. It's significant
that in ''Final Cut,'' Steven Bach's account of the making of ''Heaven's Gate,''
the former United Artists executive reports that Mr. Cimino at that point was in
the habit of adopting pseudonyms when traveling. Con artists of Mr. Cimino's
brazen caliber are a part of the American heritage.

I also suspect that we all have a fondness for them, as long as we aren't their
victims. And, as muddled and outrageously extravagant as ''Heaven's Gate'' was,
it still contained evidence that the man behind it had an eye for visual detail
rare among his generation of film makers. That the movie was, in sum, a mess,
Mr. Cimino seemed to shrug off as nothing much more than a $40 million
misunderstanding.

It was fortune that eventually brought Mr. Cimino together with a man brave
(reckless?) enough to back ''Year of the Dragon'' - Dino De Laurentiis, the
Italian producer who in recent years has been increasingly active in American
film making. The two men may well have been made for each other. Mr. De
Laurentiis has produced a number of good and/or successful films, including
(with Carlo Ponti) Federico Fellini's ''La Strada'' and ''Nights of Cabiria,''
and, on his own, ''Death Wish,'' ''Serpico'' and ''The Shootist,'' among others.
Like Mr. Cimino, Mr. De Laurentiis has a bit of the con artist in him. Talking
to a reporter at the time his remake of ''King Kong'' was released, Mr. De
Laurentiis described that monster movie - with complete sincerity - as ''a great
love story, like 'Brief Encounter.' ''

''Year of the Dragon'' presents still another Michael Cimino. This time he is
disguised as a film maker who badly wants to make a success with the kind of
frenzied, macho, action film that someone like Michael Winner (''Death Wish''
and its sequels), a director of far lesser talent, seems to be able to turn out
before breakfast. Its screenplay, written by Oliver Stone with Mr. Cimino, has
almost as much explicit violence as Mr. Stone's screenplay for Brian De Palma's
''Scarface,'' though ''Year of the Dragon'' has none of the distancing satire
that distinguished the De Palma film.

''Year of the Dragon'' is played straight, which doesn't mean that it avoids
unintentional laughs, as when Mr. Rourke's exhausted Stanley White describes
himself as having ''scar tissue on his soul.'' I really don't believe that it
will damage the reputation of Chinese-Americans, though it is true that most of
the Chinese-Americans who appear in the film are crooks of one degree or
another.

I also don't believe that Mr. Cimino is a racist, only that he puts his
melodrama ahead of positive ethnic images, which is the film maker's
prerogative. As if to forestall criticism on this score, the screenplay includes
some information about the contributions of Chinese immigrants to American
history, but this is all but neutralized by the references to extortion as a way
of Chinese life for thousands of years. It's another Cimino muddle.

More objectionable is his treatment of women in general and, specifically,
Stanley White's girlfriend, Tracy Tzu, played with no great self-assurance by
the beautiful Ariane, a New York model of Japanese-Dutch parentage. Tracy's rape
near the end of the film makes neither dramatic nor emotional sense, but it's a
little less ridiculous than the scene in which the Mr. Rourke's honorable cop
rapes her, possibly because, though he has scar tissue on his soul, he's not
very articulate.

The film is carried forward not by logic but by its relentless narrative, which
plays like a comic strip. I'm also dumbfounded by the director's profligate use
of extras, not only in the Chinatown scenes, actually shot on an extraordinarily
complex set built at the De Laurentiis studios in North Carolina, but also in
the scenes shot in Thailand. There's no particular need for the use of what
appears to be the entire Royal Thai Army, but the effect of this scene is
stunning, if no more believable than seeing the sun set into the east.

Mr. Cimino introduces Stanley White's Vietnam experiences as an excuse for the
cop's obsession with cleaning up Chinatown. When his superiors, on orders from
City Hall, tell Stanley to lay off, he replies, ''This is Vietnam all over again
- nobody wants to win the war.'' But ''Year of the Dragon'' is not ''Rambo.''
Vietnam is simply a rather perfunctory excuse for a film that, essentially,
doesn't need excuses. It's a melodramatic spectacle that is its own reason for
being.

It's going to be interesting to see where Mr. Cimino goes from here, and what
personality he adopts for his next film, for I've no doubt there will be a next
film. Flim-flam artists of his special and very real talents don't go quietly
into obscurity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHANGING WORLD OF NEW YORK INTELLECTUALS

BYLINE: By James Atlas; James Atlas, a contributing editor to Vanity Fair, is
the author of ''Delmore Schwartz: The Life of an American Poet.'' His novel
''The Great Pretender'' will be published in the spring by Atheneum.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5718 words


WHEN I WAS 17, I read a story by Delmore Schwartz that introduced a new word
into my vocabulary. ''New Year's Eve'' concerned a group of young writers and
editors in New York City who decide to have a party on a grim winter's night in
the 1930's. In the opening scene, the host and one of his cronies are engaged in
a bitter dispute about who should be invited to the party. ''Since both of them
were intellectuals,'' Schwartz noted, ''both resorted to theories about the
nature of a party and about each other's characters.'' Intellectuals?  ''New
Year's Eve,'' I later discovered, was a portrait of Schwartz's gang on the staff
of the Partisan Review, a magazine I read avidly in college - and not just the
current issues, but the heavy, maroon-bound volumes from the 30's and 40's
announcing the latest article by Lionel Trilling or Edmund Wilson, a new poem by
Wallace Stevens or Allen Tate, a story by Saul Bellow or Bernard Malamud. To see
the work of my literary heroes in its original form, the way it had appeared
before most of them were famous, was a strange experience; it made them somehow
less sanctified, more real. I was discovering these writers the way their
original audience had, leafing through a periodical meant to be picked up from
the newsstand and read in a Greenwich Village cafeteria.

Partisan Review is still a going concern. Last winter it celebrated its 50th
anniversary with a giant issue featuring work by eminent contributors from
several generations: Diana Trilling, Alfred Kazin, Philip Roth, Norman
Podhoretz, Leonard Michaels, and on down to a handful of writers just beginning
to establish themselves. But the spirit of that issue was largely nostalgic; the
passions that animated the 30's and 40's are history. ''Our literature, our
culture, our politics are full of contradictions and reversals and
polarizations,'' William Phillips, the magazine's co-founder and still its
editor, wrote in his introduction. The old political categories are obsolete.
The endless debates between various factions on the left about Stalinism versus
Trotskyism, the role of intellectuals in American life, the relationship between
politics and art, have given way to acrimonious disputes between
neo-conservatives and a dwindling band of liberals.

Literary criticism, once the provenance of freelance intellectuals, has become
the property of academics and journalists. Whatever their current political
allegiances, the surviving New York intellectuals agree on one thing: the world
isn't what it was.

The same elegiac note dominated a conference on intellectuals sponsored last
April by Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, N.Y. At a session with the title
''What Was a New York Intellectual?'' the panelists -Norman Birnbaum, an adjunct
professor of government at Georgetown University; Theodore Solotaroff, founder
of the New American Review and now an editor at Harper & Row, and Mark Krupnick,
a professor of English at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee - offered many
definitions. (Perhaps the most succinct was Birnbaum's: ''A New York
intellectual was one who wrote for, edited, or read Partisan Review.'') But
despite their strenuous efforts to dissociate themselves from the funereal
grammar of their topic, none of the panelists really disputed its main
implication: that such a community no longer exists. The past tense says it all.

The surest sign of any group's demise is the appearance of memoirs, and the New
York intellectuals have been busy writing theirs: Lionel Abel's ''The
Intellectual Fol-lies,'' William Phillips's ''A Partisan View,'' Irving Howe's
''A Margin of Hope'' and William Barrett's ''The Truants'' have appeared in the
last three years. Sidney Hook is at work on a memoir entitled ''Out of Step: A
Life in the Twentieth Century,'' and Diana Trilling is writing a book about her
life with her late husband, Lionel. There are half a dozen other books in the
works on Trilling, as well as a biography of Philip Rahv, one of Partisan
Review's founders, and a comprehensive study of the whole group forthcoming from
Oxford University Press. The old New York intellectuals are the American
Bloomsbury. WHO MADE UP THIS self-appointed elite? ''They are, or until recently
have been, anti-Communist,'' wrote Irving Howe in a famous 1967 essay, ''they
are, or until some time ago were, radicals; they have a fondness for ideological
speculation; they write literary criticism with a strong social emphasis; they
revel in polemic; they strive self-consciously to be 'brilliant'; and by birth
or osmosis, they are Jews.'' Cosmopolitan, erudite, argumentative, the New York
intellectuals were custodians of culture, interpreters of Marxism,
existentialism - whatever was in the air.

''The definition of a New York intellectual is to think he's the last one,''
says Morris Dickstein, a professor of English at Queens College and author of a
book on the 60's, ''Gates of Eden.'' And indeed, that type -radical,
Manhattan-bound, oriented toward Marxism and European literature - has left few
heirs. A changing economy, the political march to the right, the assimilation of
Jews into mainstream America, the proliferation of universities, and a city
changed beyond recognition since the 40's have rendered obsolete the
socialist-minded urban intellectuals depicted in Delmore Schwartz's story.

''Without jobs and without prospects, the young were not chained immediately to
the wheel of career and profession,'' wrote William Barrett, a Partisan Review
editor, in ''The Truants,'' recalling the enforced leisure ushered in by the
Depression. Greenwich Village was full of Luftmenschen - literally ''air men'' -
without visible means of support. The cafeteria was their salon, the park bench
their seminar room. To read and talk all day was considered a respectable
profession.

Intellectuals have always composed an adversarial elite; it's in the very nature
of the job. In 19th-century Paris, in Russia during its succession of
revolutions, they were anarchists and radicals, dedicated to the overthrow of
despotic governments. But to be an intellectual isn't necessarily to be on the
left. It's a paradox that so many of the great Modernists championed in the
pages of Partisan Review - W.B. Yeats, Ezra Pound and D.H. Lawrence - were
anti-democratic, even reactionary. T.S. Eliot declared himself a Royalist in
politics, a Classicist in literature, and an Anglo-Catholic in religion. The
important thing was to criticize society - from whatever vantage offered the
best defense of culture against the Philistines.

The New York intellectuals were left-wing as a matter of course. ''Everyone
assumed you were some kind of socialist,'' says Irving Kristol, co-editor of The
Public Interest. What was endlessly debated was where on the left you stood.
Stalinists, Trotskyites, Leninists, Marxist-Leninists, all debated their
positions endlessly in the pages of Partisan Review - or, as Edmund Wilson
called it, Partisansky Review.

The prevailing ideology among New York intellectuals today is neo-conservative.
Intellectuals, like everyone else, tend to follow power. Even Susan Sontag, that
most radical of radicals, made a significant rightward shift in her famous Town
Hall recantation of 1982, when she declared at a rally in support of the Polish
Solidarity movement that ''Communism is fascism,'' and called for ''abandoning
many of the complacencies of the left'' -among them the belief that Communism
was hospitable to art. What neo-conservatives have been saying for years - that
revolutionary movements invariably pose a threat to the autonomy of culture -
had finally been acknowledged by a prominent spokesman for the left. Partisan
Review, which maintained a dogged sympathy for the uprisings of the 60's, was
undone by that turbulent decade without even knowing it.

T HE COUNTERCUL-ture discredited the intellectual vocation,'' says Hilton
Kramer, who gave up his job as chief art critic of The New York Times in 1982 to
found The New Criterion, a small-circulation magazine devoted to cultural
criticism. ''It was their assault on the whole enterprise of high culture that
created the polarity between serious criticism on the one hand and advocacy
journalism on the other.'' For Kramer, the Vietnam protests of the 60's
represented an attack on authority, a subversion of civilized values. ''We are
still living in the aftermath of the insidious assault on mind that was one of
the most repulsive features of the radical movement of the 60's,'' he declared
in one of The New Criterion's early editorials. In Kramer's view, ''the leftward
turn in our political life'' went unchallenged by intellectuals -worse, went
unacknowledged - even though that leftward turn proved a threat to their own
authority.

Norman Podhoretz, the editor of Commentary, concurs. ''You have to remember that
the older group around Partisan Review had a real passion for literature,'' he
says. ''It was really the central activity in those days.'' Podhoretz himself
started out as a literary critic. His early appraisals of John Updike, Mary
McCarthy and Saul Bellow were as controversial in the 50's and early 60's as his
neo-conservative political writings are today. But culture was ''politicized''
during the 60's, Podhoretz argues; the energies that had gone into literature
and criticism were diverted to political and social issues.

In 1952, Daniel Bell, the Harvard sociologist, recalls in Partisan Review's
50th-anniversary issue, the timid suggestion ventured in the magazine's
symposium on ''Our Country and Our Culture'' that intellectuals had grown weary
of their alienation from American life was met with ''astonishment, incredulity,
and even outrage.'' Three decades later, Bell notes an opposite phenomenon: a
class of intellectuals ''for whom the affirmation of America and capitalism has
become the ground of their existence, and for whom criticism of America is an
affront.''

Despite modest circulations, the neo-conservative journals - such as The Public
Interest, Commentary, The New Criterion - are highly influential, both in
Government and cultural circles. ''The neo-cons are the real heirs of the New
York intellectuals,'' says Paul Berman, a young Marxist literary critic
associated with the Middle Atlantic Radical Historians' Organization. ''They're
the ones who still believe in the power of ideas - the conviction that if you
can get the analysis of society straight, you'll accomplish great things.''

What the neo-conservatives have on their side, apart from the general spirit of
the times, is a consensus about issues - or at least a sense of what the issues
are. ''There's no equivalent on the left today to what the Communist Party meant
for intellectuals in the 30's,'' says Greil Marcus, a cultural critic and former
contributor to Rolling Stone. ''It was the great unifying issue'' - no matter
which side you were on. The belief among intellectuals on the left that a
socialist revolution could happen in America, is gone from the little magazines.
Radical theory has been largely consigned to specialist journals, like Telos and
New German Critique, published out of universities. Politics now is largely the
provenance of contributors to the neo-conservative journals - whom Leon
Wieseltier, the literary editor of The New Republic, calls ''policy
intellectuals.''

So influential are the neo-conservatives today that they even have disciples.
The youthful contributors to Hilton Kramer's magazine -Bruce Bawer, Mimi Kramer,
Roger Kimball - are still in their 20's, but they manage to sound like the
imperious British critic F.R. Leavis. Their articles are full of lofty
pronouncements about ''moral values,'' ''the crisis in the humanities,'' ''the
significance of art.'' Their mission is to defend American culture against
shoddy merchandise, and they don't shirk from the task; recent issues have
carried stern indictments of John Hawkes, Raymond Carver, Robert Brustein's
American Repertory Theater - whatever strikes Kramer's team of critics as trendy
or fake.

In its original press release, The New Criterion promised ''to pose hard
questions, challenge current orthodoxies and speak out for the values of high
culture.'' This it has done - with a dedication to literary standards and a
fierce polemical verve reminiscent of its nemesis, the old Partisan Review. The
summer issue of The New Criterion, billed as ''A Special Issue'' on ''The Arts
in America 1945 - 1985,'' is a lively critique of postwar American culture.
Samuel Lipman, the magazine's regular music critic, finds little to applaud on
the contemporary scene. Bruce Bawer, in a piece tellingly entitled ''Diminishing
Fictions: Four Decades of the Novel,'' finds even less. Quoting a passage from
Ann Beattie's ''Chilly Scenes of Winter,'' he remarks: '' 'So what?' one wants
to scream.''

Podhoretz, too, has a roster of articulate young contributors - including Steven
C. Munson and Roger Kaplan, Nick Eberstadt and Daniel Pipes. And he has a
considerable following on campus; students write papers and dissertations on his
work. But this influence is deceptive, he cautions. New York intellectual life
is still under the thumb of what Podhoretz calls ''the dominant liberal
culture.'' Dominant? In the 80's? ''Of course it's dominant,'' Podhoretz says.
''Have you ever met anyone who was against a nuclear freeze?''

W HO ARE THESE liberals? Largely the crowd associated with The New York Review
of Books, long a vociferous opponent of United States Government domestic and
foreign policy, of the war in Vietnam, of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, and
of the Reagan Administration's policies in Latin America. Though it has become
somewhat staid of late, concentrating more on belles-lettres than on politics,
the New York Review of Books is still anathema to the neo-conservatives. (Tom
Wolfe once called it ''the chief theoretical organ of radical chic.'') Despite
its unremitting seriousness, its willingness to publish long academic essays by
eminent scholars, the magazine takes a tolerant view of the 60's, and of the
culture that came out of it. Its editors, Robert Silvers and Barbara Epstein,
have never hesitated to publish James Wolcott on the Rolling Stones beside an
essay by John Kenneth Galbraith on Keynesian economics, or Susan Sontag on
photography beside a review of books about Watteau.

Sontag's sympathy with new developments on the cultural scene, her openness to
pop music and Pop Art, Leni Riefenstahl and Jean-Luc Godard, epitomizes for
neo-conservatives the trendiness of the left, its promiscuous embrace of the
new. For Kramer, Sontag is a celebrity intellectual, the ''Pasionaria'' of the
''new, pleasure-seeking revolution in sensibility'' that emerged out of the
60's.

The trouble started in 1966 with ''Against Interpretation,'' the collection of
essays that established her reputation. In dismissing the crucial distinction
between ''high'' and ''low'' art - what she called ''the Matthew Arnold idea of
culture'' - Sontag was undermining the basic authority of criticism. Her famous
essay ''Notes on Camp'' ''made the very idea of moral discrimination seem stale
and distinctly un-chic,'' Kramer noted tartly in a recent review of the ''Susan
Sontag Reader.'' Sontag's heresy, in other words, was to suggest that high
culture wasn't the only culture worthy of appreciation.

This supposition goes to the heart of the difference between the heyday of
Partisan Review and now. It would never have occurred to the old New York
intellectuals to challenge the distinction between high culture and mass culture
- Broadway theater, movies, best sellers, popular music. You could go to the
movies, or even become a movie critic like James Agee, Delmore Schwartz and
Dwight Macdonald. But, with a few classic exceptions, you couldn't make any
claims for them as art. Everything was judged by the same intransigent standard:
it either was art or it wasn't. Works that were popular but serious, that
occupied the middle ground -what Macdonald termed ''Midcult'' - posed a threat
to the sanctity of high culture. ''The danger,'' Macdonald warned in a
well-known essay, ''Masscult and Midcult,'' ''is that the values of Midcult,
instead of being transitional - 'the price of progress' - may now themselves
become a debased, permanent standard.''

What unites the intellectuals of the older generation, both of the left and of
the right, is their suspicion of popular culture. Most intellectuals - or let's
just say critics - of my generation aren't interested in the difference between
Stravinsky and Talking Heads, Von Stroheim and Brian De Palma. (The New
Criterion gang is a notable exception.) The rock critic Robert Christgau writes
in The Village Voice on the Marxist critic Raymond Williams; Leon Wieseltier
writes in Vanity Fair on the rock phenomenon Prince; Mark Crispin Miller, an
assistant professor of the writing seminars at Johns Hopkins, writes on Elvis
Presley in The New York Review of Books. Greil Marcus is at work on a book about
Dada, punk rock and ''some very obscure French cultural revolutionaries, with a
few medieval heretics thrown in.'' For Marcus, one of the most influential
pronouncements of the 60's was Christgau's insistence that any definition of a
great artist that couldn't include Chuck Berry as well as Proust was worthless.
If it's interesting, if it works, it's good.

Why have so many younger critics dispensed with this once-crucial distinction?
Diana Trilling blames television, ''the great leveler.'' Hilton Kramer blames
the media, which have ''appropriated the symbols, vocabulary and rhetorical
strategies of high culture'' while disdaining high culture itself. William
Barrett blames a lot of things: the decline of religion, the campus turmoil of
the 60's and ''the squalid atmosphere of permissiveness'' it ushered in, the
transformation of psychoanalysis from a theory of human nature to an excuse for
liberation from societal constraints. Others blame the decline in literacy.
''Just to have read a lot of books makes one old-fashioned,'' complains Sontag.

The novelist and critic Elizabeth Hardwick agrees. ''You don't get that kind of
passionate reader,'' she says of her students at City College, ''the nutty,
maladapted kid who sits there reading with the vacuum going and your mother
nagging you to go out and do something.''

For the old school of New York intellectuals, the life of the mind was
paramount; it made them what they were. ''I read as if books would fill my every
gap, remedy every flaw, let me at last into the great world that was anything
out of Brownsville,'' Alfred Kazin recalled in ''A Walker in the City.''

Y OU DIDN'T HAVE TO be Jewish to be a New York intellectual - Macdonald, William
Barrett and Mary McCarthy come instantly to mind - but it helped. Kentucky-born
Elizabeth Hardwick has often claimed that she came to New York in order to be a
Jewish intellectual, and Barrett describes in ''The Truants'' an atmosphere so
''pervasively Jewish'' that he tended to forget he was ''not a Jew after all.''

If Jews became freelance intellectuals, it wasn't necessarily by choice. The
English departments of universities weren't open to them in the 30's and 40's.
Diana Trilling has written very movingly, in a memoir pointedly titled ''Lionel
Trilling: A Jew at Columbia,'' of the humiliations her late husband suffered as
a young, untenured academic among WASP professors. By the end of the 50's,
though, having survived the McCarthy era, the once-subversive group of novelists
and critics loosely gathered around Partisan Review were members of society;
they were in good standing. In 1953, Bellow could begin ''The Adventures of
Augie March'' with the declaration: ''I am an American, Chicago-born.'' Not a
Jew. An American.

By and large, the 60's were a comfortable decade for the New York intellectuals.
There was money to be had from publishers; the large-circulation magazines once
disdained as middlebrow were now hospitable to highbrows. ''For better or worse,
most writers no longer accept alienation as the artist's fate in America,'' the
editors of Partisan Review announced in 1952, ''on the contrary, they want very
much to be a part of American life.'' And by the 60's, they were. Professors,
staff critics, novelists of national eminence, they belonged. The New York
intellectuals had been absorbed into the nation's life. They had become a kind
of establishment.

The New York intellectuals had a significant influence on our literary culture.
They promoted the great European Modernists; they produced definitive essays on
the poets and novelists of their own time; above all, they established the
seriousness of the intellectual enterprise -united, in Lionel Trilling's words,
''the activity of politics . . . with the imagination under the aspect of
mind.''

It was that intensity, that sense of high purpose, that fascinated me when I
pored over back issues of the magazine. For all their squabbling and cultural
parochialism, the contributors to the old Partisan Review had a conviction about
the importance of literature that transcended ideological debate. There was
something almost priestly in their approach to books. They saw themselves as
inheritors of a tradition, devoted to the canon of high culture - not only their
own culture, but the culture reflected in English poetry, in the Russian novel,
in French political theory. Partisan Review, wrote the critic Leslie Fiedler,
''was born of a marriage of Greenwich Village and Marxism - or more properly,
from the attempt to woo the disaffected, rootless American, who wandered into
New York in search of cultural freedom, from bohemianism to radicalism.''

S TILL, IT'S EASY TO be nostalgic about a past one never knew. The
literary-minded of my generation have created their own New York. The bars of
SoHo and the East Village are crowded with writers; the little magazines are fat
with stories; a monthly poetry calendar lists enough readings to fill a
poster-sized page. Browsing among the periodicals in my local bookshop, I never
have any trouble finding articulate, engaging essays by writers in their 30's
and 40's - and even a few in their 20's - for whom literature is a serious
vocation. Culture, despite the obsequies of the old Partisan Review gang, is
alive and well and living in New York.

Only what kind of culture is it? Not the one I thought I would find when I came
to New York in the late 1970's with a head full of images drawn from books. No
intellectuals of my generation sat around like the poet in Bellow's ''Humboldt's
Gift'' - a fictional version of Delmore Schwartz - talking far into the night
about Modernism and Symbolism, Eliot and Rilke, Freud and Marx. Humboldt
believed that ''the only art intellectuals can be interested in is an art which
celebrates the primacy of ideas,'' and so did I. To be sure, there were plenty
of ideas in the air; the younger critics and cultural journalists I encountered
had read books, too. In their own way, they were just as literate as the old
Partisan Review crowd. But there was no community dominating the scene the way
the Partisan Review crowd had, no group of writers and critics who saw
themselves - or were seen -as arbiters of taste, interpreters of culture,
critics of society in the largest sense. There was no writer who commanded the
authority that Alfred Kazin or Dwight Macdonald or Philip Rahv did in the 40's.

How to account for the disappearance of this type? A different economy, for one
thing. ''No one can afford to be an intellectual anymore,'' says Leon
Wieseltier. ''The culture doesn't support it as a profession.'' Gone are the
days when Lionel Abel could move to Greenwich Village and support himself on the
strength of an advance from a publisher for a translation of Rimbaud's poems, or
when 45 cents bought a substantial dinner at the Foltis-Fisher cafeteria on West
23d Street - ''one of the lesser esthetic triumphs of the Depression years,'' in
William Barrett's recollection.

''Nobody had any money then,'' says Elizabeth Hardwick. ''Writers were supposed
to be poor.'' A $2,500 advance from a publisher meant a year free to write.
Writers bought old farmhouses in Connecticut for a song or found cold-water
flats in the city. When they needed money, they got low-level positions on
magazines or temporary teaching jobs. The art critic Harold Rosenberg worked for
an advertising agency. Others were supported by their wives. (''It was a
tradition among the New York intellectuals to marry money,'' says Irving
Kristol.) Because fewer writers can now afford to live in New York, the city has
forfeited its claim to being the center of the literary world. ''The strong new
fiction being written in the hinterlands suggests that novelists of urban
sensibility can no longer assume, as they have in recent decades, that theirs is
the dominant voice in our literature,'' Robert Towers noted recently in The New
York Review of Books. And the same holds true for essayists and critics, who
supply the kind of interpretive discourse that literature needs in order to
thrive.

Thrown together in one crowded city, the culturati of the 40's enjoyed a
commonality of interests, if not of sensibilities. They even lived, by and
large, in the same neighborhood. Writers hung out at the Minetta Tavern on
Macdougal Street, painters at the Cedar Bar on University Place. ''In the 1940's
and 1950's, you'd walk through Washington Square and see everyone you knew,''
recalls Anatole Broyard, now an editor of The New York Times Book Review.
''Rahv, Barrett, [the painter] Larry Rivers, Harold Rosenberg -on a nice day,
they'd be out in force.''

Not any more. Forced to compete for space with a seemingly limitless population
of yuppies - young, high-income lawyers and investment counselors who can afford
Manhattan's stupendous rents - those writers and artists have scattered all over
the city, dispersed to Brooklyn and Long Island City, or across the Hudson to
Hoboken. But the romance of struggle is gone. Poverty is out.

''The New York intellectuals came out of an immigrant generation,'' notes Morris
Dickstein of Queens College. ''Whatever hardships they endured were still an
improvement over what their parents went through. It was no sacrifice for them
to live the way they did. But our generation grew up middle class, and no one
who's grown up middle class is eager to forsake those comforts for a cold-water
flat.'' Or, as Leon Wieseltier bluntly puts it: ''There's no glory in being
brilliant but broke.''

It's symptomatic of our times that The New York Review of Books has been sold to
a wealthy publishing family in Mississippi for more than $5 million, making the
original investors - Elizabeth Hardwick, Silvers, his co-editor Barbara Epstein,
Random House editor in chief Jason Epstein, and publisher A. Whitney Ellsworth -
millionaires. (Ellsworth already was one.) And The New Yorker is now in the
hands of S.I. Newhouse, owner of the Conde Nast empire, who in May paid $163
million for the magazine. Serious periodicals, once a high-risk venture, have
become a good investment.

How does a freelance intellectual make a living today? By writing for
general-interest magazines and newspapers. This is nothing new. Irving Howe was
a book reviewer for Time; Alfred Kazin was a staff writer; James Agee reviewed
films. But to work for the major media used to be considered mildly suspect;
today it's a respectable occupation. The role of cultural arbiter once played by
the little magazines has been taken over by general-circulation magazines and by
The New York Times. Specialist scholars and freelance journalists appear side by
side in The Times's Book Review as a matter of course. The coverage of cultural
events and issues featured on The Times's Op-Ed page, in its magazine and on the
daily culture pages plays a crucial role in New York intellectual life. In the
40's, writers published in large-circulation magazines for the exposure; now,
they make a living at it, and appear in the little magazines to confirm their
intellectual credentials. Literary journalism has become a profession in itself.

A ND YET THE INTEL-lectual vocation - at least as I imagined it - is largely
obsolete, an archaic profession; the intellectual has gone the way of the
cobbler and the smithy. ''Highbrowism is a form of Philistinism,'' claims Robert
Christgau, the rock critic. ''It doesn't respond to new forms of art.'' Leon
Wieseltier, who has photographs of George Orwell, Lionel Trilling and the late
French critic Roland Barthes on the wall of his office, and whose own work bears
the mark of a rigorous apprenticeship to the New York intellectuals, has little
use for the distinction they made between high and low culture. ''Its real
purpose was to elevate themselves,'' he says, ''to create the illusion of a
cultural elite.''

So where do you go if your idea of the good life is to read and write books? The
university. Since the 50's, intellectual life in this country has been largely
concentrated on the campus. The spread of higher education after World War II,
when colleges expanded and state universities sprang up, meant larger faculties.
Suddenly the New York intellectuals were in demand. Some - Lionel Trilling,
Sidney Hook, the art critic Meyer Schapiro - were already established academics,
but freelance critics also found a ready welcome. Rahv went off to Brandeis;
Bellow taught at Princeton and Bard before he moved back to the University of
Chicago (to be followed by Harold Rosenberg); Lionel Abel ended up at Buffalo.
Most of those who stayed were absorbed into the university system of New York
City - a different world from the Greenwich Village society of Partisan Review.

For the generation that followed, the academic life was a natural career choice.
There were jobs to be had; universities enjoyed considerable prestige; many
campus environments were bucolic. And there was a new cultural phenomenon:
writing programs. By the 70's, hundreds of colleges and universities had them.
Some of the best younger writers in the country were clustered in remote,
picturesque locales like Missoula, Mont., and Burlington, Vt. - wherever Master
of Fine Arts degrees were handed out.

The predominance of universities in the nation's cultural life has just about
done in the type of self-educated, sporadically well-read intellectual who
flourished in the 40's. The academy has become increasingly specialized. Some of
the most influential English departments in the country - notably those of Johns
Hopkins and Yale - are dominated by the arcane disciplines of structuralism and
deconstructionism, modes of literary discourse imported from Europe and
virtually inaccessible to the lay reader. The general, free-wheeling essay that
was a favored genre of the New York intellectuals - the kind of essay, wrote
Irving Howe, that ventured to '' 'go beyond' its subject, toward some
encompassing moral or social observation'' - is nearly extinct. Instead of
Philip Rahv on politics in the novels of Dostoyevsky or Irving Howe on Edith
Wharton's antipathy to Modernism, professors now publish papers - to cite a
recent issue of Raritan Review - entitled ''Henry James, Meaning and Unmeaning''
or ''Wittgenstein and Literary Theory.''

Listening to the intellectuals talk at Skidmore College last April, I kept
wondering: Why are they here, on this campus in the woods of upstate New York,
instead of in Manhattan? The world has changed. ''Norman Podhoretz, Joseph
Epstein'' - editor of The American Scholar - ''and Hilton Kramer exert an
influence the old P.R. crowd never dreamed of,'' Theodore Solotaroff told the
half-empty auditorium. Whether the neo-conservatives are more influential than
their ancestors is open to question; that they're now the dominant voice in
American intellectual life isn't. The intellectuals gathered in Saratoga Springs
belonged to the left, as the titles of the various sessions made clear: ''The
New Feminist Intellectual,'' ''Orwell's Challenge,'' ''The Intellectual in the
Post-Colonial World.'' That's why the conference was so sparsely attended: the
reign of Partisan Review, and of the politics it represented, is over.

During the Kennedy Administration, intellectuals with liberal tendencies beat a
path to the White House. Two decades later, it's the right that enjoys the
attentions of those in power. Last winter, Norman Podhoretz was feted at a
black-tie dinner in honor of his 25th anniversary as editor of Commentary. It
was attended by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Henry Kissinger, Mayor Koch
and several hundred other notables; President Reagan sent a congratulatory
message.

Yet, the neo-conservatives perceive themselves as a beleaguered minority. And,
in a way, they are -though not in the world at large, where intellectuals have
always been a minority, nor in their own, more rarefied world, where they have
considerable influence. What is at issue here is the disappearance of the
intellectual as a type, a class, a profession, an elite. For the old New York
intellectuals, high culture was more than a category; it was a belief. ''These
were the ideas I grew up with,'' Hilton Kramer says, recalling the days when
''to write serious criticism meant something in our society.'' To have come so
far, and to see the vocation that represented the dream of one's youth in danger
of extinction is a bitter thing indeed.

Why mourn the old New York intellectuals? Whether their collective history
constitutes a minor episode in American cultural life, as even some of those who
participated in it suggest, or a last civilized stand against the Philistinism
of our own day, it was certainly an era when literature mattered more than it
does now. The excitement of literary discovery Alfred Kazin described with such
rhapsodic eloquence in ''A Walker in the City,'' of entering the Brownsville
Public Library on a summer's evening and ''trembling in front of the shelves,''
isn't an experience likely to find its way into the memoirs of my generation.

''Then what do you want to be when you grow up, little boy?'' a young Norman
Podhoretz imagines himself being asked, in his autobiography, ''Making It.'' ''A
literary critic.'' He wouldn't say that now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George Morris, Philip Rahv, Dwight Macdonald, Fred Dupee and
William Phillips, 1940 (Maurey Graber); Photo of Norman Podhoretz (Alex
Webb/Magnum page 23); Photo of Susan Sontag (Thomas Victor page 24); Photo of
Hilton Dramer, Roger Kimball and Bruce Bawer (Alex Webb/Magnum page 25); Photo
of Delmore Schwartsd, 1961 (Rollie Mckenna page 52)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PASSION OF OUR CALLING

BYLINE: By E. L. Doctorow; E. L. Doctorow's novel ''World's Fair'' will be
published this fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3423 words


ALL writers relish stories from the lives of the masters. We hold them in our
minds as a kind of trade lore. We hope the biography of the great writer yields
secrets of his achievement.

The master's life I've been thinking about lately is Tolstoy's - in particular
his crisis of conscience at the age of 50. Always at the mercy either of his
passions or his ethics, Tolstoy lived in a kind of alternating current of
tormented resolution. The practice of fiction left him elated - and terribly let
down. It is said that he had to be prevented from throwing the finished
manuscript of ''Anna Karenina'' in the fire. In any event, at 50 he decided that
his life lacked justification, that he was no more than a pander to people who
had nothing better to do with their time than read. And he gave up writing
novels.

Of course his resolve did not seem to cover the shorter form, and in time he
lapsed into the composition of a few modest pieces - ''The Kreutzer Sonata,''
for example, or ''The Death of Ivan Ilyitch.'' For the most part he employed his
position and his talents to militate against some of the overwhelming misery of
life under the Czar. He indulged a prophetic voice. He preached his passionate
Christian nonviolence. He wrote primers designed to teach the children of
peasants to read.

Now theoretically, at least, there is for every writer a point at which
circumstantial reality overwhelms the very idea of art, or seems to demand a
practical benefit from it; when the level of perceived or felt communal
suffering or danger makes the traditional practice of literature for traditional
purposes intolerable.

But even a casual examination of literary history finds a readier disposition
for this crisis of faith in Europe, where the passion of art has often been a
social passion. In Russia we have the examples, not only of Count Tolstoy
stomping about in his peasant boots, but of the young Dostoyevsky and his
literary circle arguing everything about fiction except its enormous importance
to history and human salvation. And in France, we have Sartre and Camus, among
others, conceiving a response to the moral devastation of the Second World War -
a literary Resistance that includes drama, allegory, metaphysics and handing out
pamphlets in the street. W ITH certain exceptions, American writers have tended
to be less fervent about the social value of art and therefore less vulnerable
to crises of conscience. The spiritual problems of our writers are celebrated -
but of a different kind from those having to do with the problem of engagement.
Solitude, profound solitude as much as society, has been an overriding condition
in American literary history. I think of the despair of Hemingway that led him
to turn one of his shotguns on himself. Or Faulkner's and Fitzgerald's that led
them to drink themselves into ruin. The problem of art as they lived it was a
torment of success, or failure, but in any event some recognition of mortal
limits, some inconsolability of rugged individualism formulated entirely as a
private fate. Tolstoy, we should remember, lived to write his last novel,
''Resurrection,'' when he was in his 70's. His ego was no less colossal. But our
American masters thought with theirs to hold up the earth and sky.

So in thinking about Tolstoy's point of view I am very much aware of its
foreignness. The writer's passion to save the world is a foreign passion. We
have had one decade in our own literary history, the 1930's, when politics in
art - engagement - seemed to be on everyone's mind. But we take this period as a
time of misfired artistic energy, of duped intellectuals and bad proletarian
novels. Having been turned ideological we suffered for it - or so the lesson
goes. Today's American novelists tend to cast themselves resolutely as private
citizens and independent entrepreneurs. There is certainly no tradition among us
of serving our country as senators and ambassadors, like our European and Latin
American colleagues. (Occasionally our ancestry reveals a customs inspector.) We
see the public value of our work as an accident of its private diction. Our
attitude is expressed succinctly by the naturalized American poet W. H. Auden,
who said a writer's politics are more of a danger to him than his cupidity. We
worry that if a work is formed by ideas exterior to it, if there is some sort of
programmed intention, a set of truths to be illustrated, the work will be
compromised and we'll produce not art but polemic. We want our novels pure. We
dislike about ''War and Peace'' that Tolstoy lectures us on History. He was
always that way, we think, not just after 50.

Oddly enough, the esthetic piety I've just described places the American
artist's idea of himself centrally in the American heartland. The notion that we
are the independent entrepreneurs of ourselves is a national heritage. Irving
Howe, among others, has pointed out that working people in the United States,
unlike their European counterparts, refuse to identify themselves as a class.
They tend to define themselves not by their work but by what they own from their
work, the property they've accumulated; also by their ethnic background or their
social activities - by anything, in short, that points up their distinction from
the larger community. For the independent entrepreneur of himself there is
upward mobility, at least across generations. And there is the road - he can hit
the road when things go bad, pull up stakes, move on. All this, including the
writer's idea of what he can allow in his art and what he cannot, expresses our
great operative myth of individualism.

We are thought as a country to be nonideological and nonsystematic in the way we
go about conceptualizing our problems and solving them - or not solving them. We
are chronically and by nature suspicious of systematic solutions. We're
pragmatists, we like to go out in the barn of the Constitution and tinker.
Writers, no less than blue-collar people, share the national aversion to the
intellect, to the passion of the intellect, and the voices we find for our books
are a shade more ironical, less epic, than the Tolstoyan basso profundo. In
preference to the Olympian view from the mountain, we settle for the authority
of the egalitarian witness, the pragmatic deposer of what he can confirm with
his own eyes and ears.

If there was a moment when this piety of literary practice was set to harden,
perhaps it was in 1940 with the publication of Hemingway's ''For Whom the Bell
Tolls.'' What preceded it was a decade of intense debate carried on both within
the work of novelists and outside it, in journals and conferences, as the
literary community struggled with the Depression in America and the rise of
totalitarian states in Europe. Almost every serious work of the era was informed
by the presumption of social crisis. The writer's destiny was to be confronted
with his conscience, to find his place, draw his lines. Often the right causes
got mixed up with the wrong people; ideals gave way to expediency, and hateful
writers did good work and noble writers did lousy work. But everyone, good
writers, bad writers, seemed to be in touch with what was going on in the world.

Hemingway himself had published a novel in 1937, ''To Have and Have Not,'' in
which the Hemingway hero, now a smuggler off the Florida coast, came as close as
he ever had to articulating a communal sentiment. His name here was Harry Morgan
and he was made to say, ''A man alone ain't got no bloody [obscenity] chance.''
This is a monumental insight, coming from the younger sibling of the
romantically self-involved expatriates of the earlier novels.

Hemingway's next novel was to take place in Spain, in the time of her civil war.
He had seen the war firsthand, of course. He was more worldly, more in touch
with things than either Faulkner or Fitzgerald. Though he was a Loyalist he
deeply mistrusted and came to detest the Communists who ran things for the
Loyalist side. This judgment, which turned out to be sound, was not unlike
George Orwell's in ''Homage to Catalonia.''

But it was Orwell, the European, who took what he learned to the point of
revelation, the political prophecy in ''Nineteen Eighty-Four.'' We find by
contrast in ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' that a man alone may have no bloody
chance, but it can be very beautiful that he hasn't. The Hemingway hero is now
named Robert Jordan and he's a young American volunteer on the Loyalist side, a
demolition expert who has come into the mountains to blow a bridge held by the
Falangists. He ends up dying alone, heroically, having taken over the leadership
of the partisan band he's joined and sent them away to live on, his own code of
honor being the only enduring value of the civil war of the Spanish people.

The most international of 20th-century American writers was, morally speaking,
an isolationist. War is the means by which one's cultivated individualism can be
raised to the heroic. And therefore never send to ask for whom the bell tolls:
it tolls so that I can be me.

A consideration of Hemingway now, 50 or 60 years later, has to include the
possibility that his popularity with the public and among young writers was in
part due to his service as a repository of American myth. The entrepreneurial
self had come in for some rough treatment from Melville in ''Moby-Dick'' and
from Dreiser in ''Sister Carrie.'' But Hemingway found its most romantic face.
Withdrawal from society, distrust of it, despair of it, has been preponderant in
our fiction ever since Robert Jordan withdrew from life and love and looked over
the barrel of his rifle on the last page of ''For Whom the Bell Tolls.'' It is
as if, given the self and nothing but the self - not God, not the State, love,
or any conviction of a universal order - we made ourselves its annotators. We
may have rejected Hemingway's romance; the self has become absurd, blackly
humorous, and finally shattered and fragmentary, but - and this is the point -
it is ours. T ODAY fiction suffers from a reduced authority - certainly for its
readers, who seem to be reading less of it. (It may be that the most avid
readers of new fiction in America today are film producers - an indication of
the trouble we're in.) But what is more peculiar is the reduced authority of
fiction in the minds of writers themselves, who seem to want to take on less and
less of the world with it. There seems to be a disposition many of us have to
accept some rule, largely hidden, to circumscribe our analysis and our
geography, to come indoors, lock the door, pull the drapes, to dwell in a sort
of unresounding private life.

Of course fiction, as traditionally practiced, has always dealt with private
life. High seriousness in literature is attached to the belief in the moral
immensity of the single soul. If the artist is lucky, or a genius, the specific
creation of his belief - Emma Bovary, Carrie Meeber, Stephen Dedalus, Jay Gatsby
or Joseph K. -implicates the universe. We become more who we are in the
imposition on ourselves of these morally illuminating fictive lives.

But of these characters I've listed, the books in which they find their
animation make society at large the antagonist - whether as middle-class
provincialism, religious culture, or government bureaucracy; the fate of these
individuals issues from their contention with or concession to the world around
them. And the geography of the book is vast. The heroine of ''Sister Carrie''
is, like her lover Hurstwood, a soul dominated by the material lures of the big
city. We witness her sentimental education not in the emotion of love, for which
neither she nor any other of the book's characters has endurance, but in the
emotion of social and economic advancement. Unlike so many well-written,
fashionably ironic novels of private life published today, there Continued on
next page is no claim in Dreiser for the consistent identity of the human mind,
and so in reading him our awareness moves out concentrically over Chicago, New
York, over the whole United States. And then it keeps going.

It is that moving outward, that reverberant system of judgment, that is missing
in much of our work today. This is an impression of course, nothing more, and
even as I test it in my mind with several significant exceptions, it
nevertheless seems valid to say that there is a timidity to serious fiction now,
some modesty of conception and language that has pulled it back from its old
haunts - an exhaustion of hope that writing can change anything. Or the
discovery that all the wickedness is known and thoroughly reported, and all the
solutions to the wickedness are known, and nothing changes, it all goes on, with
only the freshness of expression lost, and the power of the art. Some sort of
raging amoral system inside of which the artist is only astute in the act of
withdrawal. T HERE have been novels about Vietnam, of course, and by black
writers and by women who are feminists. Yet it is true of all of us that rather
than making the culture, we seem to be made by it - even when we are being
traditional novelists reporting on what we see, making a morally comprehensible
world.

Somehow in this postmodernist time we have been cowed. We lack some range of
imagination, the imperial earth-shaking intention, that - the world not
responding properly - would cause us to give up our writing altogether; so that
with Tolstoy we would rail against art as we had before raged against life.

And there is a corresponding withdrawal among critics. It is my impression,
perhaps unjustified, that for some segments of our critical community the large
examination of society within a story - the imposition in a novel of public
matters on private life, the lighting of history within an individual - places a
work in esthetic jeopardy.

Thus the social novel is seen as ideological. In fact if the subject of the
novel is of a certain sort -if the novel is about a labor union organizer, for
example, or a family on welfare - it is assumed to be political, i.e. impure, as
for example a novel about life in a prep school is not.

Political is always to be distinguished from what entertains. The C.I.A. novels
of William Buckley are thought to entertain. Whereas some time ago in The New
York Times Book Review a critic, Robert Alter, said of Joseph Heller's
''Catch-22'' and of a novel of mine, ''The Book of Daniel,'' that they were
flawed by a spirit adversarial to the Republic.

The final distinction is, of course, between political and literary. A quaint
distinction, and probably a source of amusement to writers in other parts of the
world - Nadine Gordimer in South Africa, for example, or Milan Kundera of
Czechoslovakia, Gunter Grass in West Germany, Gabriel Garcia Marquez of Colombia
- and it would have given a good laugh to Stendhal, Dickens, Dostoyevsky and
Malraux.

I think it is no slander to suggest that some of our critics are more likely to
accept a political novel, and even acclaim this or that example, as long as it
is written by a foreigner about a foreign country. This is analogous to
President Reagan's support of workers' movements as long as they are in Poland.

No one could seriously want the 1930's to be held up as any kind of model age.
But in trying to locate us, American writers, now, I look back to that
supposedly meager decade of misfired artistic energy, of duped intellectuals and
bad proletarian novels and I see not just Faulkner and Hemingway and Fitzgerald
and Thomas Wolfe, but James T. Farrell, Richard Wright, Nelson Algren, William
Saroyan, John Steinbeck, Katherine Anne Porter, John Dos Passos, Nathanael West,
Dorothy Parker, Edward Dahlberg, Dalton Trumbo, Horace McCoy, Erskine Caldwell,
Lillian Hellman, James Agee, Edmund Wilson, Daniel Fuchs, Henry Roth, Henry
Miller. For starters. A literature of great variety and contention, an argument
from all sides - full of passion, excessive, energetic, self-consuming.

Literary life in the present is, by comparison, decorous. It's very quiet today.
Is it because our society is sunlit and perfect? Are all our vampires staked
through the heart? Or have we given up our presumption of the authority of art,
of the central place of the sustained narrative critique in the national
argument?

Alfred Kazin has an idea about the 30's, that they ''turned out to be stronger
in counterrevolution than in revolution, in the power of the state than of the
apostolic freedom of the individual soul. . . . orthodoxy was becoming the norm
in the Thirties, not radicalism; the period that seems so easy to sentimentalize
as one of struggle against poverty and oppression actually saw the triumph of
fascism in Germany and Spain, the unchecked dominion of Stalinist terror over
what was radical in Communism itself. In this country the statism seemingly
necessary for the crisis legislation of the New Deal was soon, with Pearl
Harbor, to hammer out social regimentation and forms of intellectual control
that many Americans now regard as the norm.''

Of course I am taking his remarks out of context. But if Mr. Kazin is right -
and who, listening to the shrill voices of conservatism in culture as everywhere
else, can doubt it - then we have some suggestion of the ultimate dependence of
the artist upon the people he would speak for. We conceive of the work of art as
an ultimate act of individuation but in another sense it is a production of the
community.

Narrative is the art closest to the ordinary daily operation of the human mind.
People find the meaning of their lives in the idea of sequence, in conflict, in
metaphor and in moral. People think and make judgments from the confidence of
narrative; anyone, at any age, is able to tell the story of his or her life with
authority. The narrative mode of thought comes universally to people as, for
instance, mathematical or scientific reasoning do not. Everyone all the time is
in the act of composition, our experience is an ongoing narrative within each of
us. T HUS, ironically, in our withdrawal, our nonpolitical, pragmatic vision of
ourselves and our calling, we may be expressing the general crisis of our age:
we are writing as we live, in a kind of stunned submission to the political
circumstances of our lives and the establishmentarian rule of our politicians.
We are being bought off by our comfort while great moral outrages are committed
in our name. As two superpowers hold the world hostage, a statist ideology
encroaches on the realm of individual thought.

I would not mean to imply that the problems of writers under these circumstances
are not the least of America's problems. But the coercion of Realpolitik, the
ideology of cold war and the shadow of the bomb may have robbed us of the
passion of our calling, which is the belief that writing matters, that there is
salvation in witness and moral assignment. These days many of our best writers
do a kind of passive prophecy. They concentrate on the powerlessness or
haplessness of our lives, and the inappropriateness of our public places for
human life, or the inadequacy of our culture for the conduct of human emotion.
An inadvertent social critique comes off their pages without that level of rage
that would drive them to and fro, like Leo Tolstoy, from art to the conviction
that nothing is more important than teaching the children of the poor to read.

The young writer today who picks up tonally, philosophically, on the Hemingway
romance is in danger of misperceiving the predominant condition of things, which
is that the future for any of us is not individual. As independent entrepreneurs
of ourselves with no control over our destiny, we may be failing the task. How
will we be able to stay true to the changing nature of our lives if we hold to a
myth that is being nullified by history? If our response to what is going on
today were appropriate, it would probably produce books of a grubbier, sloppier
and more energetic sort than we are doing. Books with less polish and
self-consciousness, but ones about the way power works in our society, who has
it, and how it is making history. In order to begin to rebuild our sense of
ourselves, we may have to go back to childhood, to the past, and start again. In
order to reclaim our society, we need the words to find it.

This essay was adapted from the Hopwood awards lecture to young writers given
last spring at the University of Michigan. The complete text will be published
in the fall issue of The Michigan Quarterly Review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

60 YEARS OF PASSION AND COMPASSION

BYLINE: By Hugh Ford; Hugh Ford is the author of ''Published in Paris'' and the
forthcoming ''Four Lives in Paris.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


WORDS THAT MUST SOMEHOW BE SAID Selected Essays of Kay Boyle 1927-1984. Edited
and with an introduction by Elizabeth S. Bell. 262 pp. San Francisco: North
Point Press. $16.50.

This collection brings together 25 essays, reviews and prefaces composed over
six decades but mostly between the mid-1940's and the late 70's. Many appeared
in The Nation and The New Republic, journals that accepted the writer's work
when others didn't. As a supplement to her ''Fifty Stories'' (1980), ''Words
That Must Somehow Be Said'' is invaluable. It is also a welcome confirmation of
Miss Boyle's prolific and variegated career. Of her 14 novels, only a few are
still in print, though once again available is the nonfiction work ''Being
Geniuses Together: 1920-1930,'' Robert McAlmon's expatriate memoir, to which she
added chapters about her own experiences in Paris.

Many of the essays in the present volume afford unfaded, disturbing glimpses
into our country's traumatic past and Miss Boyle's impassioned concerns, from
the McCarthyism epidemic to the Vietnam War protests and the Attica prison
riots. There is much autobiography here too, and a portrait emerges of the
author as a bold and articulate defender of civil liberties and humane treatment
of the neglected and defenseless. As the editor of this volume, the critic
Elizabeth S. Bell, notes in an informative introduction, Miss Boyle's writing is
consistently vivid and trenchant and, in the best pieces, compassionate and
enduring.

In the first essay, ''The Family,'' we get a sense of the writer's ancestry.
Affectionately described are a general in Washington's army, a frontier doctor,
a Kansas schoolteacher, an aunt who drew cartoons for the National Woman's Party
and the author's mother, a stalwart and independent woman who had a profound
influence on her daughter. From them Miss Boyle claims her pioneering spirit and
devotion to free inquiry. In some evocative passages, they are revealed as moral
touchstones guiding her deliberations.

The essays under the heading ''On Writers and Writing'' include early reviews of
works by William Carlos Williams and Hart Crane (both appeared in transition
magazine in the late 1920's). She celebrates Williams's essays in ''The American
Grain'' as an authetic rendering of America, unencumbered by inheritance, an
original depiction grounded in ''chastity of fact.'' She dismisses Crane's poems
in ''White Buildings,'' however, as empty and dull, lacking the raw substance of
life. In Katherine Mansfield's stories she discerns an ''inadequacy to see in
any other and wider terms the things she sensed so acutely,'' but in William
Faulkner's 1938 novel, ''The Unvanquished,'' she finds consummate skill and
vision to effect both a personal and national passage out of violence.

Doubtless the imperatives she issued in ''A Declaration for 1955'' after she had
borne the contumely of McCarthyism were reactions to the time, but her
insistence that authors must not just speak their beliefs but also defend them,
devoting themselves to altering society according to the ''higher standards'' of
the individual, remains compelling. Among those who met the challenge to speak
the ''words that must somehow be said'' she cites Dylan Thomas, Edward Dahlberg
and James Baldwin.

In the book's final section, ''On the Human Condition,'' Miss Boyle addresses
the tragedy of this century: genocide. In a 1945 essay, she excoriates the
beggarly conduct of Andre Gide, Sacha Guitry and Maurice Chevalier, who, during
the Occupation, stood by while 11,000 Jews were incarcerated and deported. In
1949 she writes of two women traveling on the same train to Frankfurt. One is a
civilian War Department employee who assuages her hatred of Germany (''a leper's
colony'') by spending weekends in Paris. The other is a German refugee, a Jew,
who sustained herself in exile by remembering the words of Goethe: ''freedom and
life are deserved only by those who conquer them anew each day.''

It was with some reluctance that Kay Boyle returned to live in Germany in 1948.
Two years later came ''The Smoking Mountain,'' a collection of stories
describing that vanquished country. In the book's preface, a long, sharply
observed report and commentary reprinted here, she set forth with sympathy and
understanding the results of her ''painstaking and almost completely loveless
search for another face of Germany.'' She accepts the common finding of Goethe,
Heine, Nietzsche and the novelist Theodor Plievier that Germans suffer from
fatal dualities within themselves and that only when they finally acknowledge
this will the national psyche be healed. H ER account of the trial of Heinrich
Baab, a former Gestapo official accused of participating in over 50 murders,
offers harrowing testimony about the difficulties facing a nation of bewildered
and divided people. When a German jury finds Baab guilty and a German judge
sentences him to hard labor for life, a young court guard Miss Boyle had noticed
during the trial turns toward the press bench, his face ''as clear as light with
vindicated pride.'' ''Until there has been a national upheaval, a cleaning of
our house by our own hands,'' a German friend told the author, ''the twilight
will remain.''

If Kay Boyle defines the human condition in terms of war and its aftermath - the
suffering and extinction of multitudes, violations of human dignity by
totalitarian and democratic nations and relentless preparations for conflict
under the guise of security - it is not because she has lost faith that man can
prevail but because she believes he will. With the abolitionist John Brown, she
holds that ''a minority convinced of its rights, based on moral principles will,
under a republican government, sooner or later become the majority.'' As this
collection impresively attests, Kay Boyle has spent a lifetime speaking for the
voiceless and acting for the inactive in pursuit of that goal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words


Aug. 25, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 10 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 2 2 6 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 3 3 23 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 4* 1 LUCKY, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of a
crime lord takes on the heiress of a shipping tycoon in fashionable spots all
over the world.

* 5 11 2 THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $14.95.) Romance,
scandal and murder in New York's high society.

* 6 4 14 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 7 5 14 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner
to the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century
American wilderness.

* 8 6 9 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 9 8 31 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 10 7 15 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 11* 9 6 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

* 12 10 6 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.

* 13 1 TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $17.95.) Three
sisters find their destinies bound by an obsession with the same man.

* 14 23 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $16.95.) A married couple
with five children cope with the crises of modern-day America.

* 15* 13 23 INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
traditionalist Jew's quest for identity in glittery contemporary America.
Nonfiction

* 1 1 7 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) The story of the first man to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 43 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 16 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 21 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze modern women's
efforts to find acceptable men.

* 5 5 5 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the New York Yankee baseball star.

* 6 8 15 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 7 6 6 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis champion.

* 8 7 8 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery
and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 9 9 2 THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men
seek the 1984 Olympic gold medal for single sculling.

* 10 10 3 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 11 12 4 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding
the 1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 12 11 2 THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing
pieces about pursuing pleasures in the great outdoors.

* 13 14 6 THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A
chronicle of the Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

* 14* 12 MOUNTBATTEN, by Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The authorized
biography of the British nobleman, diplomat and naval hero.

* 15 1 AT MOTHER'S REQUEST, by Jonathan Coleman. (Atheneum, $19.95.) Another
account of the murder case recounted in ''Nutcracker'' (see No. 8).

* 16* 15 51 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) How
the author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' sought a true love. Advice and
Self-Help

* 1 1 11 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 2 2 WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's,
$14.95.) How to find the right man and maintain a happy relationship with him.

* 3 3 21 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for
delicious dishes prepared at moderate cost.

* 4 5 7 SMART COOKIES DON'T CRUMBLE, by Sonya Friedman. (Putnam, $15.95.) A
psychologist's advice to women about living their own lives.

* 5 4 38 NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to
buy real estate with little or no money; revised edition of a 1980 book. And
Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE
COLLECTED STORIES OF WILLIAM HUMPHREY. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence, $19.95.)
Located mainly in Texas, these 22 stories offer both a refined sensibility and a
rustic energy, a Jamesian psychological penetration and a spirit that expands in
the presence of awesome natural forces.

ANOTHER NAME FOR MADNESS, by Marion Roach. (Houghton

Mifflin, $14.95.) A vivid and moving personal account of a mother lost to her
family and the world through Alzheimer's disease. THE ART OF CAPTAIN COOK'S
VOYAGES, by Rudiger Joppien and Bernard Smith. Volume One: The Voyage of the
Endeavour, 1768-1771. Volume Two: The Voyage of the Resolution and Adventure,
1772-1775. (Yale University, $50 each.) The work of artists who accompanied Cook
and introduced the romantic image of the South Seas to Europe; handsomely
produced and scholarly.

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EUROPEAN JEWS, by Raul

Hilberg. (Holmes & Meier, three volumes, $159.50.) A revised, expanded and
apparently final edition, by the pre-eminent scholar of the Holocaust, of his
magnum opus, first published in 1961. HENRY VIII, by Jasper Ridley. (Viking,
$24.95.) A briskly narrated version of Henry's reign which dispenses with the
legend of the frank young King turned tyrant in middle age; he was ever thus.
UNDER THE BANYAN TREE and Other Stories, by R. K. Narayan. (Elisabeth
Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) Simple observation for its own sake is at the heart of
these 28 benign, even-tempered, elegant stories by the distinguished Indian
English-language novelist.

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC, by William Gaddis. (Elizabeth Sifton/

Viking, $16.95.) A mazy, mercilessly adroit carnival of frauds and cynics,
thieves and liars, redeemed (if at all) by outrageous humor and a suggestion
that the world may not be as bad as it is painted. The listings above are based
on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted
to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BAR PANEL TO CONSIDER DOHRN'S FITNESS

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


She was a leader of the Weather Underground and a fugitive for nearly 11 years
from charges that she participated in violent protests.

As recently as 1982, her own lawyer described her in an affidavit as having ''a
view of the law and a view of life and her rights and obligations that is
myopic, convoluted, unrealistic, childish, and inexplicable'' and as a woman who
''is intractable in her views and beliefs to the point of fanaticism.''

Today, Bernardine Dohrn - 43 years old and a married mother of three who lives
with her husband in upper Manhattan - is applying for admission to the bar. And
a court-appointed committee is considering whether she has outgrown the style,
if not the substance, of her years of protest, as well as the degree to which
her behavior is relevant to the practice of law.

Don H. Reuben, the Chicago lawyer who filed the 1982 affidavit in an effort to
convince the court that it was pointless to prosecute, now says of Miss Dohrn,
''My impression is that she's so conservative she's dull.''

''I suspect it's children, the law, life and reading Time magazine,'' he said in
a recent interview.

Called a Violent Terrorist

In contrast, at a hearing by the character committee earlier this month, Miss
Dohrn was portrayed as ''a violent terrorist leader'' by Lieut. Terence McTigue,
who is on a medical leave from the New York City Police Department's bomb squad.

''It's not up to us to prove that she's a bad person,'' said Lieutenant McTigue,
who asked the committee to be permitted to testify. ''It's up to her to document
that she's a good person.'' The lieutenant said he based his description of Miss
Dohrn as a ''terrorist'' on Congressional reports and other documents that
recount the violent acts of the Weather Underground.

When Miss Dohrn surrendered to authorities in 1980, however, she was charged
only with participating in a riot in Chicago in 1969.

Miss Dohrn, who passed the state bar examination last year, declined to be
interviewed while her application was pending. She is working in the Manhattan
office of a prominent Chicago-based law firm.

''We're hopeful that they will feel that she has been, what I would call
rehabilitated, in the language of the law,'' said Harold R. Tyler Jr., a former
Federal judge who is representing her in the current proceeding.

Hearing Next Month

The Committee on Character and Fitness of Applicants for Admission to the Bar of
the First Judicial Department, which covers Manhattan and the Bronx, is expected
to conduct another hearing on Miss Dohrn's application next month.

Last year, the committee recommended about 2,000 applicants for admission to the
bar. Fewer than 1 percent of their applications raised questions deemed serious
enough to lead to hearings by the committee.

Its hearings consider whether the problem was isolated, the time that has
elapsed since the actions or events that raised the questions and the
applicant's record since that period.

The committee's proceedings are confidential. The body is appointed by the
Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court, which may accept or reject its
recommendations. An applicant who is denied admission by the committee can
petition the court for review.

Pleaded Guilty in 1980

Miss Dohrn graduated from the University of Chicago Law School in 1967. After
spending 11 years as a fugitive on charges of rioting and related accusations,
she surfaced in 1980 and pleaded guilty to two counts of aggravated battery and
two counts of bail-jumping stemming from protests against the Vietnam War in
1969. She was fined $1,500 and placed on three years probation.

In 1982, she spent seven months in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in
Manhattan for refusing to cooperate with a grand jury investigating the 1981
robbery of a Brink's armored truck and murders in Rockland County.

Miss Dohrn's husband is William Ayers, son of a prominent Chicago executive and
a former Weather Underground member whom she married during a two-day furlough
from prison in 1982.

In deciding to release Miss Dohrn at the end of 1982, Judge Gerard L. Goettel of
Federal District Court said there appeared to be no furthur purpose in jailing
someone prosecutors had said ''might have been an unwitting facilitator of the
criminal activity.''

Mr. Tyler discussed Miss Dohrn's application and the 1982 affidavit, concurred
in by him as one of her attorneys and which also said Miss Dohrn ''may well
perceive herself as a second Joan of Arc.''

''I wouldn't have put the problem quite the way Don Reuben did,'' Mr. Tyler
said, referring to the affidavit's tone. In any case, he added, ''I maintain she
has changed. She acts like a perfectly typical lawyer in a big firm. I would
think she would be interested in only great social causes. She's interested in
working.''

''I would be very troubled, as to the notion of fairness, if she wasn't made a
member of the bar now,'' Mr. Reuben said. ''This country makes a point of
looking at people as they are and not visiting upon them their past silliness of
their youth.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernardine Dohrn (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WARNED CONGRESS OF G.I. ROLE IN NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


The Reagan Administration, as part of its effort to persuade Congress to renew
aid to anti-Sandinista rebels, argued that continued financing of the guerrilla
force was necessary to avoid the risk of sending American troops to Nicaragua,
according to testimony recently made public.

Langhorne A. Motley, then Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, told a closed session of a House Appropriations subcommittee on April
18 that the rebels, widely referred to as the contras, were preventing the
governing Sandinista Front from consolidating a Marxist-Leninist regime in the
Cuban style and that if rebel military activities should be terminated it might
become necessary to send American troops.

''What we have tried to do in designing this program, the contra program, is
create two do-not-wants,'' Mr. Motley said, ''because that is what the American
public, as we understand it, and the President don't want - they don't want a
second Cuba, that is, a Marxist-Leninist state. And they don't want a second
Vietnam, U.S. combat troops bogged down without a clear purpose.''

''If you knock down one half of that,'' he continued, ''say Nicaragua is going
Marxist-Leninist and continues to subvert its neighbors - it does not have the
motivation not to do so - then the other side of the equation doesn't hang up
either.''

Arguments Used by Shultz

He said that leads to ''a possibility that under some circumstances the United
States may have to get involved.''

Secretary of State George P. Shultz, in a speech on May 23, used some of the
same arguments that Mr. Motley used before the subcommittee. He said that if the
United States failed to aid the rebels now it would eventually have to make ''an
agonizing choice about the use of American combat troops'' in Central America.

Mr. Motley, who resigned from the State Department at the end of April and
returned to private business, spoke in response to questions from subcommittee
members about a secret Presidential report supporting the request for $14
million in renewed aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.

During the hearing, Representative Norman D. Dicks, a Washington Democrat,
quoted a portion of the report as saying that ''if the military assistance to
the contras is defeated . . . this option would be lost, placing us in an
accommodationist or military response dilemma at some later date when the threat
to U.S. interests become more obvious and when the only effective response would
be on a larger scale or in less favorable circumstances.''

Battling Over Aid

''Now that means military involvement by the United States Government,'' said
Mr. Dicks. ''Isn't that what you are saying?''

''It means the possibility of it,'' Mr. Motley responded. ''It may reach that
point. Yes.''

The Administration lost a battle for military aid for the rebels in April, but
two months later - after Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega Saavedra angered
many members of Congress by leaving on what was said to have been a
long-scheduled visit to Moscow - it won approval for $27 million in nonmilitary
assistance.

The Central Intelligence Agency had provided financial support, supplies and
advice to the Nicaraguan rebels until ordered by Congress to cease all support a
year ago. In the last year, however, the largest rebel group, the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, nearly doubled in size, from about 9,000 fighters to an
estimated 16,000 to 17,000, and its leaders raised private funds in the United
States and abroad estimated variously at $15 million to $25 million.

The director of the C.I.A.'s Office of African and Latin American Analysis, John
Helgerson, told the subcommittee that analysts for the agency ''have
consistently underestimated the determination of the contras, not only to
continue fighting, but we did not expect that they would continue to win
recruits in the absence of any outside support. I think it is a testimony to
their appeal and the lack of the appeal of the Sandinista regime that this
movement has continued to grow.''

'Real Problem in the North'

Mr. Helgerson predicted that in six months the Sandinistas would ''face a real
problem in the north because of their policies - it will wind down, but there
will be no precipitous collapse.'' Mid-October would be six months from the time
he spoke.

Asked about the sources of rebel financial support since the termination of
C.I.A. backing, Mr. Helgerson said he believed that about a million dollars had
been provided by Cuban-Americans and several million dollars from American
corporations and what he described as conservative action groups. He said aid
had also come from individuals in Central and South America. He said the
C.I.A.'s information was ''fragmentary'' and based largely on news reports.

In addition to the possible need to send American troops, Mr. Motley and C.I.A.
officials used a number of other arguments to justify aiding the rebels during
their appearances before the panel, the Subcommittee on the Department of
Defense. The transcript of the discussions, with large portions deleted on the
grounds that they were classified, were published recently by the Appropriations
Committee.

Mr. Motley, again responding to questions about statements in the secret
Presidential report, warned that the United States might have to substantially
increase its outlay in military assistance to other Central American countries
if it did not support the guerrillas.

Growing Military Costs

''If you don't like $14 million for aid in a budget deficit year, try and
increase $500 million for military assistance to Central America,'' he said. ''I
think we are being realistic in looking at what Congress will vote, and what
will come forth. I can see the arguments in the committees.''

He said United States military costs for friendly Central American governments
totaled about $3.2 billion a year in fiscal 1984 and 1985 and ''could'' rise to
$4 billion if the Nicaraguan rebels were not supported. He said the figure was
an amalgamation of estimates from the Defense and State Departments and the
C.I.A.

Asked whether Congressional rejection of aid for the rebels would lead to an
increase in Soviet involvement in the region, Mr. Motley said that it would, but
not ''a dramatic 15 freighters steaming into the harbor - what I see really is
what Robert Frost used to call free verse: playing tennis with the net down.

''The message that they will receive is 'Go ahead and keep your supplies up, go
ahead and keep helping the insurgencies of different countries, the United
States has shown it doesn't really want to face up to this.' It will be a
process of erosion. It won't be a big dramatic action such as tanks marching out
of Managua headed for Tegucigalpa, but it will be over a period of time.''

It was also argued that other Central American countries and some South American
countries needed to see signs of American resolve in dealing with Nicaragua.

Some of the Congressmen, in response, argued that the Reagan Administration
ought to cease trading with Nicaragua as one way of showing resolve. The
Administration did impose an embargo on all trade between the United States and
Nicaragua two weeks after the subcommittee hearing, and senior officials have
said the primary reason was to send a message to other Central American
countries that the United States was not abandoning the Nicaraguan opposition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Langhorne Motley

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Eat on the Street? How Pedestrian

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


Jeffrey Marcus is a lawyer. He wears a gray suit, single vent. His glasses are
pale tortoise shell. His shoes are black loafers. But in this city where people
seem to strive for comformity, Mr. Marcus is something of an anomaly. He's got a
rivulet of relish on his chin.  ''That's the tradeoff when you lunch from the
vendors - you eat fast and cheap but every so often you miss your mouth,'' Mr.
Marcus said, plucking a cloth handkerchief from his pocket and dabbing away the
evidence of his lunch-on-the-run.

Where you eat in Washington is often thought to be a measure of where you stand,
so it is no surprise that most people hungry for position, in addition to lunch,
don't want to be caught standing on the corner of 18th and K Streets with a hot
dog in hand.

''Imagine how I would feel if a client passed,'' Mr. Marcus said, ''or a
colleague.''

But on this day, schedule and finances made Mr. Marcus realize that he was
better off taking a risk than making a reservation, so for $2.45 he had a dog
with the works and a ginger ale. ''It wouldn't be so bad if there was more of a
choice,'' he said. ''But the offerings on the streets here aren't
overwhelming.''

Cart cuisine has not taken hold here the way it has in other cities, like New
York, where on one corner you can eat anything from tacos to vichyssoise, fancy
ice cream to old-fashioned egg creams. But for those eager, or forced, to have a
street corner special, Washington vendors offer plenty of substance, if not
style.

In a recent survey, one vendor parked on Seventh Street near Independence was
found to feature beef hot dogs (with chili and kraut), egg rolls, fried rice,
fresh orange juice and lemonade, coffee, cigarettes, pretzels, pizza,
half-smoked sausages, gum, candy and potato chips, regular, sour cream and
onion, salt 'n' vinegar and barbecue.

As for dessert items, he did not carry Dove Bars - the latest gourmet ice cream
to melt Manhattan -but he did have Popsicles, Nutty Buddys, pushups, toasted
almond bars, ice cream sandwiches, bomb pops, chocolate eclairs, strawberry
shortcakes, snowcones and even Frozfruit.

This van was scarcely different from the six others parked alongside the
National Air and Space Museum. Competition among Washington vendors seems to
come not from menu but from position: whoever is parked closer to where the
person who wants to eat is standing gets the customer.

And most of the food vendors try to position themselves near tourist
attractions, where customers are more likely to be concerned with their stomachs
than their stature.

'The Best I'm Gonna Do'

''It's not like a meal at home, but it's all right and it's here,'' said Scott
Bullock, a 20-year-old farmer from Goldvin, Va., who was in town to visit his
grandfather. ''If I was home, I'd have a thick, juicy hamburger, french fries, a
big glass of iced tea and a piece of pie. But right now a Polish sausage and a
Diet Coke is the best I'm gonna do.''

Ned and Betty Frame of Bloomington, Ind., had just toured the White House, and
with three young boys in tow - Mark, 3, George, 5, and Ned Jr., 8 - they decided
it was more sensible to pick off a cart than a menu.

''It takes shorter time and that way we can visit more places,'' Mr. Frame said.
''Our next stop is the Washington Monument, then Lincoln and then the Vietnam
Memorial.''

''This way, the boys also can't embarrass us by fighting in a restaurant,'' Mrs.
Frame added.

Some people speculate that, in general, Washingtonians are too proper and tucked
in to adopt street eating as a habit. A New Yorker who recently moved to
Washington said he was walking down the street in Adams Morgan, eating a
sandwich, when he passed a woman who looked at him and laughed. ''You must be
from New York,'' she said. ''Nobody from here eats and walks at the same time.''

Marsha Newman, who works as a secretary for an accounting concern, said that,
indeed, she does not like to be a regular curbside diner but sometimes the
convenience is hard to resist. ''At least now you can buy fruit if you want
to,'' said Miss Newman, scarfing down an egg roll and a diet soda on her way
back to her job. ''I really don't have to be eating this junk food, even if I
didn't want to go to a restaurant for lunch. There are corners now where you can
get real nice plums and apples.''

But if eating a hot dog on the run is a danger to one's sartorial splendor, a
piece of fruit is no safer. Susy Bobenreith runs a fruit stand at 17th and L
Streets that carries peaches, nectarines, apples, green and red seedless grapes,
mangos, raspberries, plums, tomatoes and bananas.

''People comes up and say 'Are the peaches ripe?' '' she said. ''And I tell
them, 'Oh, yes, they're real ripe and juicy.' And then they'll say they can't
buy it because it might dribble on their tie.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


REEL WORLD STRING BAND The Reel World String Band has been described as ideal
for dancing and just generally letting loose the spirit. There isn't room for
dancing at the intimate, funky Folk City. But spirits are likely to be flying
and feet to be stomping when this old-time Appalachian band performs there
tonight at 8:30 and 10:30, if Reel World's appearance this summer at the
Clearwater Revival is any guide.

Based in Lexington, Ky., the four-woman group sings and plays traditional and
contemporary music, with an emphasis on the tunes of the members' home states -
Texas, Kansas and Kentucky - as well as the traditions of central Kentucky and
Appalachian songwriters. The instruments are mandolin, played by Bev Futrell;
banjo, by Sue Massek; acoustic bass, by Sharon Ruble; hammered dulcimer and
fiddle, by Karen Jones, and guitar, by Mrs. Futrell and Miss Massek.

Reel World, which first played in 1977, was formed by Mrs. Futrell and Miss
Massek. Shortly after, Miss Massek worked at a summer folk heritage camp for
Appalachian children, where she learned the Appalachian ''clawhammer'' banjo
style, which she plays in addition to the three-finger bluegrass style. Miss
Ruble, a graphic artist, joined the band after she met the two musicians at a
bluegrass jam session at a conference for the International Women's Year. Miss
Jones, a lawyer who learned her fiddling from Guy Blakeman, joined a little
later.

The music often has a witty edge. And Reel World is likely to include songs
celebrating the strengths of women and of the coal miners of Kentucky, as well
as cuts from ''In Good Time,'' the group's latest album, on the Flying Fish
label. Tickets are $4 and may be obtained at Folk City, 130 West Third Street.
Information: 254-8449.

'CARIBBEAN INSTRUMENTS'

Musical instruments have a beauty of their own simply as art, and their sounds
and histories have much to say about cultural survival. Music, art and the
persistence of traditional culture are the subjects of ''Caribbean
Instruments,'' an exhibition now on view at the Caribbean Cultural Center, 408
West 58th Street. Brought to the New World by Africans, the percussion and
stringed instruments are still played today, often with subtle changes in style.

There is, for instance, the chekere or beaded gourd, whose sound inspired the
formation of Women of the Calabash, the New York-based quartet. The exhibition
also includes the banjo and its African counterpart; the maracas, gourd rattles
used originally by South American Indians; the marimba or African xylophone, and
the agogo, an Afro-Cuban ritual hand bell. Here, too, are the bata drums used by
the Yoruba people to summon up powerful divinities, and the berimbau, whose name
may have derived from the Bantu word for song.

Photographs by Juma Santos and Marco Kalisch, taken in West Africa, the
Caribbean and North and South America, illustrate the creation of the
instruments and the ritual and popular uses of the traditional and adapted
versions. The curators of ''Caribbean Instruments'' are Leonard Goines and
Felipe Luciano, and the instruments are from such collections as those of
Babatunde Olatunji, Tito Puente, Maya Deren and the American Museum of Natural
History. The suggested admission to the exhibition, which runs through Oct. 5,
is $2 for adults; $1 for students and the elderly. Gallery hours are Tuesday
through Friday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M. Information:
307-7420.

NEW PHOTOGRAPHY

The subject matter and techniques are wide ranging in ''New Photography,'' an
exhibition of 40 black and white photographs that has just opened at the Museum
of Modern Art. On view is work by Zeke Berman, Antonio Mendoza, Judith Ross and
Michael Spano, all young American photographers who are represented in the
museum's permanent collection.

Miss Ross has been working on an extended series of portraits of visitors to the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, taken at the memorial with the
cooperation of her subjects. Mr. Berman, who trained as a sculptor, taught
himself photography to document his work and began to create sculptural
constructions that could be photographed from a specific vantage point.

Mr. Mendoza is represented by 14 pages from his autobiographical ''Stories,''
which combine text and images. Technical experimentation is the hallmark of Mr.
Spano's photographs. Three of his eight photographs on view here were made with
a camera that produces eight exposures at predetermined time intervals.
Admission to the museum is $4.50 for adults; $3 for students; $2 for the
elderly; children under 16 free if accompanied by an adult. The museum is open
Friday through Tuesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; closed
Wednesday. Information: 708-9400.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 28, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA ON BRINK OF REBIRTH, OR DECAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1842 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Aug. 22


Nearly seven years after Vietnamese soldiers replaced the brutal Pol Pot regime
with a Government friendly to Vietnam, Cambodia is an exhausted and isolated
nation, struggling to develop - and still haunted by the threat of Pol Pot's
troops.

Residents say those soldiers, known as the Khmer Rouge, are able to strike
within 10 to 15 miles of the capital, although such attacks seem to be
infrequent. The Khmer Rouge is based near the Thai border, as are two
non-Communist insurgent groups.

More guerrilla activity is reported in the distant provinces of the north and
northwest. Trains and buses from the Battambang area arrive in Phnom Penh with
armed guards aboard.

Guerrillas of the rebel coalition assert that they regularly blow up bridges and
damage roads that the Government is trying to improve in several provinces.
Their assertions were buttressed by Nhim Vanda, Vice Minister of State Planning,
who said one problem was that ''the guerrillas are trying to detroy our
highways.''

At the same time, Cambodians and the small community of Westerners helping in
the limited relief work here say the gratitude and optimism that greeted the
fall of Pol Pot have dissipated. Though famine is gone, national development has
proceeded slowly in the face of immense natural, technological, strategic and
human problems.

Cambodians, the inheritors of one of Asia's richest cultures, have seen their
country drawn economically, politically and socially into the orbit of a
culturally different people, and a traditional enemy, the Vietnamese.

A foreigner with long experience in the country was asked to sum up the changes
in the last few years. ''There is a lot less enthusiasm,'' he said. ''And more
political repression.''

Phnom Penh is a bruised but still-beautiful city that seems to be teetering
between rebirth and decay. The population is 500,000, most of the people living
in homes and apartments abandoned during the Pol Pot years. All property in the
city belongs to the state.

Pigs, goats and chickens wander among French-built villas along shaded streets,
while people cook on sidewalks, giving the capital the appearance of an Asian
village temporarily camped out in a European city.

A 9 P.M.-to-5 A.M. curfew imposed in 1979 remains in effect in Phnom Penh.
Foreigners, whose travel in the countryside is strictly limited, but who can
move around the city at night among the three hotels where they live, say that
after midnight intersections and major roads are patrolled by Vietnamese troops.


Bridges Are Guarded

Outside the city, no bridge or village seen by journalists on a recent visit was
unguarded, apparently because of the rebel threat. In the hamlet of Anlong
Samreth, about 25 miles southwest of the capital in Kompong Speu province, the
headman said the village militia mounted a 24-hour watch with old American-made
M-16 rifles.

Khmer Rouge broadcasts monitored in Bangkok have threatened sabotage in the
capital. There have not been any such attacks, though there have been small
violent acts that, like many things in Phnom Penh, were never officially
explained, residents say.

The guerrilla war takes other, less noticeable tolls on Cambodian life.
Civilians by the thousands are being sent to the Thai border area to help build
fortifications. Medical workers say many return with malaria. Refugees reaching
Thailand say some are killed by land mines or get caught in skirmishes.

At the cheerful and well-organized Nutrition Center orphanage in Phnom Penh, the
director, Chan Haranvadhey, one of many young Cambodians working hard with small
resources to alleviate big problems, said the parents of some of the babies
brought to her had died ''at the border.''

The threat of Pol Pot, whose forces are estimated by most Western sources to be
greater than the Cambodian Army, also insures that the Vietnamese Army stays in
Cambodia, Westerners in the city say. That leads some aid workers to question
the wisdom of giving material and moral support to the resistance coalition.
They argue that it prolongs the Vietnamese occupation that has caused most of
the world, the Soviet bloc and India excepted, to withhold diplomatic
recognition and badly needed aid.

'Punished for Being Invaded'

''These poor people are being punished for being invaded,'' one relief worker
said.

The Vietnamese and the Cambodian Government, still nominally headed by Heng
Samrin but increasingly dominated by Prime Minister Hun Sen, according to
politically knowledgeable people, continue to make the Pol Pot regime the
scapegoat for all the country's problems. Hanoi supported the April 17, 1975,
Communist takeover, the anniversary of which is still a national holiday here,
breaking with the Khmer Rouge only after the regime became brutally
anti-Vietnamese.

Exaggerated accusations are sometimes quickly contradicted. Reporters on a
recent visit to the planning ministry were told that Pol Pot had ''destroyed all
the 60 factories in Phnom Penh.'' But at the Takhmau tire factory, built by
Czechoslovakia during the years that Prince Norodom Sihanouk ruled, the manager
told the same visitors several days earlier that the plant had remained open.

And while many families suffered tragic, gruesome losses under the Khmer Rouge,
whose acts and policies resulted in the deaths of two million or more of this
country's seven million people, there are also survival stories that challenge
assumptions about what happened to at least some of the country's skilled and
educated people.

Reports on Medical Profession

The Government routinely says the medical profession was annihilated by Pol Pot.
But at the Kampuchean-Soviet Friendship hospital the deputy director, Dr. Pen
Phimean, said that when she and her family returned to the capital from the
countryside in 1979, she heard that many of her early-1970's medical school
classmates were alive and working in France.

There are repeated rumors, but no evidence, that some of the damage to factories
and other buildings occurred in the 1978-79 Vietnamese invasion.

There are aspects of life in Cambodia that contribute, like the treatment of
history, to creating disillusion and sometimes a certain cynicism among the
young, Westerners say.

The Government, under Hanoi's tutelage, may be preoccupied with political
orthodoxy and social control, some residents say. But corruption and high living
are said to flourish in official ranks, to the reported distress of the
disciplined Vietnamese, who are represented, a knowledgeable foreigner said,
''from top to bottom'' in Cambodian ministries.

Role of Private Traders

Much of the urban economy is in the hands of private traders, fixers and
smugglers who supply the city with everything from Western medicine to beer from
Singapore. Some here suspect they are in collusion with Government officials.

But while Phnom Penh's markets offer a choice of foreign detergents, cosmetic
soaps and toothpastes, most people have no running water. The city's erratic
electricity supply is pilfered regularly, officials say. ''They just take two
wires and steal it,'' said a Government planner.

The country, though desperately short of technical and professional skills,
discourages and occasionally forbids Cambodians living in the West from
returning to assist in development. ''Anyone with Western connections is seen as
a security problem,'' a diplomat said.

Cambodians are still escaping to Thailand, often more out of a sense of general
hopelessness than for specific political reasons, their friends say. A foreigner
decribed one young couple she knew as committed to staying to help rebuild
Cambodia ''until they had a baby.''

Good French Restaurants

Phnom Penh has good French restaurants - and also malnourished children. With
fringe benefits like subsidized food, Cambodian office or factory workers can
earn as much as $100 a month at official exchange rates. But at the black market
rate required to buy many consumer goods, that wage shrinks to less than $10.

Babies abandoned by mothers who can no longer feed their families are cared for
by a government that is urging women to have as many children as possible to
push the country's population to 8 million in the next five years.

Sanitation standards are slipping, some aid workers say, giving rise to more
childhood infections. In a restaurant, a waitress ostensibly filling a sugar jar
suddenly whispered to a foreigner, ''Would you have any penicillin for my
children?''

Hard-working doctors in the city's hospitals list epidemic diseases, malaria and
dengue prime among them, as the country's most serious health problems. Yet at
the nation's only medical school, the Faculty of Medicine in Phnom Penh, a
blackboard chart of required courses in the six-year medical degree program
showed 48 hours of epidemology, but 288 hours of political education and 256
hours of Vietnamese language.

Importance of Languages

Asked about the language requirement, a hospital administrator, Oy Samath, said
knowing Vietnamese was needed ''to keep up with advances in medicine'' and to
enable Vietnamese lecturers to teach in their own language. But he added that
French was to be re-introduced next year.

With Vietnam itself too poor to contribute much to Cambodia's development, the
Soviet Union and some of its Eastern European allies have become the biggest aid
donors. In several cases, these nations have revived facilities they had built,
like the Czech tire factory or the Friendship Hospital.

Western relief workers say there are perhaps 2,000 Soviet advisers in the
country. They live in separate compounds and do not share work on projects with
private or church organizations from the West.

Cambodian officials say Soviet aid has been important in education and in the
construction of large development projects, the port of Kompong Som, for
example, and road resurfacing in Phnom Penh.

Empty New Hospital

The Friendship hospital has been a mysterious Soviet project, however, in that
it appears full of clinical machinery but almost empty of Cambodian patients, in
contrast to the overcrowded squalor of the city's under-equipped general medical
centers.

Dr. So Saren, the former deputy director of the hospital, who fled to Thailand
with his family a few months ago, said the hospital was reserved for
high-ranking officials. The hospital's administration denies this. Doctors at
other hospitals were evasive, or said the location of the Soviet facility in a
suburb probably made it hard to get to.

Inside the hospital's sparkling treatment rooms, French-speaking Soviet doctors
and technicians showed reporters equipment that seemed irrelevant to Cambodia's
needs: a water-therapy shower for migraine headaches, and a prenatal clinic
stocked with sunlamps to ''vitamize'' pregnant women.

''Isn't that just what you would expect,'' a Western medical worker said sadly.
''Who else but the Soviets, with nine months of winter, would think of sending
such a thing to Cambodia, where the sun shines every day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Cambodia (page A14); photo of chicken and produce arriving in
Cambodia (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 28, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 868 words


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 28, 1985

International

Pretoria halted trading in its stock and currency markets as the South African
currency plunged to its lowest level ever. Officials said the suspension was in
effect until Monday. The trading suspension - rare in a country with an advanced
economy -followed months of increasing capital flight because of rising violence
and mounting doubts among foreign investors about the wisdom of maintaining
South African investments. [Page A1, Column 6.]

South African authorities seized a leading anti-apartheid activist, the Rev.
Allan Boesak, a day before he was to lead thousands of protesters in a march to
demand the release of a jailed black nationalist, Nelson Mandela. Nonetheless,
political activists said the march would proceed today as planned. [A4:1-2.]

Nigerian officers announced a coup in Lagos. The army officers said they had
overthrown the 20-month-old Government, accusing it of abusing power and failing
to revive the country's economy. All communications with Nigeria were cut, and
no information was available on the fate of the Government chief, Maj. Gen.
Mohammed Buhari. [A1:4-5.]

Three suspects in a cafe massacre in San Salvador in which four United States
marines were killed have been arrested, President Jose Napoleon Duarte
announced. He said a fourth leftist guerrilla suspected in the June 19 killing
of 13 people in the Salvadoran capital is dead. [A1:6.]

Cambodia is exhausted, isolated and struggling to develop nearly seven years
after Vietnamese troops replaced the savage Pol Pot regime with a Government
allied with Hanoi. Phnom Penh residents say the Pol Pot troops, known as the
Khmer Rouge, are still able to strike within 10 miles of the capital although
the attacks seem to be infrequent. [A1:3-5.]

France urged New Zealand to give it ''all the facts'' Wellington has on the
destruction of a ship belonging to Greenpeace, the antinuclear and
environmentalist group. [A3:4-6.]

An air link to Moscow may resume. Reagan Administration officials said the
United States has offered to open negotiations with the Soviet Union next month
on resuming air service between the two countries. Direct flights ended in 1981
after martial law was imposed in Poland. [A3:1-3.]

The U.N. rebuked nuclear powers. Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar
warned that if the nuclear arms race was not halted ''the fear of a final
catastrophe will shadow our daily existence.'' [A12:3-4.]

National

The Pentagon halted a key arms plan after spending $1.8 billion on the program.
This was the first time a major new weapons program has been suspended in the
production stage since the 1960's. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
announced an end of purchases of the Army's Sergeant York antiaircraft gun,
saying the performance of the weapon was ''not worth the cost.'' [A1:1.]

The nation's poverty rate declined last year by nine-tenths of a percentage
point, to 14.4 percent, the largest one-year decrease in more than a decade, the
Census Bureau reported. It said the total number of poor Americans declined by
1.8 million, from 35.5 million in 1983 to 33.7 million in 1984. [A1:3.]

The U.S., battling money laundering, has imposed civil penalties of $2.25
million on the Crocker National Bank of San Francisco for failing to report cash
transactions totaling $3.9 billion over four years. Crocker is the sixth bank to
be penalized by the Treasury Department for violations under the Bank Secrecy
Act of 1980. [A1:2.]

The Discovery rocketed into orbit in the eye of a rainstorm to begin a mission
to be highlighted by a daring attempt to repair a stranded satellite. A
malfunction two hours into the shuttle's journey forced the astronauts to deploy
one of three satellites in the cargo bay a day early. [D18:1-3.]

The undamaged reactor at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant may be restarted,
under a 68-page ruling by a three judge Federal appeals court panel that also
refused to order more Government hearings on whether the Pennsylvania unit could
be operated safely. Opponents said they would appeal the decision. [A16:1.]

Metropolitan

A judge, upholding the homeless, barred New York City from sheltering homeless
families in welfare offices, even for one night, and ordered that all homeless
families were entitled to immediate beds in hotels or shelters. Lawyers for the
city said they would appeal, contending that officials were now doing all they
could for the homeless and criticizing the far-reaching ruling by a state judge
as inflexible. [A1:1-2.]

A 31-year-old woman found dead in her suburban mansion in Hewlett Neck, L.I.,
Monday was murdered, according to the police. A preliminary autopsy indicated
that Mindy Sperber Schwartz, the estranged wife of an heir to an oil fortune,
was shot with a handgun ''several times in the upper body.'' [B1:1-3.]

Full rail service was restored to Amtrak and commuter lines while railroad
officials sought to determine what caused a 12,000-volt power line to snap
between Manhattan and Newark just before Monday evening's rush, stranding tens
of thousands of people up to four hours. [B2:1.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WALLACE RALLY RAISES HOPE FOR ONE LAST HURRAH

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala. Aug. 28


For the 3,000 people who paid $5 apiece to crowd into the state's sweltering
agricultural coliseum last weekend, it was the first public glimpse of Gov.
George C. Wallace since he returned home from surgery last month in Colorado.

''Thank you, all of you, I love you,'' the Governor said in a brief appearance
in his wheelchair. ''I'll see you in the future.'' Then, with a grin, he added,
''Maybe right here in this coliseum.''

For Mr. Wallace's legions of supporters, who have cheered him on in countless
campaign appearances in the old arena, it was a small but hopeful signal: George
Corley Wallace, a giant figure in Alabama politics over three decades, might
just be feeling well enough to run again next fall for a fifth term as Governor.

Mr. Wallace, who was 66 years old last Sunday, has not yet said what he plans to
do. But among his supporters, who are loath to see the Wallace era come to an
end, there is a growing hope that the surgery he had in Colorado will restore
not only his physical health but also his political vitality.

A Growing Dependence on Drugs

Through the spring and early summer, the betting in Alabama political circles
was that the ailing Mr. Wallace was unlikely to seek a fifth term.

The pain in his upper legs, hips and lower back that has dogged him ever since
May 15, 1972, when Arthur H. Bremer shot him down in a Maryland shopping mall,
has taken an increasing toll. It has also led to what aides to Mr. Wallace have
described as a growing dependence on various drugs, including methadone, to help
control the pain.

Since his current term began in 1982, Mr. Wallace has spent more than two months
in hospitals. In his most recent surgery July 27, doctors made a 10-inch
incision in his lower back to apply electrodes to his spinal cord and deaden the
nerves believed to be the cause of his chronic pain.

Earlier this summer a series of polls found that more than half of those
surveyed believed that the Governor's failing health clouded his ability to do
his job. One poll, conducted by the Market Research Institute of Mississippi for
several Alabama business and industry groups, asserted that Mr. Wallace ''holds
little if any chance for re-election success as Governor in 1986.''

Another poll in June by The Birmingham Post-Herald said 68 percent of the voters
surveyed indicated that they did not want to see Mr. Wallace seek another term.
Only 28 percent favored his running again.

'Surgery Has Apparently Worked'

But the Governor's aides said those polls were taken before Mr. Wallace came
home from Colorado. The word now from the Alabama Statehouse is that much of Mr.
Wallace's worst pain is gone, and that so far he has been able to reduce by 50
percent his daily consumption of drugs.

''The message going out across the state is that the surgery has apparently
worked,'' said Hezekiah Wagstaff, a press aide to Mr. Wallace. Indeed, Wallace
aides who organized last Saturday's rally billed it, in part, as a fund-raising
event for the Governor in case he does decide to run again.

Although his doctors have issued no final verdict on the success of the surgery,
Mr. Wallace has said on two occasions that he feels better. Even his political
opponents concede that he looks better, that his face seems fuller and less
drawn than it has in earlier appearances.

By any measure, Governor Wallace, whose battle cry in his first inaugural
address in 1963 was ''Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation
forever,'' remains one of the enduring figures in Southern politics, the only
one of the region's Governors whose career transcends the entire sweep of the
civil rights era.

Over the years, he has proved deft in his ability to change with the times; the
critical margin in his 1982 victory came from black voters, who gave him most of
their votes.

Primary Likely to Be Crowded

But his age, longevity and failing health - he is also partly deaf - have made
him the target of critics who say that Alabama must, like other states in the
region, move toward a more progressive, younger governor with a New South,
rather than Old South, image.

If Mr. Wallace does decide to run, he will face opposition in what could become
a crowded Democratic primary. Two people frequently mentioned as likely
opponents are Bill Baxley, the Lieutenant Governor, and Charles Graddick, the
State Attorney General.

George McMillan, a former Lieutant Governor whom Mr. Wallace narrowly defeated
in the 1982 Democratic primary, and former Gov. Fob James are also possible
contenders.

Whoever wins the Democratic primary is likely to have little trouble winning the
general election against the Republicans, who are devoting most of their
resources toward the re-election of Senator Jeremiah Denton. In 1980 Mr. Denton,
a retired Navy admiral and prisoner of war in Vietnam for seven years, became
the first Republican Senator from Alabama since Reconstruction.

Trip to China Planned

If Mr. Wallace does agreed to run, his aides say their biggest task is to
convince the voters that his health has truly improved. As a step in that
direction, the Governor is planning to make a two-week foreign trade trip to
China next month.

For now, Mr. Wallace is convalescing from his recent surgery. He is staying at
the Governor's mansion, a few blocks from the State Capitol, where even on his
best days he has seldom been able to spend more than four hours a day.

Indeed, through much of his current term Mr. Wallace has made relatively few
public appearances. When he did, politicians and political aides here said his
voice sometimes seemed slurred and his eyes appeared glassy.

Last spring there were published reports that the Governor's ill health was
going to force him to resign before the end of June.

Now his supporters are hoping that the public opinion polls are wrong, that
there will be a last hurrah next fall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gov. George C. Wallace cuuting cake (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Offers Proposal On Missing U.S. Soldiers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 28


Vietnam offered a two-year plan today to resolve the issue of nearly 1,400
Americans missing in action in the Vietnam War.

Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son told reporters Vietnam would welcome
United States aid in financing the search for remains, but had not requested it.
He said the American side brought up the possibility of financing searches for
missing soldiers.

He did not give details of the Vietnam plan and said the American delegation had
submitted its own proposals.

Mr. Son and five other Vietnamese officials met in Hanoi with a four-member
United States delegation headed by Richard Childress, a member of the National
Security Council. Also in the team is Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of
the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast
Asia.

Of the 2,464 American servicemen and civilians still listed as missing in
Indochina, 1,375 disappeared in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LAOTIAN NEEDLEWORK COMES TO AMERICA

BYLINE: By ANN BARRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


WHEN Chang Xiong fled Communist forces in her native land of Laos in 1975, along
with other Hmong, the mountain people who provided help to American forces in
the Vietnam War, she discovered that the needlework skill she had acquired as a
young girl was not just a handy craft but a means of survival. Interned for more
than a year in a refugee camp in Thailand, she and other Hmong women began
making needlework for sale. Eventually, sponsored by the International Institute
of Rhode Island, a refugee settlement agency, Mrs. Xiong, along with her husband
and six children, settled in Providence, R.I., where hundreds of other Hmong
have since immigrated.

In 1979 Mrs. Xiong walked into Providence's Southeast Asian Cooperative, where
Hmong women were being initiated into various aspects of American business,
participating in saleswork, marketing and pricing.

''Chang proved to be the most incredibly resourceful person,'' said Joan
Ritchie, an early member of the cooperative who is the owner of the Peaceable
Kingdom shop (436 Wickenden Street), which has been carrying Mrs. Xiong's work
since the cooperative closed in February. ''She was able to teach the public
about this textile art and its symbolism, as well as work within the community
to promote other women's needlework and to stress the importance of its not
dying as an art form.'' Mrs. Xiong's work at the shop ranges in price from $4.50
for small items such as a bookmark to $1,000 for a quilt-size wall hanging.

Today, she does her own road shows, so to speak. She started her own business
when the cooperative closed and, traveling with a suitcase of samples, she has
displayed her works, as well as pieces by some 20 other Hmong women, in craft
shows from New York to Georgia to Texas.

At these outposts, she garners orders that she and her fellow craftswomen fill
in Providence. Everything is done by hand. Mrs. Xiong's specialties are pillows
($20 to $35) and clothing based on her own designs ($50 to $150), while others
concentrate on wall hangings ($6.75 to $800), sashes and belts ($12 to $15), and
the like. A fast worker, she finishes between 10 to 20 pillows or hangings a
month, plus an article of clothing.

Pa ndau, as the needlework is called, shows a cultural link to China and can be
divided into several distinct categories: applique (the most frequent form),
cross-stitch, reverse applique, counted satin stitch and other surface stitches.
Thread can be either cotton, silk or synthetics, with the background fabric
preferably 100 percent cotton. By tradition, the brightly colored designs are
rich in symbolism, part of the animist Hmong religion. While these symbols -
elephant feet, peacock eyes, plants and animals, and other imagery drawn from
everyday life - are pleasing to the Western eye in themselves, their spiritual
meaning is often difficult to translate.

The outward-pointing spikes in commonplace geometric sawtooth patterns at the
borders, for example, are meant to keep the evil out; the inward-pointing, to
protect the ''good'' at the center of the design. Children's hats are
embellished with colorful decorations to fool the spirits into thinking the
children are just bright flowers when the tops of their heads are seen from the
heavens. A piece with a mazelike design would be sewn specifically for someone
plagued with nightmares, so that their wandering spirit causing the nightmares
will be trapped in the maze.

A recent phenomenon that originated in the Thai refugee camps is pictorial
pieces developed, perhaps, to tell the Hmong story to Westerners. In effect,
they are pictorial diaries of the Hmong culture: the New Year's celebration, the
planting of corn and slaughter of animals, ritual ceremonies and the like. More
dramatic and poignant examples -rarities on the marketplace, but costing in the
neighborhood of $70 to $150 if they appear - depict such scenes as villagers
crossing the Mekong River to escape.

Position and status within a tribal group - there are some 20 clans -were also
identified by costumes made of hand-stitched textiles. However, today pieces
that once served these functions are done simply through custom. Also, as Hmong
women fashion their work to appeal to the Western market, the focus has shifted
from traditional clothing to decorative and utilitarian items - a soft eyeglass
case made of folded pa ndau or an apron, for example - that would hardly have
been found in a Hmong household.

Information on mail orders may be obtained from Chang Xiong at 55 Daboll Street,
Providence, R.I. 02907 (telephone her at 401-831-6177 or the Peaceable Kingdom
at 401-351-3472).

Another major outlet for Hmong needlework is the Hmong Folk Art Shop, 3037
Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis, Minn. 55408 (telephone 612-825-9506). Over 600
women bring in works on consignment, ranging from a place mat with napkin for
$10.50 to $3,000 for a large wall hanging. A catalogue is available.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chang Xiong; photo of Hmong women at work

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARSH CLARK, AT 56, REPORTER WAS CHIEF OF BUREAUS FOR TIME

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


Marsh Clark, a senior correspondent for Time magazine and former chief of its
bureau in Johannesburg, died of cancer at his home there on Tuesday. He was 56
years old. Mr. Clark spent 22 years as one of Time's most widely traveled
foreign correspondents, according to a magazine spokesman.

Before moving to Johannesburg in 1980 to head Time's bureau there, he served as
bureau chief in Ottawa, Saigon, Jerusalem, New York, Hong Kong and Moscow.

From 1968 to 1970, in heading the magazine's coverage of the Vietnam War, he
went into many combat areas in Vietnam and Cambodia. In 1970, during a period of
uneasy truce between Israel and the Arab countries, he opened Time's bureau in
Jerusalem.

Bennett Marsh Clark was born in St. Louis and was reared in Washington, D.C.,
where his father, Bennett Champ Clark, served as a Democratic Senator from
Missouri for two terms and on the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia.

Grandson of House Speaker

His grandfather was Champ Clark, a Democratic Congressman who served as Speaker
of the House from 1911 to 1918.

After graduation from Washington and Lee University in 1950, he went to work for
The News-Press in St. Joseph, Mo. After a two-year Army stint at Fort Smith,
Ark., he worked for The St. Louis Globe-Democrat. He joined Time as a
correspondent in 1963.

His first marriage was to Catherine Gill Clark, the mother of his four children.

He is survived by his wife, Pippac Caldow Clark of Johannesburg; a son, James
Bennett of St. Louis; three daughters, Maree Marsh and Marsha Ann, both of
McLean, Va., and Mrs. Elizabeth Mills of Miami, Fla.; and two brothers, Champ
Clark of Ruckersville, Va. and a twin, Kimball Clark of Arlington, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Hanoi Plan To Recover War Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 29


The head of an American delegation said today that the United States and Vietnam
were working on a unified plan to account for nearly 1,400 Americans still
missing in the Vietnam War.

Vietnamese officials have pledged to resolve the issue of the missing soldiers
in ''a very short time,'' said Richard Childress, a member of the National
Security Council.

Mr. Childress would not give details of the plans under discussion, but he said
there were common features in the proposals submitted at the talks. He described
the negotiations as ''very substantive.'' The talks ended today.

Col. Vo Dong Giang, a Deputy Foreign Minister, said that Vietnam had offered a
three-step plan and would welcome more meetings this year with American
officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 31, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIOLENT INCIDENTS AGAINST ASIAN-AMERICANS SEEN AS PART OF RACIST PATTERN

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2387 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 30


Two Cambodian refugees were followed by a car one night as they drove home from
a party in a working-class suburb of Boston. They stopped and got out, only to
be severely beaten by a gang of white men. One of the Cambodians suffered a
skull fracture and died 10 days later.

The assault, on Aug. 4, is the latest in a series of recent violent incidents
against Asian-Americans in the Boston area. Others have included a fracas
between a middle-age Chinese immigrant and a Boston policeman, a midnight attack
on three young Vietnamese by a gang of drunken white teen-agers and the burning
of a house where 37 Cambodians lived.

''The U.S. has been perceived by Cambodians as a country of freedom and
security,'' said Daniel Lam, a Cambodian who is executive director of the
Massachusetts Office of Refugee Resettlement. ''But now we must face the reality
of racism in America.''

Sign of Growing Animosity

Asian-American leaders and Government officials say the incidents in Boston are
perhaps the most dramatic evidence of what appears to be a growing pattern of
bigotry and animosity toward Asians in many parts of the country. ''No one has
any reliable statistical information,'' said Dr. H. John Bunzel, a member of the
United States Commission on Civil Rights. ''Is the problem serious nationally?
We just don't know.''

The commission began a study in August 1984 in an effort to fill that
information void. Dr. Bunzel, a senior research fellow at the Hoover
Institution, at Stanford University, who has been studying minority communities
in California for 30 years, said he asked for the study after receiving ''an
increasing number of reports citing discrimination against Asian-Americans.''

New immigrants have particularly faced ''a variety of difficulties when they
come here,'' he said. ''In New York, Seattle, Boston, Houston and Philly, there
have been different kinds of incidents.''

Report Due in the Spring

''What one doesn't know is whether or not these incidents are racially motivated
exclusively,'' he added, or whether other factors play a role. The study is to
be completed next spring.

Wallace Warfield, associate director of the Community Relations Service of the
Department of Justice, said discrimination against Asians ''is definitely a
growing problem in all parts of the country.'' He said every part of the country
had ''some incident that it could point to as a sign of this kind of problem.''
Some conflicts are with blacks, he said; others are with the Hispanic or other
whites.

He said some of the worst troubles occurred where Indochinese refugees had
settled in poor urban areas or where Korean merchants had moved into black or
Hispanic communities.

'Racially Negative' Graffiti

Dr. Alan Seid, a fourth-generation Chinese who heads the Asian-Pacific American
Advocates of California, an umbrella organization of several hundred
Asian-American community groups, noted the recent appearance of anti-Asian
graffiti in high schools in San Jose, where he lives. ''There are words like
Japs, gooks, Nips, slanteyes and slopeheads - racially negative words we haven't
seen since World War II,'' he said.

These signs of animosity are appearing at a time when many Asian-Americans are
winning academic and professional success and have finally begun to be
assimilated into American society after a century of legal discrimination,
including laws barring Chinese from immigrating and laws barring Asians from
owning land in California. In World War II, 110,000 Japanese-Americans were
imprisoned simply because of their ancestry.

Prosperous and Educated

Today, as a group, Asian-Americans are among the best educated and most
prosperous Americans. They account for only 2 percent of the population, yet
will make up 11 percent of the incoming freshman class at Harvard University
this fall, 21 percent at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and 25
percent at the University of California at Berkeley.

Economically, the median family income of Asian-Americans is $22,713, according
to the 1980 census, as against $19,917 for all Americans and $20,800 for whites.

When community leaders discuss what they see as new animosity toward
Asian-Americans, they speak of new elements such as the recent explosion of
Asian-American immigration, economic rivalry with poor residents of inner-city
neighborhoods where the immigrants settled, and such diverse factors as the 10th
anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War and the trade deficit with Japan.

''There's a certain amount of hostility because the Japanese are thrashing us in
trade,'' said Representative Don Edwards, a California Democrat. He said one
executive in a high-technology concern suggested that his employees ''Zap the
Japs.'' #4.8 Million Asian-Americans Asian-Americans are the fastest-growing
racial group in the country, according to Leon F. Bouvier, vice president of the
Population Reference Bureau in Washington, a private demographic research group.
The extraordinary growth of the Asian-American population started with the
dropping of quota-based immigration restrictions in 1965. From 1970 to 1980 the
number of Asian-Americans jumped from 1.4 million to 3.47 million, and it
climbed again to 4.8 million this year, according to the Census Bureau.

In New York City, Asian-Americans numbered 230,000 in the 1980 census.

Mr. Bouvier projects there will be 6.5 million Asian-Americans by 1990 and
almost 10 million by the turn of the century. By the middle of the 21st century,
he estimates they will be as big a proportion of the United States population as
the Hispanic are now, 6.4 percent.

Equally important, he said, are dramatic changes in where the immigrants come
from and where they go after they arrive in the United States.

In 1970 two-thirds of all Asian-Americans were Japanese or Chinese, but by 2000
these groups will only be a third of the total, Mr. Bouvier predicts. In recent
years 728,000 Indochinese have joined their ranks, along with an even larger
number of Koreans and Filipinos. By 1990, Filipinos will become the largest
Asian group.

Spreading Out to New Areas

These new Asian immigrants, whose predecessors largely settled in together in a
few cities, have spread to many parts of the country where they have had more
contact with white and black communities. The result has been outbursts of
violence in cities including Los Angeles, Houston, New York, Philadelphia,
Boston and Providence, R.I.

One area of conflict was the Gulf Coast, where many Laotians settled in the
1970's, working as fishermen. ''The Southeast Asian fisherman worked a lot
longer hours than the traditional American fisherman,'' said Mr. Warfield of the
Justice Department. ''They maximized their profits quicker. Many now have as
many boats on the Gulf Coast as the white fishermen.''

Glenda Joe, coordinator of the Council of Asian-American Organizations, an
umbrella group in the Houston area, said ''it's a competition thing'' for jobs,
housing and Federal aid. ''Nobody likes an overachiever,'' said Miss Joe, who is
half Chinese and half Irish, ''and that's how Asians are viewed - as
overachievers. They are accomplishing in a short time what blacks and browns
have been trying to do for years.''

In Philadelphia a group of 5,000 Hmong hill people from Laos and about 40,000
Koreans have moved into predominantly black areas in the past few years. Violent
attacks last September on a number of Hmong prompted some to leave the city.
Their assailants often believed the Hmong were getting extra welfare benefits,
later testimony before the city's Commission on Human Relations showed.

Koreans who opened small businesses like dry-cleaning and grocery stores in
Philadelphia have often been raided by blacks who resent their commercial
success, said James A. Lineberger, deputy for community relations in the
District Attorney's office. ''Hoodlums will take cases of stuff and dare the
owner to call the police,'' he said. ''Many of the owners are afraid and
acquiesce and then they are identified as an easy mark.''

Conflict in Harlem Eases

In New York a similar conflict between blacks and Korean store owners led to a
boycott last winter against a number of Korean shops on 125th Street in Harlem,
with several heated and violent confrontations. Black residents charged that the
Koreans were rude, overcharged their customers and were giving nothing back to
the community.

A number of projects have eased the tension, including a program this summer in
which black merchants hired Korean youths and Korean merchants hired black
youths, said Lloyd A. Williams, president of the Uptown Chamber of Commerce.
''The situation has improved considerably,'' he said. ''Blacks and Koreans still
have a long way to go to establish a long-lasting relationship, but we're on the
road.''

In Washington, a Cambodian who owns a gas station in a black section of the
capital says he has been robbed several times by black youths who worked for him
and has been shot at twice. One time, said the Cambodian, who asked that his
name not be used, a black woman drove up in a new Mercedes and said to the
station owner's brother-in-law, a new arrival from Cambodia: ''Hey, Chinese, how
long have you been here? Only two weeks? Only two weeks here and already you're
taking jobs away from young blacks.''

Such misidentification, confusing the Cambodian for a Chinese, is a constant
source of complaint by Asian-Americans. Many contend it is a sign that they are
being lumped together as a stereotyped group.

'They See Us as One Race'

Paul M. Igasaki, who handles Asian-American liaison for the Chicago Commission
on Human Rights, recalled a 1982 incident in Detroit in which a
Chinese-American, Vincent Chin, was beaten to death with a baseball bat by two
unemployed automobile workers angry about Japanese imports. ''They see us
basically as one race, and that's what racism is all about,'' Mr. Igasaki said.

In Providence two Cambodian widows were recently burned out of their house in a
black section of the city, said the Rev. Daniel M. Trainer of the city's
Indochinese Advocacy Project. It was the sixth in a series of arson attacks
against Indochinese there in the past year.

Arson has also occurred in Boston, where most of the trouble has come in white
working-class neighborhoods. In Revere, just north of Boston, several
Asian-Americans' homes have been burned, including an old three-floor tenement
house where lived five Cambodian families, numbering 37 people. Catherine Penn,
a City Councilor, said such crowding was contributing to racial tension because
of a belief that it led to neighborhood deterioration. The Cambodians say they
must live together in large numbers to afford housing and save money.

The two Cambodians who were beaten Aug. 4 were living in Revere. Two white men
have been charged with murder in the case.

In East Boston, a predominantly Italian-American section where church groups
have begun finding Cambodians places to live, four Cambodians were beaten by
eight whites last month after the Cambodians asked the whites to stop touching a
new red automobile that belonged to one of the refugees.

Economic Factor Seen

''I have a feeling a lot of this trouble is economic, not racial,'' said Mayor
Raymond L. Flynn. ''You have poor white kids out of work, and then they see
these refugees buying shiny new cars.''

But Mayor Flynn said he gained an added perspective after one of the victims
urged him to see the movie ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' with Sylvester
Stallone as a former Green Beret back in Vietnam to rescue Americans missing in
action. Mr. Flynn said he was ''outraged'' by the way the film encouraged
violence against Vietnamese as a form of retribution for America's defeat in
Vietnam.

''Media stereotypes have a lot to do with how Asians are treated in their
communities,'' said Stewart Kwoh, director of the Southern California
Asian-Pacific Legal Center. He said he had noticed more and more Asian roles on
television, but all were gangsters.

Since its opening Aug. 16, the film ''Year of the Dragon,'' about a white
policeman fighting drugs and youth gangs in New York City's Chinatown, has drawn
criticism and demonstrations at the Loew's Astor Plaza at Times Square as well
as in such cities as Chicago, Detroit, Boston, San Francisco and Los Angeles. As
a result, MGM/UA has put in the film a disclaimer of intent to demean
Asian-Americans.

Film Is Termed Racist

Opponents of the film, who include Robert Daley, author of the book from which
the film was adapted, say the film is racist in its portrayal of
Chinese-Americans. It ''portrays Asian-Americans as gangsters and mobsters,''
said Virginia Kee, a City Council candidate who has taught school in Chinatown
for 20 years.

A more subtle discrimination charge has arisen in colleges and universities,
where Asian-Americans would appear to have made the most progress. Asian student
activists at a number of schools contend they must have better records than
other applicants to gain admission. At Harvard, for example, 12.5 percent of
Asian-American applicants were accepted this year, as against 15.9 percent of
all applicants.

Henry Rosovsky, former dean of the faculty at Harvard who is now a professor of
Japanese economic history, said some admission standards, such as athletic
ability, extracurricular activities and family ties to the institution could
work against Asian-Americans.

'Very Valuable Addition'

''But if you start playing the numbers game, they are the most overrepresented
group in the universities,'' Mr. Rosovsky said, adding, ''I think that's fine -
they are a very valuable addition to American society.''

Some Asian-Americans say they have never encountered ethnic animosity.

''I've never been aware of any social or professional discrimination,'' said Dr.
Mariano Ezpeleta, a Filipino physician who lives in Andover, Mass. In part, he
conceded, that may be because he is a Harvard-educated physician who speaks
English virtually without an accent.

Lisa Sun, 30, a computer programmer from Taiwan who lives in Prospect Heights,
Ill., agreed that her middle-class life may have helped her avoid
discrimination. ''I'm a yuppie,'' she said with a laugh. ''People don't mistreat
yuppies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of members of a Cambodian family visiting their burned-out home
in Revere, Mass. (NYT/Rick Friedman)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
CAMBODIAN REBEL SAYS TIME IS GROWING SHORT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 31


The leader of the larger of two non-Communist factions fighting to dislodge the
Vietnamese from Cambodia said today that he had given his guerrilla army a
two-year deadline to provoke and support a popular uprising in the country.

The rebel leader, Son Sann, said he feared that after that point, the Vietnamese
would have succeeded in changing the ethnic composition of Cambodia enough to
block a nationalist political movement.

Mr. Son Sann, a former Cambodian Prime Minister who now leads the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, also said in an interview today that his group and
the smaller army of the other non-Communist leader, Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
urgently needed to expand their political and military activities to limit the
influence of the Khmer Rouge inside Cambodia.

The Sihanouk forces and Mr. Son Sann's group are allied in an unsteady coalition
with the Khmer Rouge, a Communist force led by Pol Pot, the former ruler of
Cambodia. The two non-Communist groups recently merged their military command,
but efforts to join them politically have failed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
SONGS AND MEMORIES OF LABOR WARS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


Obviously, it is time to consider the union movement. Labor Day is at hand. As a
rule, television does not pay much attention to unions, other than when they go
on strike or when political candidates look for their endorsements. Meanwhile,
the popular culture gives the labor movement mixed reviews, with the reviews
from the past more positive than the ones from the present. Artists and writers
were sympathetic to the labor movement during the Great Depression; unions were
the hope of the common man. In the 60's, however, the counterculture saw unions
differently. George Meany, the president of the merged labor federation,
supported the Vietnam War, while individual unions, particularly those in the
building trades, were accused of excluding minorities. The romance with labor
fled.

Ignored then, and even now, was where the labor movement had been and the real
role it still was playing. Beginning today, a three-week series of documentaries
on Channel 13 sketches some of this in. The series, loosely gathered under the
umbrella title ''Made in the U.S.A.,'' begins with ''Singing for the Union'' at
6:30 tonight. Tomorrow at 10 P.M. there is ''Even the Heavens Weep: The West
Virginia Mine Wars.'' The two documentaries are wildly different, although they
are temperamentally related. Each in its way addresses itself to the heroics of
the labor movement.

''Even the Heavens Weep'' is by far the more substantial of the two, but
consider ''Singing for the Union'' first. It visits a workshop for people who
write and perform labor songs. What will strike you first about the songs is
that almost all of them sound country, even though union members are, and have
been, predominately urban. The second thing that will strike you is that the
subjects of the new union songs are not so glorious as those of the old songs.
''VDT Blues'' - a VDT is a video display terminal - is not likely to stir
listeners the way ''Joe Hill'' once did, although clearly it is more applicable
to today's workers.

At the same time, some of the new stuff is catchy, even to the imaginative
rhyming. It's hard to dislike a song that uses the words ''justice'' and ''bust
us,'' as in ''We're gonna fight for jobs and justice/Ain't gonna let the right
wing bust us.'' Some of the songs we hear are better than others, but all of
them, one way or another, insist that labor has had a long and honorable past.
''Even the Heavens Weep: The West Virginia Mine Wars'' confirms the contours of
this past. Indeed, it is shown as encompassing an epic, almost mythic, struggle.

The documentary, produced by WPBY in Huntington, W. Va., centers on a march by
10,000 armed miners in 1921. This seems to have been the largest gathering of
armed workers in American history, but the documentary treats it as more than
just that. At the start, the narrator, the actor Mike Connors, says that ''this
is the story of coal, the making of a union, and the collision of competing
interests and dreams.'' Then the documentary, using old photographs, archival
film and interviews with historians and West Virginians who recall those ancient
days, tells the story. It is an intelligent piece of work.

Coal became a serious business in West Virginia around 1880, when technology
found ways to dig it out of the ground and then transport it out of the state.
One of the documentary's small triumphs here is to give us a sense of West
Virginia's old isolation. Communities were divided one from another, nestled in
mountainous pockets. When coal became a major industry, miners were recruited
from outside West Virginia. The population soared, and coal companies built
towns for the miners. The towns included churches, schools, stores and jails
-all of them supervised by the coal companies.

''Even the Heavens Weep'' isn't particularly moralistic about any of this, and
it's a better documentary because of it. Nonetheless, the old photographs,
rather like the ones Walker Evans took for ''Let Us Now Praise Famous Men,'' are
striking: miners gaunt and grim, mines dark and foreboding, company towns
cheerless. Mr. Connors reminds us that black-lung disease took its toll among
the miners, and that mine tunnels collapsed, killing hundreds. Methane gas
killed, too. There were no safety rules. Miners, meanwhile, were paid according
to the amount of coal they dug. Mine operators cheated when they weighed the
coal.

How long did these conditions last? ''When I was 14 years old, I worked like a
man and got a quarter for it,'' an elderly West Virginian recalls. Other West
Virginians also seem clear in their memories. ''Even the Heavens Weep'' suggests
that the distant past is not that distant.

The specific interest of the documentary, however, is the march by the 10,000
miners. The United Mine Workers was born at a national convention in 1890. By
1898, the union had won major concessions in some states, but none in West
Virginia. By 1912, the union had 250,000 members, but few were from West
Virginia. Miners struck then at Paint Creek and Cabin Creek in West Virginia,
beginning a 20-year struggle for union recognition. Mine owners retaliated by
evicting miners and their families from the company towns. Both sides armed.
World War I brought a temporary peace to the coal fields, but in 1919, John L.
Lewis, the president of the U.M.W., called a national strike.

Again there were evictions in the company towns; again there were gunfights.
Seven guards from the Baldwin-Felts Detective Agency, which had been hired by
the coal operators to protect their interests, died in an ambush in the town of
Matewan. Martial law was declared; the state militia moved in. Conditions
deteriorated further. In August 1921, miners mobilized for a march on Logan
County, the home of the strongest union opposition.

Within days, 10,000 miners had come together, marching 70 miles. Blair Mountain,
with 3,000 sheriff's deputies and private guards on its crest, stood in their
way. The deputies and guards were dug in behind machine guns. Fighting lasted a
week. ''Even the Heavens Weep'' is a little short on details; we get no estimate
of casualties, although presumably this was America's largest insurrection since
the Civil War, and it ended only when Federal troops were called in. Meanwhile,
the documentary notes that the march virtually destroyed the union; 500 of its
leaders were indicted, and the U.M.W. did not recover until the 1930's. ''Even
the Heavens Weep'' gives us an important chapter of American history, and it
does it intelligently and well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Todd Smith in performance (Lloyd Wolf); Photo of coal miners
surrendering their weapons after the Battle of Blair Mountain

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHUCK NORRIS -- STRONG, SILENT AND POPULAR

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 14, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1555 words


Chuck Norris, the movie star, former karate champion and superpatriot on the
order of his idol, John Wayne, was sitting in a Manhattan office the other day
doing two things he doesn't do very much of in his movies: smiling and talking.

Mr. Norris has good reason to be happy. Like another strong, silent type before
him, Clint Eastwood, Mr. Norris has been belatedly ''discovered'' by audiences
and critics alike after a nine-year career in which his films were routinely
lambasted and he was written off as a wooden actor whose only talents were his
high kicks and lethal karate chops. He was, to some critics, ''the blond Bruce
Lee.''

The keys to the 45-year-old actor's newfound success are two recent movies in
which he got to do more -at least a little bit more - than just kick, chop,
knife, shoot and bomb his enemies into submission. The first was ''Missing in
Action,'' in which he played an American Army colonel, who, after years as a
prisoner of war in Vietnam, returns there to try to rescue other prisoners. The
second was ''Code of Silence,'' in which he played a taciturn-yet-tough Chicago
police inspector caught in the middle of a cocaine war between rival underworld
gangs. Both films were box-office hits, and they also prompted some of the first
kind words the critics ever uttered about Chuck Norris.

''I really appreciate the acclaim,'' Mr. Norris said in his soft, affable voice,
which still bears a slight drawl from his native Oklahoma. ''I've worked hard
these last nine years to get critics to look at me in a different light. They're
usually more concerned with things like 'Passage to India,' and they've hit me
hard all these years, especially in the beginning. I'm really excited, to say
the least.''

Mr. Norris, who now earns close to $2 million per film, was in town on behalf of
his latest shoot-'em-up, ''Invasion U.S.A,'' directed by Joseph Zito, which
opens Oct. 4 in 1,600 theaters. He said it is about a band of terrorists who
invade the United States and start blowing up shopping malls and tract homes,
''all the places where working people go.'' As a result, he said, ''the whole
economic system starts to collapse.'' That is, until Matt Hunter (played by Mr.
Norris), a former Government agent now in retirement in the Florida Everglades,
enters the picture.

Mr. Norris, who co-wrote the screenplay, said he got the idea after reading an
article in Readers Digest that said hundreds of terrorists were running loose in
the United States. ''I thought, 'Boy, that's scary,' '' he said. '' 'What if
some guy on the order of a Khomeini or a Qaddafi mobilized those guys and
started sending them out to every major city?' ''

The actor said he was especially proud of a $5 million scene (the film's total
cost to Cannon Films: $16 million) in which 2,000 National Guardsmen battle 300
terrorists in the streets of Atlanta. ''There are tanks firing, and helicopters
flying among the real buildings,'' he said. ''It's a battle like in 'Gone with
the Wind,' one of the best action battle scenes that's ever been done so far.''

Does he really think America is in danger of being attacked by terrorists? He
nodded his head gravely. ''I know it's going to happen,'' he said, ''and even in
the movie, the head terrorist says, 'It's so easy because of the freedom of
movement in this country.' So we're really accessible to this. The movie is not
meant to scare people, but to make us aware of a potential problem.''

Later this month, Mr. Norris plans to go to the Middle East to begin filming
another terrorist-oriented film, ''Delta Force,'' with Lee Marvin and George
Kennedy. ''It is very similar, due to a freakish coincidence, to the recent
airport hostage situation in Beirut,'' he said. ''But the script was written
before that occurred.'' Mr. Norris, of course, will be in charge of rescuing the
hostages.

Off scree this red-blooded American hero seems no larger than life
-5-foot-10-inches and 167 pounds. But, oh, is he in shape. He said he spends
three hours every morning working out with his stunt men in a gymnasium in his
home in Rolling Hills Estates, Calif., ''to maintain a certain youthful
appearance.'' The workouts have not been in vain, judging from the impressive
figure he cuts in tight blue jeans and a red plaid cowboy shirt. He has longish
blond hair with a fringe of bangs flopping over his forehead, a blond mustache
and a blond beard. Underneath all the hair he bears a somewhat craggy
resemblance to Robert Redford.

Why does he think he's become so popular with audiences? ''Well, my films do
deal with certain positive things,'' he said. ''The endings are always positive.
I think a lot of people are tired of depressing, boring films. I think they like
to feel good at the end of a film. One of the biggest thrills of my life came
when I went to a theater to see 'Missing in Action,' and all the people stood up
and applauded at the end. That's when my character brings some P.O.W.'s he's
just rescued to a conference in Saigon, where the politicians are saying there
aren't any more prisoners of war.''

Talk like that brings forth memories of John Wayne anbd Charles Bronson, as well
as Sylvester Stallone as Rambo. Asked if he's as patriotic as the characters he
has played, Mr. Norris crosses his left foot, shod in a gray ostrich-skin cowboy
boot, over his right knee and replies: ''I am a conservative, a real flag waver,
a big Ronald Reagan fan. I'm not so much a Republican or Democrat; I go more for
the man himself. Ronald Reagan says what he thinks, he's not afraid to speak his
mind, even if he may be unpopular. I want a strong leader and he is a strong
leader. And ever since he has been in office there has been a more positive,
patriotic feeling in this country.''

Mr. Norris said he thought there was a big difference between ''Missing in
Action'' and Mr. Stallone's recent ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' in which
Rambo also rescues some prisoners of war. ''I'm not quite as anti-Government as
Rambo is,'' he said. ''When the helicopter comes to rescue Rambo and the
American M.I.A., and then leaves them stranded, I found that unrealistic. There
is not an American pilot alive who would leave them there. They'd have to shoot
me to stop me from picking them up, because I'd be dead inside if I didn't.''

He added that he had made ''Missing in Action'' and its sequel, ''Missing in
Action 2: The Beginning,'' as a tribute to his younger brother, Wieland, who
died in Vietnam in 1970 while leading a squad of soldiers on patrol in the
jungle. ''Vietnam was a tragic mistake,'' he said. ''If you don't want to win
the battle, don't get involved.''

Mr. Norris, born Carlos Ray Norris, said he grew up under the influence of the
movies of John Wayne, whom he regarded as his ''substitute father'' after his
own Cherokee father, an alcoholic, left the family's home in Ryan, Okla., when
he was 10. His Irish-English mother later moved the family of three boys to
Torrance, Calif.

After high school, Mr. Norris did a stint with the Air Force in South Korea,
where he learned karate. ''I studied it because I wanted to be a police officer
when I got home, and I thought it would help.'' Instead, he opened a chain of
karate schools in southern California. He also became the the world middleweight
karate champion, a title he held from 1968 to 1974.

He said he was pushed into the movies reluctantly by the late Steve McQueen, who
with his son, Chad, took karate lessons from the champ. ''He told me that I
should think about projecting a presence, and never do a part that had a lot of
dialogue,'' he said. ''He told me, 'Movies are visual, and when you try to
verbalize something, you're going to lose the audience.' He said to let the
character actors lay out the plot, and that when there were important things to
say, you say it, and people will remember.''

Mr. Norris made his film debut in Bruce Lee's ''Return of the Dragon'' in 1973,
and followed it with ''Breaker! Breaker!'' ''A Force of One,'' ''Good Guys Wear
Black,'' ''The Octagon'' ''An Eye for an Eye,'' ''Forced Vengeance,'' ''Silent
Rage'' and ''Lone Wolf McQuade.'' He usually played a soft-spoken loner who let
his fists and feet do the talking.

The movies are all marked by R-rated mayhem, prompting questions about the
effects of this violence on audiences. Mr. Norris, who sounded as though he had
answered the questions many times, said he didn't think his brand of violence
was harmful or suggestive. ''I don't initiate violence, I retaliate,'' he said.
''In my films I'm forced into a situation that I must cope with. Even though I
have to do it in a violent way, I think the audience understands the motivation
behind it. That's why I don't think it promotes violence on the streets.''

Mr. Norris has been married for 26 years to his wife, Dianne, his high school
sweetheart. They have two sons, Mike, 22, an actor, and Eric, 20, an aspiring
producer.

Discussing the longevity of his marriage, he said: ''She has always been very
supportive of my goals. She never complained, even when we were scrimping and
scraping.'' So when she told him in 1983 that she wanted to go into the
restaurant business, he rewarded her with a $600,000 restaurant, called Woody's
Wharf, in Newport Beach, Calif. ''It's now the No. 1 restaurant in town,'' he
said proudly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chuck Norris in ''Missing in Action''

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BIDDING TO MAKE POISON GAS

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2410 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN the Army solicited companies to manufacture components for the first
battlefield nerve gases to be produced by the military in 16 years, the Vertac
Chemical Corporation of Memphis, a company with $60 million in sales and a small
niche in custom herbicides and fertilizers, had no qualms about bidding for the
job. ''We don't have to worry about housewives not buying our Saran Wrap because
we're involved in a weapons project,'' said David Simmons, Vertac's public
affairs counsel. ''We don't have exposure in the commercial range.''

Most of the big chemical companies, however, do. The Army expects to award $1.5
billion in contracts to the private sector for the new chemical weapons (called
binaries because they consist of two nonlethal agents placed in an artillery
shell that combine in flight to make a quick-killing poison). And, although the
Army says the contracts would likely provide ''hundreds of millions of dollars''
in revenues to participating companies, many of the industry giants shied away.

Of the Fortune 500 chemical companies, only the Olin Corporation entered the
bidding. Du Pont, which makes plutonium for nuclear weapons at its Savannah
River plant, passed on nerve gas. Dow, Union Carbide, Monsanto, none were
interested.

Olin and Vertac, working jointly with a Stamford, Conn., chemical engineering
and construction firm, Crawford & Russell, are now the finalists in a contest to
be decided in the next few months. ''We as a company have come to grips with the
ethics of that program,'' said David E. Marchand, vice president of commercial
development at Crawford & Russell.

The major chemical companies describe their lack of interest as a business
judgment. For one thing, the nerve agent business holds little promise of
long-running revenues, because after the military stockpiles have been topped
off the production plants will be geared down to a state of readiness. And,
although the nerve agent ingredients the Army is shopping for are relatively
simple compounds, generically related to insecticides and herbicides that most
of these companies have made for years, there is no larger commercial market for
the specific stuff the Army will buy.

Some companies say the program did not suit their corporate strategy. ''It's
just not our niche,'' said Monsanto Company vice president John F. Hussey.
''Generally the military contracting business is not a place that Monsanto
believes is in the best interest of its shareholders in the years ahead.'' Union
Carbide told the Pentagon that nerve gas was ''not in keeping with our overall
production and marketing strategy,'' said Ed Van Der Ameele, a spokesman.

The industry view was clearly colored by a fear of bad press and potential
liability.

Memories of consumer boycotts (including one of Saran Wrap) and expensive
litigation and settlements that the Dow Chemical Company endured in the
aftermath of its manufacture of the incendiary napalm and the defoliant Agent
Orange, both used by the military in Vietnam, have made executives leery of any
involvement with military poisons.

''There are a lot better ways of making money in the chemical industry,'' said
an executive with one major chemical company, who declined to have his name even
associated with the topic. ''I guess the attitude is, who needs it?'' said
Patrick J. McCurdy, a former Dow executive who is now editor of Chemical Week
magazine.

It is certainly the attitude at Dow. ''There is a clear consensus among top
management,'' said Robert W. Charlton, Dow's Washington public affairs manager.
''We have virtually no interest in that line of business. The experiences with
Agent Orange and napalm have been enlightening in that regard.''

Those experiences included a great deal more than adverse publicity. Last year
Dow was one of seven companies that joined in a $180 million settlement with
Vietnam veterans who said they were harmed by exposure to Agent Orange. It was
the largest award ever received by a class of litigants claiming wrongful
injury, and Dow managers still blame the Government for getting them into it.

Now Dow says that liability is a major issue keeping it away from any kind of
Government contract involving chemical weapons. ''Long term, if we would
consider seriously getting back into it, the indemnification question would be
the key issue,'' Mr. Charlton said.

Since Union Carbide's catastrophe at Bhopal, India, that concern has spread to
the manufacture of any kind of toxic chemical, whether used for military
purposes or not, says Anantha Raman, an independent chemical industry analyst.
''A lot of companies have clearly enunciated policies where they want to get
away from product lines that have any kind of liability,'' he said.

Olin, if it entertains such worries, is not letting them stop it from competing
for a share of the nerve agent business. The company already has a longstanding
relationship with the military as an ammunition maker, and its consumer line
(skis, swimming pool chemicals, flares) is narrow enough, others in the industry
said, that the company would not face a risk of backlash.

Even so, Olin responded to questions about its interest in chemical weapons with
a cautiously worded statement: ''We, like the people in the Administration, the
Congress, the Defense Department and their laboratories, genuinely hope that any
need for the binary system, or, for that matter, any weapons system, will never
arise. At the same time, we have no doubt about the need to support the United
States Government's efforts to strengthen our military program as approved by
this country's elected representatives.'' THE nerve gas program also contains a
sizable degree of uncertainty that may have put off some potential bidders. It
still awaits final Congressional approval. And its continued survival is subject
to an annual appropriation from Congress, which has long been sharply divided on
the question of nerve gas. ''Every year's production,'' said Col. Donald C.
Reinhard, who oversees the program for the Army Munitions and Chemical Command
in Rock Island, Ill., ''is at the whim of Congress.''

American production of chemical weapons has been on hold since President Richard
M. Nixon ordered a moratorium in 1969, amid the popular outcry over Napalm and
Agent Orange. (Earlier generations of nerve gas were produced primarily in
Government-owned arsenals, so the question of industry interest did not arise.)
The Reagan Administration has tried to break the moratorium, arguing that the
binary weapons are safer to store and handle than the aging stockpiles.

The House voted three years running to deny the request. But this year,
persistent lobbying and the election of several dozen new House Republicans
tipped the balance in the Army's favor. In June, the House gave its blessing to
the binary program, which is part of an overall military authorization now
awaiting final House approval.

The Army estimates that the program will cost $2.3 billion over the first five
years. Private contractors would build plants to produce the components, operate
them until military stockpiles are full, then maintain them in a state of crisis
readiness. Almost all details of the program costs are classified to avoid
disclosing intended production capacities.

Within the next month or so, the Army expects to pick a producer of a chemical
called QL - ethyl-2-diisopropylaminethylmethl - that is to be a key ingredient
in a Navy bomb called the Bigeye. As the bomb falls, the QL mixes with a sulfur
core to produce droplets of an agent called VX that kills on skin contact.

Vertac and Crawford & Russell, a division of the British company, John Brown
P.L.C., have jointly bid for the contract to manufacture QL. They propose to
build a plant in West Helena, Ark. Vertac, based in Memphis, has done limited
military work making ingredients for propellants used in the shuttle and some
missiles. Crawford & Russell, with annual sales of about $100 million, has never
had a military contract but sees the program as an entry into a possible market
for ammunition, propellants, and destruction of old chemical weapon stockpiles
(see box).

In early December, the Army plans to choose between Olin and the Vertac-Crawford
& Russell team as the supplier of DC - methylphosphonyl dichloride - a key
subcomponent in the 155-millimeter artillery shell. The DC will be shipped to
the Army's Pine Bluff Arsenal in Arkansas for manufacture into DF - methyl
phosphonic diflouride. In flight, the DF will mix with an alcoholic brew of two
off-the-shelf industrial chemicals to form a nerve agent that kills through the
lungs.

Olin and the Crawford & Russell-Vertac team are competing for this contract.
Olin has proposed to build a DC plant at Lake Charles, La.

By law, the military is required to study the feasibility of producing new
chemicals by itself. Thus, the private companies interested in QL and DC
contracts are also competing with the Army's own arsenals at Newport, Ind., and
Mussel Shoals, Ala. If the Army chose to produce the chemicals itself, it would
open a new round of bidding for a contractor to build and operate the plants.

Yet a third binary weapons program is on the horizon. Within the next two years,
the Army plans to solicit bids to produce a chemical agent for a battlefield
rocket system. ALTHOUGH the large chemical corporations turned up their noses at
the DC and QL business, several smaller companies saw the program as a potential
foot in the Pentagon's door. The unsuccessful bidders on the QL and DC contracts
included Atomergic Chemetals, a specialty chemicals company in Plainview, N.Y.;
the Great Lakes Chemical Corporation of West Lafayette, Ind., and Specialty
Organics, a tiny company in Irwindale, Calif. that makes organophosphorous
chemicals and chemicals that go into mothballs and urinal deodorant cakes.

Executives at these companies also wrestled with a basic distaste for chemical
weapons. But without the worry of consumer backlash, the misgivings were easier
to overcome.

''The thought behind it is abominable, but not really more so than nuclear
warfare or conventional warfare,'' said Mel Blum, general manager of Atomeric
Chemetals. ''So long as the other side is doing it, it's up to the politicians
to find some way of ending the madness.''

Mr. Blum contended that Atomeric Chemetals, with $10 million in annual sales and
a ''whole new methodology'' for producing the binary compounds, was given short
shrift. He attributes that to a fear on the part of the Army of awarding a
contract to a relatively unknown company. ''If there was ever a problem and you
got a Congressional committee investigating, everybody would want to know who we
were and what our track record was,'' he said. Colonel Reinhard declined to
discuss the basis for the military's decision.

Some executives still believe that the squeamishness of the industry giants is
unjustified. ''The public got over its napalm hangover, but the industry
didn't.'' said one executive who asked not to be named.

Still, there is recent evidence that the chemical warfare business carries
political, if not legal, risks. The consulting firm of Arthur D. Little
discovered that in 1983, when it built a new laboratory in Cambridge, Mass. and
accepted military contracts to develop defensive gear for soldiers in chemical
combat.

Although all of the experiments involved protective clothing, decontamination
techniques and other defensive measures, the laboratory stirred angry resistance
in Cambridge and two adjoining communities. Environmentalists worried about
leaks of the small quantities of nerve agents kept on hand for the experiments.
Peace activists challenged the morality of any work related to chemical warfare
programs.

Last year the Cambridge health commissioner ordered a halt to the laboratory's
work, and after a protracted court battle the Massachusetts Supreme Court sided
with the city this summer. Dr. William S. Augerson, an Arthur D. Little vice
president, acknowledges that campus-heavy Cambridge has a unique political
atmosphere. But he adds: ''Things that start in Cambridge and Berkeley have a
way of happening elsewhere.'' DISPOSING OFCHEMICAL ARMS The Army will soon be
shopping for contractors to take care of an especially nasty garbage disposal
job: Destroying hundreds of tons of aging chemical weapons.

The job is potentially as big as the new nerve gas program itself. The cost of
destroying the stockpile is officially estimated at $1.5 billion, and skeptics
in Congress have said the price could be as much as 10 times that high, once all
the environmental hurdles have been leaped.

Old bulk agents and chemical weapons are stored at eight locations in the United
States, plus a site on Johnston Island in the Pacific and one in West Germany.
The Army will probably build up to 10 ''demilitarization'' facilities, situated
at those sites, that one expert estimates will cost $100 million to $250 million
apiece.

The Army also is conducting an environmental study to check the feasiblity of
building a smaller number of very large ''de-mil'' facilities. But that would
involve trucking the deadly materials across the district lines of many queasy
Congressmen, and thus, that option seems less likely.

Many of the major engineering firms - Bechtel, Parsons, Stearns Catalytic, Burns
& Roe and the Lummus Crest division of Combustion Engineering among them - have
already indicated an interest, and some already have preliminary contracts for
various design studies.

The challenge is substantial. Although incinerating old nerve agents, mustard
gas and other unpleasant substances is well within the talents of the industry,
much of the poison comes packaged as artillery shells, cluster bombs and other
munitions, wrapped up with propellants and detonators that cannot be popped into
a furnace.

Thus, each disposal plant will require a facility to safely extract the toxic
agent from its hardware. One candidate is a process called cryofracture, which
involves freezing each weapon and cracking it open.

Disposal also requires extraordinary caution in handling - a few of the old
weapons have been found to be leaking. In fact, George H. Schnitzer, director of
government systems for Lummis Crest, said the automated handling and personnel
protection systems developed in the Army's programs may well become the state of
the art for future disposal of toxic industrial waste.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE EPISCOPALIANS;
A CHURCH IN SEARCH OF ITSELF

BYLINE: By Paul Wilkes: Paul Wilkes's most recent book is ''Merton: By Those Who
Knew Him Best,'' a collection of interviews from his PBS documentary on Thomas
Merton.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3926 words


IT IS INDEED A STRANGE FELLOWSHIP OF BELIEVERS THAT CAN, IF NOT BOAST OF, AT
LEAST TOLERATE:

All Saints, Brooklyn, where, seated in glistening oak pews beneath elegant
Tiffany-style windows, worshippers raise their outstretched hands in
fundamentalist fervor as they shout the words of a charismatic hymn projected on
a movie screen installed just inside the Art Nouveau communion railing.

St. Peter's, Springfield, Mass., where the ministers envelop the altar, the
choir, the worshipers and one another in cloud after cloud of incense.

St. Augustine by-the-Sea, Santa Monica, Calif., whose church bulletin proclaims
a ''Covenant of Commitment'' and invites the congregation to join in the
''commitment'' service for a homosexual couple.

House of Prayer, Newark, whose pastor, in a dingy glen plaid suit and scuffed
penny loafers, nods to the vagrant sleeping in a bed of ivy beside the rectory
and waves to the prostitutes across the street as he makes the rounds of parish
buildings in which homeless adults and abused children are sheltered.

St. John's, in rural central Massachusetts, where the new Vicar of Ashfield, a
priest in a Roman collar, sets off to make rounds of her far-flung parish.

St. John's, Brooklyn, where termites have been discovered, and the small band of
worshippers, most of them black, in the pristine old church is once again
reminded that expenses are barely being met.

All are gathered, oftentimes fractiously and more uncomfortably than discrete
people might care to acknowledge, under the ecclesiastical mantle of the
Episcopal Church of America. Few within or without the ranks of this prestigious
denomination of 2.8 million members in 7,379 congregations, once so sure of
itself and its people, would, though they may marvel at its diversity, dare to
pronounce it well and flourishing these days. All so-called ''establishment''
mainline Protestant churches have lost members in the last decade, but the
Episcopal Church's drop of almost 25 percent since 1966 has been particularly
dramatic. Its decline dramatizes the problems faced by many of America's
mainline Protestant denominations, as they lose members to more fundamentalist
faiths on the one hand, and to secularism on the other.

At one time thought of as the cutting edge of liberal Protestantism, and before
that as the embodiment of America's social elite - always as an active force in
American religious life - the Episcopal Church today is, in one grim view, ''I
must sadly say, an institution with no vision and no direction.'' The Rev. John
Hall Snow, a respected professor of pastoral theology at the Episcopal Divinity
School in Cambridge, Mass., adds to his grim assessment: ''We talk about
mission, but there is no mission. Paul Wilkes's most recent book is ''Merton: By
Those Who Knew Him Best,'' a collection of interviews from his PBS documentary
on Thomas Merton. We have nothing to make people come; we've spent all our time
keeping them from leaving.'' To the Rev. T. James Snodgrass, rector at Newark's
House of Prayer: ''It's quite simple. We lost our nerve. We're on the flip side
of the 1960's, where it's easier to look at your navel than into the eyes of the
poor and hungry.''

This had always been the church that people ''moved up to,'' whose indifference
to evangelism was entirely in order and good form. Recruitment was never
considered necessary. But the cachet of being an Episcopalian is, for all
practical purposes, a fond relic of another era. ''Yes, this used to be the
church where it helped you in business to be seen on Sunday,'' says the Rev.
Canon Richard J. Anderson, head of the Episcopal Communications office in New
York. But, he adds, ''The comfortable pew just isn't there anymore.''

On Sept. 10, at its triennial General Convention, in Anaheim, Calif., the church
will face a particularly important juncture in its history with the election of
a new Presiding Bishop, an office roughly akin to that of the mother Church of
England's Archbishop of Canterbury. The voting will take place against a
background of many voices calling for the Episcopal Church to rise and recapture
the vision it so forcefully promoted in the late 1960's and early 70's, under
the activist Presiding Bishop, John E. Hines. To awake, before it dies still
further, as the church is doing in England, where each year 25 or more Anglican
churches close down permanently. Still others are calling for a return to the
forms and elegant 16th-century language of the 1928 Book of Common Prayer and
the cancellation of women's priestly orders. And there are those who want,
somehow, for the glory that once was to miraculously be restored.

It is not lost on church wags that the convention is being held in the hometown
of Disneyland. ''We've lived in fantasy for so long, I think this is highly
appropriate,'' says the Rev. Malcolm Boyd, an Episcopal priest in Santa Monica,
Calif., and author of ''Are You Running With Me, Jesus?'' and many other books.
Nor is it unnoted that two of the four candidates to succeed John M. Allin as
Presiding Bishop are on the board of advisers of a fundamentalist group bent on
converting Jews to Christianity, a highly ingenuous work in a church that has
always prided itself on sophisticated tolerance.

Still, there are glimmers of hope. The number of men and women who want to tend
the declining Episcopalian flock remains substantial. In 1973-74, 293 people
entered seminaries; in 1984-85, 282. According to the Rev. Robert Wright,
professor of ecclesiastical history at the General Theological Seminary in New
York, ''Underneath it all, in our seemingly self-involved society, there is a
great desire to serve.''

I T IS A CHURCH WITH A rich and checkered history. Even after Henry VIII broke
with Rome in the 16th century because of the king's desire to take another
spouse, Anglicanism retained Catholic sacraments, liturgy and vestments. But its
uniqueness, from the beginning, lay in what Bishop Paul Moore Jr. of New York
has called ''the democratic polity of Protestantism and a sense of individual
reponsibility and intellectual freedom.''

Anglicanism made the passage well to America, keeping a British sense of pomp
and order in the midst of a raw, untamed land, even as the Founding Fathers
struggled to carve out their own style of nation. Anglicanism seemed just right:
at once elite yet permitting great latitude of expression and belief. Two-thirds
of the signers of the Declaration of Independence were Anglicans. Tocqueville
marveled that such a church could so powerfully inculcate a ''self interest,
properly understood.''

The industrialization following the Civil War gave rise to many of America's
great fortunes, and those accumulating them were often Episcopalian, or were
attracted to the religion because of its formality, rationality, conservatism
and at least a patina of spirituality. Astors, du Ponts, Morgans, Vanderbilts,
Mellons, Roosevelts - Episcopalians all. Even though in this century it has
never embraced more than 2 percent of the population, the church enhanced its
power because of who belonged, growing in membership and influence. A Fortune
magazine survey in 1976 reported that a third of the most powerful banking
concerns were headed by Episcopalians, as were one-fifth of the nation's major
corporations. Churchgoing members today include 67 members of Congress and Vice
President Bush.

''I'm sure many considered themselves like-minded people belonging to some kind
of social club rather than a religious body,'' says Father Wright. ''During
those many, many years, it was more important to act in a way befitting an
Anglican than as a mere Christian. Anglicanism is not a confessing church with a
great body of doctrine. We believe in Scripture and tradition, and where the
Catholics have authority as the third part of doctrinal triad, we proclaim
reason instead. Altogether congenial for the non-papist, non-royalist
Anglo-Saxon temperament.''

T HE EPISCOPAL Church blithely entered the 1960's as it had scores of decades
before, confident that superior wisdom, generous finances, good manners and
sturdy Anglo-Americanism could solve even the most intractable problems. Then
the world fell apart. The murders of civil-rights advocates and the war in
Vietnam brought wave after wave of protest and violence to American cities.
Unable to grasp what was afoot, Presiding Bishop Hines took off his collar in
1967 and traveled through the still-smoldering fires of Newark, Harlem,
Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brownsville, Watts and Detroit. His nine-day sojourn changed
the direction of the Episcopal Church.

''I came back realizing the complexity of poor people's lives,'' says Bishop
Hines, who now lives in retirement in North Carolina. ''I felt it was high time
the Episcopal Church had something to say to them.'' His answer later in 1967
was the General Convention Special Program, which over the next 3 years
distributed 9 million Episcopal dollars to ''empower the powerless.''

The flush of beneficent enthusiasm quickly paled as Episcopalians discovered
that some of their dollars were supporting groups that had resorted to violence,
and certainly none of the funds were targeted for traditional church programs.
Enraged Episcopalians closed their checkbooks and stayed home on Sundays.

It would be inaccurate to blame Bishop Hines for all the ensuing conflict. Other
forces that were on the move would cause, in the words of Martin Marty, an
eminent church historian, ''a seismic shift in American religious life.''

''The Establishment'' was no longer to be trusted, and so ''establishment
churches'' -surely the Episcopal, among them - were to be avoided, rather than
approached with some sense of awe or need. Reeling from the excesses of a decade
of upheaval, Americans wanted simple answers. Mainline Protestantism looked
rather vague and anemic in comparison with more straightforward, if more
demanding, fundamentalist beliefs or the transcendant peace of Eastern
spirituality.

Some of those who did stay felt that their spiritual needs were being
short-shrifted as the church became more involved in worldly matters. Some
feared that the church was so swept up in the here-and-now that it had forgotten
not only the hereafter but also its history. ''More emphasis was placed on
expressing feelings than cultivating commitment or understanding of the
Christian tradition,'' says Donald E. Miller, director of the School of Religion
at the University of Southern California. Religious conservatives sought other
churches, and many others eventually opted for secular modes of commitment.

Some church dropouts went the route of what has been termed ''privatized
religion'' - trying to live a good and perhaps moral life independent of any
church. ''The wealthy don't go to church anymore; they go to a museum on Sunday
afternoon,'' says the Rev. John Hall Snow of the Episcopal Divinity School.
''That's why we have magnificent museums being built instead of magnificent
churches.''

''This church, which had molded a synthesis of culture and faith, a value system
that public life had a religious dimension, simply collapsed as the culture
polarized,'' says Wade Clark Roof, whose specialty at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst is the sociology of religion.

''Episcopalians always thought their religion was somehow passed on through
genes,'' says Martin Marty. ''They were so beautifully adapted to their old role
they couldn't readily move to the new.''

Be it patronizing or ''progressive,'' the old Episcopalian sense of duty and
service, of a debt to be repaid to the less fortunate, was endangered. The upper
classes were abandoning the church; the middle class, career-oriented and
upwardly mobile no longer saw the church as necessary to their lives. ''Let us
say, there was no longer any noblesse who should feel the oblige,'' says Bishop
Moore, himself the son of a wealthy New Jersey family.

S TAGGERED BY losses and dissension, Episcopalian leaders gathered at their
triennial General Convention in 1973 to choose Bishop Hines's successor. Their
choice was Bishop John M. Allin of Mississippi, a quiet unassuming man whose
public posture during his term of office was basically not to have one, and to
work behind the scenes. Defending him against critics who deplored his
passivity, Father Wright of the General Theological Seminary says, ''Bishop
Allin was not as forthright as he could have been, but he held this church
together at a critical moment and he healed it.''

The Allin years saw two extraordinary internal events. Beginning in 1977, women
were officially ordained - an act Bishop Allin opposed, and still does - and in
1979 a revised Book of Common Prayer took much of the poetry out of Archbishop
Thomas Cranmer's stately 16th-century prose. Although some churches still refuse
to use the new prayer book, which is more accessible if less elegant, it has,
after an initial flurry of controversy, been generally accepted. Female priests
are having a harder time being assimilated. Now numbering 596 nationwide, in
comparison to 12,032 male priests, they are ordained by bishops in 18 of the 98
continental United States dioceses.

''It's sad,'' says the Rev. Susan Crampton, the Vicar of Ashfield, Mass.,
''because women have something unique to offer. I hear the confessions of a
tremendous number of male priests because they know I'm not a threat to them.
Sex problems, struggling up the clergy ladder; they know they can talk about
anything. Also, I'm the mother of three children. The women of my small parish
know that I've been through what they experience.''

Once 94 percent white, the church's membership today is at least 10 percent
nonwhite, and the numbers of Koreans, West Indians and American Indians are
growing. Episcopalianism is no longer the bastion of the affluent. In fact, many
an Episcopal church, whose average congregation numbers about 200, struggles
just to stay afloat.

While overall membership has shrunk, some evangelical Episcopal churches have
grown dramatically. Brooklyn's All Saints, until a few years ago a moribund
church serving a handful of wealthy widows, now has scores of new members. On
Sundays at St. Paul's in Darien, Conn., off-duty policemen are called out to
direct traffic because the crowds are so large. Some psychologists and
sociologists characterize evangelical fervor as just another sign of our times:
a quest for self-fulfillment and absolute answers in an age of uncertainty. But
to the Rev. Everett L. Fullam of St. Paul's: ''It is a movement sweeping the
world, in all religion. Christ is calling out and people are responding.''

The centuries-old split between high-church and low-church Episcopalians has
been widened on the one hand by high-church advocates who thrive on pageantry
and ''correct'' liturgy and seek a reconciliation with Roman Catholicism and on
the other by evangelicals who stress personal conversion and, in some instances,
have taken on pentecostal ways, freely speaking and singing in tongues during
their services.

A fixed body of theology has never been important to the Episcopal Church,
always considered a ''bridge'' between Catholicism and Protestantism, so trying
to point an ecclesiastical finger at heretical beliefs within the communion has
proved a lesson in frustration for those bold enough to try. Following the
ordination of women, however, a number of Episcopal priests, some taking their
flocks with them, went over to the Roman Catholic Church, and as many as 20,000
dissidents formed the independent Anglican Catholic Church. But the binding
forces seem equal to the task of holding the majority of Episcopalians together.
''The pro-abortionist and the anti-abortionist acknowledge the same God,'' says
the Rev. John Hall Snow, ''and it is our worshipping side by side, using the
same Book of Common Prayer, regardless of our differences, that keeps us
intact.''

A ND SO, NEXT WEEK at Anaheim, the thorny issue of who will lead this complex
church for the next 12 years will be decided. Each of the approximately 150
active bishops was theoretically considered by a committee headed by Bishop John
B. Coburn of the diocese of Eastern Massachusetts.

But liberals - such as Bishop John S. Spong of Newark - or conservatives -such
as Bishop Robert C. Witcher of Long Island -were passed over. Bishop Coburn
calls the four nominees ''impressive men with strong administrative and pastoral
experience,'' but one member of the committee states bluntly, ''It's not an
impressive list because we didn't have an impressive pool to start with.''
Father Wright, a man well versed in church politics, says, ''The tendency in
picking bishops is to vote for the man who will offend the least number of
vested interests.''

The four bishops to be nominated are Edmond L. Browning of Hawaii, William C.
Frey of Colorado, Furman C. Stough of Alabama and John T. Walker of Washington,
D.C. The scenarios for election vary according to whom you consult. Some people
dismiss Walker, the first black to be nominated, because he will be a ''one
issue'' bishop - civil rights; others see his Washington contacts as an asset.
Browning is highly regarded for his missionary work in Asia, but his present
jurisdiction is thought to be too distant for him to be well enough known. Frey
is considered the evangelicals' candidate and perhaps a sop to them, no more.
And the affiliation with A Christian Ministry Among Jewish People in the United
States that Stough and Frey maintain as members of the group's board of advisers
is still another element whose effect is hard to determine. It is a group that
proclaims: ''Jesus is the Messiah for the Jews, or He is not the Messiah at
all.'' There is serious talk about additional nominations from the floor.

Asked about his Ministry Among Jewish People, Bishop Frey said, I'm
uncomfortable with the strident tone of that statement, but I cannot retreat
from my personal conviction that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, God's annointed
one.'' Bishop Stough said, ''As a Christian, I find no problem in witnessing to
the Jews, but I certainly don't write them out of the kingdom.''

At age 65, New York's Bishop Moore, perhaps the best-known member of the
Episcopal hierarchy, who presides at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, the
world's largest Gothic cathedral, is too old to be considered. But he remains a
much-talked-about figure. ''Many people look at him as a crazy upper-class
liberal who, because of his money and status, could afford to indulge himself in
the controversial issues of the last 25 years, from civil rights to gay
rights,'' says the Rev. John Hall Snow. ''The young tend to trivialize him
today, but anyone who has worked with him has enormous respect for the man. He's
saying the same things he always has, but there's just not a great desire for
such forthrightness.''

''Whoever they choose, and for whatever reasons, it will tell you what direction
this church wants to go,'' says Martin Marty, ''and who American Episcopalians
are at this moment in history.'' Even Bishop Coburn, a man who chooses his words
carefully, says: ''It's time we got on with our work. We stayed together during
some rough years. But for what? We have to show that now.''

T HE FUTURE OF THE Episcopal Church in mid-1980's America may be uncertain, but
there are a number of positive signs that any religious institution would find
most encouraging. After ranking eighth in per capita giving for mainstream
churches 10 years ago, Episcopalians are now first among the larger
denominations. An interesting statistic, indicating that as the church has
become more egalitarian it has become more generous. When the plight of
Zimbabwe's Anglican churches was announced recently, $9 million was quickly
raised.

There is no lack of seminarians, such as the Roman Catholic Church faces. In
certain Episcopal dioceses, men and women are even held back from beginning
their training because there would be no jobs for them upon ordination. In the
face of recent declines in overall lay membership, one droll statistician
projected that if both trends continued there would be one clergyman for every
lay person in the year 2004.

On the negative side, there is a pool of female priests angry about not being
given parishes to head, and a great many members of the clergy who are
''disaffected,'' ''passive,'' ''frightened'' - descriptions heard with alarming
frequency. The Rev. Kevin Bean, who worked in Washington's slums before coming
to St. Luke's in wealthy Darien, says, ''Of the 400 clergy in my diocese, I
could count on my two hands the men who are committed and not bound by the
upward-mobility mindset so prevalent in the Episcopal ministry.''

There is hardly a man or woman within the church unwilling to vocally volunteer
an agenda for its future. Father Wright believes the time is right for reunion
with the Roman Catholic Church. Father Fullam of St. Paul's in Darien, is sure
the thrust must be old-fashioned evangelism, bringing people to confess Christ
as their personal savior. Some say the ancient liturgical forms should be
rediscovered, and that ''smells and bells,'' as practiced by high-church
congregations, should dominate Episcopal worship. Others demand that the age-old
ties to the mother church be stressed. They want their clergy to become more
Anglophile, to pay more than lip service to the Archbishop of Canterbury as the
church's spiritual leader. Still others say it is time for the Episcopal Church
consciously and deliberately to lead mainstream Protestantism into the vanguard
of social change.

A ND THEN THERE are the voices of two men in parishes that serve the opposite
ends of the Episcopal Church's clientele, as well as America's.

Father Bean sits in his book-lined office in Darien and looks out across the
well-trimmed lawns of one of America's largest and most prestigious Episcopal
churches: ''Our goal isn't to make people feel better, but to make them better.
In a church like St. Luke's, we have the means and the people - C.E.O.'s who
manage great corporations - to change the world. Why can't we stop the arms
race, feed the hungry? Our danger is not in straddling the fence, but falling
asleep on it. I'm afraid of what's going to happen in that great day of
reckoning. We can't afford more years of dishonest caution. It's time for an
official and sanctioned radicalism from the top down. That's my hope. Our
problem is that we haven't trusted the strength of the church itself.''

Father Snodgrass leans on the rusting wrought-iron fence outside his Newark
rectory, talking over the steady dull roar of traffic on Interstate 280, which
passes virtually overhead: ''There are too many churches like this, in cities
and rural areas that nobody wants or that can't afford that clergy 'package.'
Our seminaries still train our people to serve nice suburban parishes that can
afford them. How about beginning to train them like the Marines do? Where they
could be dropped down anyplace on earth and survive.

''And schools. We have the best prep schools around, and every year we take a
token handful of minority kids, uproot them and think they'll do just fine. They
don't. We have an opportunity to educate an entire generation of black and
Hispanic leaders. This is the frontier. We don't lack the money, just the
vision. Five schools - with standards like Groton and St. Mark's - in the five
worst cities in America. Then the Episcopal Church would stand for something.
Wouldn't people notice?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article in today's New York Times Magazine on the Episcopal church contains
an incorrect reference to the ordination of women as priests. They are not
ordained by bishops in 18 of the 98 continental United States dioceses.

GRAPHIC: photo of participants in mass

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1318 words

                                                                     Weeks
This                                                        Last        on
Week      Fiction                                           Week      List

 1        LUCKY, by Jackie Collins. (Simon                     4         2
          & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of a crime
          lord takes on the heiress of a shipping
          tycoon in fashionable spots all over the
          world.
 2        SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King.                      1        11
          (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of horror
          set in contemporary America.

 3        THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders.          2         7
          (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of six suspects
          murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

 4        THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy.             3        24
          (Naval Institute Press, $14.95.) A
          Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the
          United States with the Soviet Union's most
          advanced nuclear secrets.

 5        THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne.          5         3
          (Crown, $14.95.) Romance, scandal and murder
          in New York's high society.

 6        THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving.               6        15
          (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine orphanage
          earlier in this century.

 7        LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor.                        1
          (Viking, $17.95.) Recollections of a small
          American town.

 8        LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry.                    8        10
          (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old West
          seen larger than life.

 9        JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour.                     7        15
          (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner to the
          17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer
          scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

10        HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor                   10        16
          Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Continuing
          the family saga begun in ''A Woman of
          Substance.''

11         IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon.               9        32
          (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman destroys the
          crime lords who got her an undeserved prison
          term.

12        TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline                   13         2
          Briskin. (Putnam, $17.95.) Three sisters
          find their destinies bound by an obsession
          with the same man.

13        THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras.                     11         7
          (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual initiation of
          an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in
          Saigon in the 30's.

14        INSIDE, OUTSIDE, by Herman Wouk.                    15        24
          (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A traditionalist
          Jew's quest for identity in glittery
          contemporary America.

15        FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins.                  12         7
          (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Machinations by
          spies, double agents and a beautiful woman
          on the eve of D-Day.

          Nonfiction

 1        YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager            1         8
          and Leo Janos. (Bantam, $17.95.) The story
          of the first man to fly faster than sound.

 2        IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee                    2        44
           Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
          $19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to
          top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

 3        SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES,                        4        22
          by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
          (Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical
          psychologists analyze modern women's efforts
          to find acceptable men.

 4        A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE,                            3        17
          by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
          House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction
          in management.

 5        THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck.          5         6
          (Doubleday, $15.95.) The autobiography of
          the New York Yankee baseball star.

 6        THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam.                   9         3
          (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men seek the
          1984 Olympic gold medal for single sculling.

 7        MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova                      7         7
          with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
          autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born
          tennis champion.

 8        CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope                16        16
          with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
          Memories of more than 50 years of golfing,
          by the comedian.

 9         NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander.                     8         9
          (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery and
          high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon
          multimillionaire.

10        HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin                10         4
          Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow, $15.95.)
          The British heavy metal group's boisterous
          tours of the 1970's.

11        FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer.                        11         5
          (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding the
          1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in
          Oklahoma City.

12        LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.                          52
          (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions for
          ''setting our priorities right in order to
          enjoy life to the fullest.''

13        THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick                    12         3
          F. McManus. (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing pieces
          about pursuing pleasures in the great
          outdoors.

14        THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach.         16        52
          (Morrow, $16.95.) How the author of
          ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' sought a
          true love.

15        THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway.          13         7
          (Scribners, $17.95.) A chronicle of the
          Spanish bullfight season of 1959.

16        A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel                                141
          Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light
          verse and drawings by the author.

          Advice and Self-Help

 1        DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart            1        12
          M. Berger. (NAL Books, $14.95.) A regimen
          designed to produce weight loss while
          improving health and increasing energy.

 2        WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.                    43
          (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work
          updated in 1983.

 3        WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin                    2         3
          Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's, $14.95.) How
          to find the right man and maintain a happy
          relationship with him.

 4        THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.                   3        22
          (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for delicious
          dishes prepared at moderate cost.

 5        FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey                                        2
          Diamond and Marilyn Diamond. (Warner,
          $16.50.) A diet for weight loss and physical
          fitness.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE MANTLE OF THE PROPHET: Religion and Politics in Iran, by Roy Mottahedeh.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A gifted scholar traces the sacrifice of a national
tradition of restraint and tolerance by mullahs reacting to the ambitions of the
Shah.

THE GLORIOUS ONES: Classical Music's Legendary Performers, by Harold C.
Schonberg. (Times Books, $24.95.) Anecdotes, from charming to bizarre, of the
charismatic musicians of past and present, collected by the former senior music
critic of The Times.

DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Visions of Gender in Victorian America, by Carroll
Smith-Rosenberg. (Knopf, $19.95.) The changes, from female bonding to reform
movements, wrought in woman's role by the dislocations of 19th-century
industrialization.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF WILLIAM HUMPHREY. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence, $19.95.)
These 22 stories offer a refined sensibility and a rustic energy, a Jamesian
psychological penetration and a spirit that expands before nature's forces.

THE ART OF CAPTAIN COOK'S VOYAGES, by Rudiger Joppien and Bernard Smith. Volume
One: The Voyage of the Endeavour, 1768-1771. Volume Two: The Voyage of the
Resolution and Adventure, 1772-1775. (Yale University, $50 each.) The work of
artists who accompanied Cook and introduced the romantic image of the South Seas
to Europe; handsomely produced and scholarly.

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EUROPEAN JEWS, by Raul Hilberg. (Holmes & Meier, three
volumes, $159.50.) A revised, expanded and apparently final edition, by the
pre-eminent scholar of the Holocaust, of his magnum opus, first published in
1961.

HENRY VIII, by Jasper Ridley. (Viking, $24.95.) A briskly narrated version of
Henry's reign that dispenses with the legend of the frank young King turned
tyrant in middle age; he was ever thus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A BLEAK SUMMER FOR MOVIE MAKERS

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 1


The summer of Hollywood's discontent ended this weekend. Ticket sales were 17
percent lower than last summer. Only three movies - ''Rambo,'' ''Back to the
Future'' and ''Cocoon'' - kept their momentum month after month.

Tri-Star's ''Rambo,'' with $146 million in ticket sales, and Universal's ''Back
to the Future,'' with $128 million so far, are the summer's only blockbusters.
The rest of the Top 5 include 20th Century-Fox's ''Cocoon'' ($69 million),
Warner Brothers' ''Goonies'' ($61 million) and MGM/ UA's ''View to a Kill'' ($50
million).

There was an extraordinary number of high-budget disasters. Disney's ''Return to
Oz'' cost $28 million and sold $11 million worth of tickets. Since a movie's
distributor gets slightly less than 50 percent of the box-office revenues and
since Disney had to spend approximately $6 million on prints and advertising for
''Return to Oz,'' that film may now be $29 million in the red.

Columbia's $20 million ''Perfect'' was a box-office dud despite John Travolta.
Paramount's $25 million teen-agers-in-space movie, ''Explorers,'' and Cannon's
$25 million vampires-in-space film, ''Lifeforce,'' were also losers. ''Perfect''
grossed $13 million, ''Lifeforce,'' $11 million and ''Explorers,'' $9 million.

Less expensive to make but performing even worse at the box office were Disney's
''My Science Project,'' Columbia's ''Bride,'' Orion's ''Secret Admirer'' and
''Heavenly Kid,'' MGM/UA's ''Red Sonja,'' 20th Century-Fox's ''Man With One Red
Shoe'' and Tri-Star's ''Real Genius.''

'Looked Alike, Smelled Alike'

''There were so many pictures that looked alike, smelled alike and were
advertised alike,'' said Ashley Boone, former head of marketing at Columbia and
now a consultant to Lorimar. ''If I can't tell the difference between 'My
Science Project,' 'Real Genius' and 'Weird Science,' how can I expect moviegoers
to tell the difference? And there were a lot of 'youth-oriented' films that had
no appeal for anyone over 18. They all melt together.''

''You can't fool the public,'' said Marvin Antonowsky, president of marketing at
Universal. ''Give them good pictures or they'll go to the beach. Most of those
teen-age pictures were trash.''

Nor did the western make a triumphant return. The two most closely watched films
of the summer were Clint Eastwood's ''Pale Rider'' and Lawrence Kasdan's
''Silverado.'' Despite good reviews and good response from people who could be
enticed to see it, ''Silverado,'' with its four feckless heroes riding to the
rescue, proved that audiences in the 1980's prefer their horse operas set on
distant planets with the feckless heroes riding spaceships.

Although Clint Eastwood has a fanatic following, ''Pale Rider,'' in which he
plays a gaunt supernatural being resurrected in answer to a maiden's prayer, was
not one of his major successes. Two years ago, ''Sudden Impact'' sold more than
$70 million worth of tickets. ''Pale Rider'' has grossed $41 million.

Cable and Foreign Markets

But how many dollars' worth of tickets a movie sells at American theaters is no
clear indication of how profitable it is. Some money will be made at theaters
abroad. The foreign market has been shrinking, but violent action-adventure
films can still smash through. ''Rambo'' has already broken records in 19
countries, and Carolco, the producer of that $23 million Sylvester Stallone
anthem about redeeming American pride by rescuing prisoners from Vietnam,
estimates that ''Rambo'' may gross as much as $150 million abroad. The James
Bond movies usually make two-thirds of their money abroad, and ''A View to a
Kill'' is not likely to be an exception.

There are also sales to pay-cable and independent television stations and a
growing afterlife on video cassette. John Huston's adult comedy ''Prizzi's
Honor'' was a succes d'estime for its producer, ABC Motion Pictures, and its
distributor, 20th Century-Fox. With ticket sales of $24 million, it did
respectably at the box office. In addition, because ''Prizzi's Honor'' stars
Jack Nicholson and Kathleen Turner and can be expected to appeal to the somewhat
older people who go less often to movie theaters but own video-cassette
recorders, video-cassette rights were sold for a huge $4.2 million.

There is also the question of how much a movie costs. Columbia's ''Silverado''
was not a box-office failure. It has sold $27 million worth of tickets so far.
The problem is that it cost $25 million, and another $8 million or $10 million
was spent on prints and advertising. Columbia's late-summer horror flick,
''Fright Night,'' has sold $22 million worth of tickets. Since it cost only $7
million, ''Fright Night'' will make the studio a nice profit.

''Pale Rider'' will make a considerable amount of money for Warner Brothers
because Clint Eastwood, who produces and often directs his own movies, is one of
the few stars who are willing to share the risks with their studios. ''Pale
Rider'' cost only $6.9 million, far below the industry average, because the
actor - whom astounded Warner Brothers executives describe as ''being as frugal
with the studio's money as if it were his own'' - did not take a large salary.
Mr. Eastwood gets a healthy share of the profits of his films. But if the film -
for example, 1982's ''Honkytonk Man'' - doesn't make money, he doesn't make
money either.

Losers and Winners

The big losers among the studios were Paramount, Disney and Columbia. Disney's
$25 million animated movie ''The Black Cauldron'' was another major
disappointment. Columbia was salvaged only by the $33 million grossed by ''St.
Elmo's Fire,'' with its ensemble of trendy young actors who have been dubbed the
''brat pack.''

Although Tri-Star will make a tidy profit from distributing ''Rambo,'' it went
nowhere with ''The Legend of Billie Jean'' and ''Real Genius,'' or with
''Lifeforce,'' which it distributed for Cannon. And Tri-Star's profits on
''Rambo'' are more limited than they would be if the studio had produced and
financed the movie.

The big winners were Universal with ''Back to the Future,'' ''Fletch'' and
''Brewster's Millions'' and Warner Brothers with ''The Goonies,'' ''National
Lampoon's European Vacation,'' ''Pale Rider,'' ''Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome''
and the summer's oddest movie, ''Pee-Wee's Big Adventure.'' A throwback to the
kinds of movies Jerry Lewis was making two decades ago, ''Pee-Wee's Big
Adventure'' is losing only 8 percent of its audience each week, a sign that
people who have seen the film are urging their friends to see it too.

''Back to the Future'' is also holding its audience and, sometime in October, it
will most certainly pass ''Rambo'' at the box office.

In contrast, ''European Vacation'' - for which Warner Brothers refused to hold
the usual preview screenings - had a huge $12 million opening weekend and
plummeted 40 percent its second weekend.

Aimed at Youth Audience

Most of the 50 movies released this summer were aimed at ''the kids''
nationwide. Two movies targeted an older audience. ''Prizzi's Honor'' earned
more than 50 percent of its money in just four cities - New York, Los Angeles,
San Francisco and Boston. And ''Cocoon,'' a fable of eternal life whose central
characters were in their 70's, played to people 25 and older. '' 'Cocoon' wasn't
a blockbuster because it never got the younger audience en masse,'' said Tom
Sherak, president of distribution at Fox. ''But we got a lot of people in their
60's and 70's who normally never go to a movie.'' ''Cocoon,'' which opened in
June, is still selling several millions dollars worth of tickets each week.

One thing the summer proved was that Steven Spielberg has not yet lost his magic
touch. Mr. Spielberg was executive producer of both ''The Goonies'' and ''Back
to the Future,'' and a reissue of his 1982 movie ''E.T.'' sold $33 million worth
of tickets.

It is also likely - the words are Mr. Boone's but the sentiment is echoed by
other marketing and sales executives - ''that we won't see too many more movies
about a teeny-bopper-in-high-school-rebellious-nerd making things on his
computer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from ''Rambo,'' ''Back to the Future,'' ''Cocoon,''
''Perfect,'' ''Lifeforce'' and Return to Oz''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN WAR BY RADIO

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 1


Journalists, usually denied the opportunity for first-hand reporting from inside
Cambodia - or Kampuchea, as it is known in Southeast Asia - rely for information
at least in part on the radio broadcasts of two opposing sides in the Cambodian
civil war.

The Cambodian Government radio, called the Voice of the Kampuchean People in
Phnom Penh, and the Khmer Rouge radio, called the Voice of Democratic Kampuchea,
which is believed to transmit from southern China, try daily to portray their
enemies in disarray. Here are samples of two recent broadcasts, as monitored and
translated by Reuters in Bangkok:

'Misled People' Return Voice of the Kampuchean People, Aug. 23 - During the
first six months of this year, 154 misled people surrendered to revolutionary
state authorities in Santuk district of Kampong Thom Province.

These people brought along with them a number of weapons and military equipment.

They were warmly welcome by the people and the authorities in the area. They
were later allowed to live and earn their livelihood like other Kampucheans.

Security forces of Kampot Province, with the cooperation of Vietnamese voluntary
troops, early this month attacked and ambushed guerrillas of the Pol Pot,
Sihanouk and Son Sann groups who intruded into the area many times.

The security forces destroyed many bandits in the attacks, and 60 misled people
surrendered to the revolutionary state authorities.

Vietnamese Desert at Meal

Voice of Democratic Kampuchea, Aug. 29 - On Aug. 5, Vietnamese enemies had moved
fresh Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam on three trucks along Route 3 to
Phnom Penh. When they reached Bek Chan market, west of Phnom Penh, they stopped
for a meal. At this time all those new Vietnamese troops escaped and fled back
to Vietnam.

These new Vietnamese troops were old men and students recruited in South Vietnam
by the Le Duan clique. This has clearly shown that the Vietnamese troops are
against Vietnam's expansionist war in Kampuchea, and that they do not want to
fight and die for Le Duan or Vietnamese expansionist leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: FROM 'HAVE NOT' CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Prak Sarinn had nothing to do with a Government decision to invite a group of
foreign journalists to this poverty-racked country recently. But when a few of
them turned up at Orphanage No. 1, which he runs, he took the opportunity to
mention a few things that were on his own agenda.

Detouring two reporters about to leave after a cultural performance by some of
the institution's 535 children, Mr. Prak Sarinn headed for the corner where he
keeps his sports trophies.

The 48-year-old Mr. Prak Sarinn told the visitors he wanted to get a competitive
basketball team going at the orphanage.

''We have the boys,'' he said, adding sadly, ''But we lack the basketballs.''

At the Seventh of January Hospital - named for the day the Vietnamese overthrew
the brutal Government of Pol Pot - the deputy director, Dr. Un Pan, made a
low-key pitch for more technically advanced equipment.

He had just shown reporters his emergency room: four bamboo cots in an airless
corner of an unlighted ward. In the suffocating heat of the afternoon, a drawn
young man was fanning the almost-lifeless body of his bone-thin wife. She was
suffering an attack of hemorraghic tuberculosis, the doctor said.

Nhim Vanda, Cambodia's Deputy Minister of State Planning, told the visiting
reporters, in a summary of the country's problems, that the deprivation seen all
around had much to do with the rapid decrease in aid from nongovernmental
Western relief agencies.

''International assistance from 1983 to 1985 has been reduced to almost zero,''
he said.

Cambodia gets no governmental aid except from Soviet-bloc nations, because most
of the world denies recognition to the Government installed by Vietnam in 1979
and maintained by 160,000 Vietnamese troops.

The most visible Soviet aid project in Phnom Penh during the journalists' visit
was a road crew resurfacing a boulevard that was already in uniquely good shape,
in a country whose roads are potholed from end to end.

''In the Ministry of Communications and Transport there are 200 cars that are
inoperable because they need Japanese spare parts,'' Mr. Nhim Vanda said. With a
wry smile, he then pointed out that his own office was without electricity.

There are ''haves'' as well as ''have nots'' in the Cambodian capital.

Shadowy figures whom residents describe as smugglers or high-ranking officials,
or both, speed through the city now and then in chauffeur-driven European cars -
a sight never seen in Hanoi, where poverty is shared by a leadership accustomed
to sacrifice.

Here in the evening at the Sereipheap Restaurant there are faces pressed to the
wire screening peering in at foreign and Cambodian diners working their way
through French cuisine and smuggled Heineken beer, while the tape deck sings the
praises of an ''Itsy-Bitsy, Teenie-Weenie, Yellow-Polka-Dot Bikini.''

On a recent evening, five well-dressed young Cambodian men had just opened a
second bottle of Scotch when one of them dropped off to sleep from the effects
of the first.

Before he slumped back into his chair, he had time to unbutton the cuffs and top
of his shirt, displaying a gold neck chain, an imported watch and a ring set
with diamonds.

Visits to Cambodia by reporters from the non-Communist world are infrequent. The
small group of Japanese and Western journalists who recently spent a week in
Phnom Penh had been invited by Vietnam, not Cambodia, to cover a meeting of
Indochinese foreign ministers.

Phnom Penh allowed the group to remain after the conference closed, but then had
to organize a car and a ''program'' for each guest, since rethe country.
Cambodians may not speak to foreigners without official approval.

The reporters asked for many things - trips to troubled areas, interviews with a
officials, meetings with guerrilla defectors, compilations of factual material -
but got few of them.

Sometimes omissions or denials were understandable. At other times they were
inexplicable. A reporter who tried for a week to see a curator of the city's
impressive National Museum, which is being restored to better house an
outstanding collection of Khmer art, got evasive answers for six days. On the
seventh, a triumphant Government guide reported: ''Good news! Tomorrow you can
see a conservator of Angkor Wat!''

''Western reporters publish wrong information about our country,'' Sek Setha,
the deputy press director of the Cambodian Foreign Ministry, told a foreign
journalist he had summoned to his office. ''But now that you are here, you can
see for yourself what we are doing and write the truth.''

The search for truth is a difficult one in Cambodia, however, and in the battle
of information surrounding the most important story - the real, deadly war
between the Phnom Penh Government and the guerrillas trying his colleagues
operate with self-imposed disadvantages.

In Bangkok, representatives of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea
- which has loosely unified the guerrilla forces of the Khmer Rouge, the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front and the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk
- ply reporters with a steady barrage of sophisticated printed and broadcast
''news'' about their country. Invitations are extended to visit ''liberated
zones'' of Kampuchea, the name most Southeast Asians use. Important exiles who
have fled Phnom Penh are presented for interviews.

In Cambodia, where reporters are told that the guerrillas have been largely
routed, the countryside is closed to outsiders, except for closely supervised,
well-guarded expeditions. Visitors have no way of testing the veracity of
guerrilla claims, many of which seem inflated.

No visits are permitted to areas where exiles say there are large concentrations
of Vietnamese soldiers or Soviet advisers.

The most sought-after ''sources'' in Phnom Penh are the 60 or 70 people who work
for private or religious Western aid agencies. They form, in a sense, the
diplomatic corps through which Cambodia can make its needs known to the West.
They are also the real experts on life in Cambodia, although they, too, are
limited in their travels.

Many of them do not relish either role. Living under stress and hardship in
spartan hotel rooms, sometimes without water, often without lights, they joke
about fears of getting sick on a Friday, because Thursday is the only day to get
to Bangkok. But their real concern is that nothing, least of all politics,
interfere with their main task of helping people.

''Please don't quote me on any of this,'' one said after an informal
conversation with a reporter. ''My function is not to talk to journalists.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon;
Reflections on 46 Years of Army Service

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


On the eve of retiring after 46 years of Army service, the past three as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. is in a
reflective mood these days.

Over breakfast in his Pentagon office one recent morning, he ruminated over his
four decades in uniform and, at the same time, offered some observations and
advice for his successors.

It was straight-forward talk, spare, declarative sentences, one after the other,
touching on everything from duty and honor to unit training and nuclear
holocaust. The impression was of a man who took considerable quiet pride in his
career, an officer who had mastered not only the art of war but also the art of
politics.

On 'Political Decisions'

On relations between military officers and political leaders, he said: ''We know
how to build forces. We think we know how to employ them. But choosing the time
and place is a political decision. We have some ideas about whether it's right
or wrong. We ought to make those ideas known but recognize that it's a political
decision.''

What if you tell the President something he does not want to hear? ''All of us
have to recognize that the ultimate decision is the President's. He's Commander
in Chief. It's our business to advise him and tell him; then, when he makes his
decision, to carry it out.''

The general asked himself the next question: ''Suppose you know that he's
absolutely wrong and that it won't work; what do you do?'' Well, he answered, an
officer could resign and, in fact, he himself had come ''very close'' to that as
commander of American forces in Korea under President Carter.

Opposed Troop Withdrawal

At that time, President Carter planned to withdraw some American troops from
Korea, a decision that General Vessey vigorously opposed within the councils of
government. The President eventually relented but later bypassed General Vessey
in naming a new Chief of Staff of the Army.

Actually, the general continued, resigning may not be a particularly good
solution in such situations. ''You have to set your 'shove-it' tolerance
someplace,'' he said. ''But you also have to recognize that you, too, may be
wrong, and that in two weeks time you'll be 'old what's-his-name' and won't be
able to influence the situation at all.''

On his watch as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Vessey led the
chiefs in opposing the Reagan Administration's deployment of a Marine contingent
to Lebanon in 1982 and 1983. Should the chiefs have put up more of a fight
against placing the marines in a poor tactical postion, with their backs to the
sea?

''I don't think so,'' General Vessey said. He pointed to the possibility of a
political breakthrough that would have changed the direction of events. ''It
didn't happen,'' he said, ''but I can understand the decision.''

Fibbed About His Age

The general, who fibbed about his age to enlist in the National Guard in 1939,
went on to win a battlefield commission on the Anzio beachhead in Italy in World
War II and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross, the Army's second
highest combat decoration, in Vietnam.

His retirement on Sept. 30 will mark the end of an era. The general, who is 63,
is the last officer who fought in World War II to be Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

He will be succeeded by Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., now the commander of American
forces in the Pacific. Admiral Crowe, who is 60, was commissioned in 1946, just
after World War II ended.

Among many military officers today, the legacy of Vietnam is perhaps the
strongest influence on their attitudes toward the use of military force. They
seems to be especially sensitive to the need for public support for military
actions.

General Vessey thinks Americans would support a military venture if it were
sensible. The responsibility for generating that support, he says, is ''the job
of the political leaders of the country.'' The public would support a military
operation after the fact, he said, ''if you can make it self-evidently clear
that what you did was the right thing for the nation.''

Americans, the general said, don't like wars and they particularly don't like
long wars. Thus, his advice on using military force: ''Don't go if you don't
have to; that's a cinch. But if you have to go, go in the fashion that's going
to get public support for what you're going to do. Do it quickly.''

Like many other senior military officers, General Vessey thinks the armed forces
are not large enough to cover the commitments of the United States. But, he
said, ''I think that's clearly the way the American people want us - spread
thin.''

''I would feel more comfortable with larger forces,'' General Vessey said,
''with a higher chunk of the G.N.P. for defense.'' But it's like insurance, he
said; ''you spread it as thin as you possibly can'' so that premiums are the
smallest needed to provide adequate protection.

'Very, Very Good Armed Forces'

Even so, he is clearly satisfied with what he called ''the absolutely phenomenal
improvement in the quality of the forces.'' He stated flatly: ''We have very,
very good armed forces now.''

He pointed to new equipment, to better people recruited and retained by better
pay and living conditions and to expanded training. ''It has been the
combination of the people, the equipment and the training that has made the big
difference,'' he said.

General Vessey said that in a new tank qualification test, ''on the move at
night, the crew takes under fire a moving target at a range of 2,000 meters and
a fixed target at a range of 1,000 meters, and they're expected to hit both in
14 seconds.''

''Ten years ago,'' he said, ''going down range with tank crews at night, you
were lucky to find the radio boxes.''

He chuckled, then added softly: ''It's got to scare the Russians.''

WORDS FROM THE GENERAL

On a military officer's responsibility when he thinks the President is about to
make a mistake:

''You have to tell him.''

On the decision to deploy a Marine Corps contingent to Lebanon in 1982-1983:

''I wish we hadn't.''

On a lesson learned from the experience of Beirut, where a terrorist bomb killed
241 Americans:

''Don't get small units caught in between the forces of history.'' On the need
to end wars swiftly: ''Americans are not patient with long, drawn-out,
protracted wars, wars that dribble away our public support and strength.''

On the size of the armed forces relative to American commitments:

''We're spread thin.''

On the huge military budgets of recent years:

''We've improved the quality of the force. That's a very important thing for the
American people to understand.'' On the threat of nuclear war: ''Any politician
with any brains recognizes the danger in a nuclear power confrontation. That has
put caution into the world's leaders.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. John Vessey Jr. (AP)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KHMER REBELS SAY POL POT IS RETIRING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Sept. 2


The Khmer Rouge rebel movement in Cambodia announced today that its leader, Pol
Pot, was retiring from command of the organization.

The announcement on the Khmer Rouge radio said that Mr. Pol Pot, who ruled
Cambodia for four years until Vietnam invaded the country in 1979, would assume
a vaguely defined military advisory role.

Diplomats and experts on the Khmer Rouge, whose rule of Cambodia was marked by a
reign of terror and policies that left as many as two million people dead,
reacted to the report with caution. They said it was unclear whether the
announced change in leadership would be substantive.

The Khmer Rouge, a Communist group backed by Peking, is the dominant faction in
a three-way guerrilla coalition headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former
Cambodian King and later Prime Minister. The group is officially recognized by
the United Nations. #2 Non-Communist Members The coalition's non-Communist
members are the Khmer Peoples National Liberation Front, led by Son Sann, who is
also a former Prime Minister, and the followers of Prince Sihanouk. [In Peking,
Prince Sihanouk, asked his reaction to the announcement, told a Western reporter
that the Khmer Rouge ''are my allies, so in my official capacity I must believe
them.'' He went on, ''But, if you ask me for my personal opinion, I would say
that it is better not to believe what they say.''] Mr. Pol Pot's removal as head
of the Khmer Rouge has long been sought both by Western nations who support the
rebel alliance and by Vietnam, whose troops continue to occupy Cambodia. Hanoi
has said repeatedly that such a move was necessary as a first step toward ending
Cambodia's six-year civil war.

Replacement Is Named

The broadcast today by the Khmer Rouge radio said Mr. Pol Pot would be replaced
by Khieu Samphan as president of the guerrillas' political organization. Mr.
Khieu Samphan is foreign affairs spokesman for the rebel coaltion.

The new Khmer Rouge vice president, according to the broadcast, monitored and
translated by Reuters, will be Son Sen, who has been Khmer Rouge Defense
Minister. Mr. Son Sen would also become the guerrillas' commander in chief,
according to the radio, which added:

''Mr. Pol Pot would be retired to hold the position of chairman of the high
technical office for national defense, which has the duty to observe, consider,
explore and make summaries on the national defense field.''

Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand, was quoted as saying that if the
report is true, ''at last we see at the end of the tunnel some light.'' Mr.
Savetsila, arriving in Singapore for a two-day visit, told Reuters that Mr. Pol
Pot's departure would leave Vietnam without an excuse for continuing its
military presence and blocking national reconciliation and self-determination in
Cambodia.

No Word From Hanoi

Mr. Siddhi said the leadership change appeared to be ''a sort of a concession,''
adding, ''I wish Vietnam and its patron, the Soviet Union, will carefully
consider this.'' There was no immediate reaction to the announcement by Hanoi.

The six-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations has sought indirect peace
talks between Vietnam and Prince Sihanouk's coalition.

The alliance, composed of Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines,
Singapore and Brunei, recently proposed such talks, but Hanoi said it would not
join as long as Mr. Pol Pot was leading the Khmer Rouge.

In Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian Deputy Foreign Minister, Kadir Sheikh Fadzir,
said, ''Cambodian leaders are now preparing to put aside their personal feelings
and interests for the wider national interest.''

Reservations Expressed

But he expressed reservations, saying, ''I have to wait for further
clarification over Pol Pot's new position.''

In July, possibly reacting to public concerns about its record, the Khmer Rouge
issued a statement suggesting that it would be prepared to reliquish power if
the coaltion were to regain control of Cambodia. At that time it also pledged to
support a liberal, democratic system for the country.

On Friday, Prince Sihanouk said in Bangkok that he had repeatedly offered Mr.
Pol Pot a retirement home in Peking. He said the Khmer Rouge leader had turned
him down. ''They want only to kill Vietnamese,'' he said.

Five of the Prince's own children and 14 grandchildren were slain during Mr. Pol
Pot's rule and the Prince is said to have had no contact with him since being
released from his house arrest by the Khmer Rouge outside Phnom Penh in January
1979. ---- Rebels Attack Vietnamese Unit BANGKOK, Sept. 2 (Reuters) - The Khmer
Rouge guerrillas killed four Vietnamese soldiers and wounded several others in
clashes over the weekend, Thai military officials said today.

They said about 150 guerrillas attacked the troops Saturday in the rugged Phnom
Malai area opposite the Thai village of Khlong Nam Sai.

The Vietnamese responded with artillery and mortar barrages, they said. Two
guerrillas were wounded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pol Pot (Gamma-Liason); photo of Khieu Samphan (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 872 words




International

A black miners' strike faltered in South Africa, and union leaders blamed
intimidation by mine employers. Meanwhile, South Africa's currency, the rand,
recovered sharply as foreign-exchange markets reopened. [Page A1, Columns 3-4.]

Many black groups have shifted toward radicalism and tough tactics in the year
since the latest wave of unrest began in South Africa's black townships,
according to academics and other specialists there. Violence, the specialists
say, has won a kind of legitimacy and has become more intense and more directed
toward the overthrow of white rule. [A6:1-2.]

Peru's reformist new President, Alan Garcia Perez, has shaken his country out of
prolonged pessimism after barely one month in office. The confident, youthful
President has tackled an array of problems that had long appeared insoluble.
[A1:1.]

Pol Pot is retiring from command of the Khmer Rouge movement in Cambodia, the
rebel organization announced. The Khmer Rouge radio said that Mr. Pol Pot, who
ruled Cambodia for four years in a reign of terror in which as many as two
million people died, until Vietnam invaded the country in 1979, would become a
military adviser. [A3:1-3.]

A missing intelligence official from West Germany, in a note that is said to
appear genuine, said he defected to East Germany because he was in ''a hopeless
personal situation,'' according to an informed West German official. The note
apparently written by Hans Joachim Tiedge, a counterespionage officer, evidently
referred to his debts and drinking, and it strengthened a belief among
investigators that he had not been a longtime East German spy. [A8:3-6.] Joakim
Nystrom upset Boris Becker at the United States Open in Flushing Meadows,
Queens. The Swedish player defeated Becker, 17, the youngest winner of the
Wimbledon men's singles championship, by 6-3, 6-4, 4-6 and 6-4. [D15:3-6.]

Anatoly Karpov and Gary Kasparov made no pretence of camaraderie as they faced
off at the ceremonial opening in Moscow of the second round of their stormy
struggle for the world chess championship. [C16:1-4.]

National

A hurricane swept ashore along Mississippi's Gulf Coast, peeling roofs from
buildings and toppling trees and power lines. Hurricane Elena had bobbed and
weaved for four days in the gulf, its erratic wanderings leading many residents
to flee inland, return home, then flee again. But the repeated warnings worked,
because the authorities reported the hurricane caused no deaths or serious
injuries when it pushed ashore. [A1:6.]

Searchers have found the Titanic off the coast of Newfoundland 73 years after
the luxury liner struck an iceberg on her maiden voyage and sank with the loss
of more than 1,500 lives, a team of American and French researchers announced.
They said they had verified the liner's identity with sophisticated new undersea
robots, cameras and sonar. [A1:1.]

The President opened his fall drive for an income tax simplification with a
blunt attack on the present system as ''unfair, unworkable and unproductive.''
Mr. Reagan stood in front of the bronze statue of Harry S. Truman in
Independence, Mo., and repeatedly linked his tax revision proposal to the
populist views that epitomized the Truman Presidency, strongly denying criticism
that the proposal favors the wealthy at the expense of middle America. [A1:2.]

Health-care officials trying to control the problem of medical incompetence say
many of their efforts are confounded by a disjointed, unwieldly and
loophole-ridden stytem of medical peer review. Many officials say the medical
disciplinary network is plagued with flawed laws, feuding officials,
underfinanced agencies and a fear among many physicians that if they take action
against incompetent colleagues they will be the target of costly lawsuits.
[A1:2-4.]

As the Discovery's crew prepared to return to earth, ground controllers
activated systems of the repaired Leasat 3 satellite and found it in apparently
excellent condition despite four months of dormancy. [C3:5-6.]

A glut of potatoes has lowered payments to Maine growers to 42 cents for a
10-pound bag, and they expect receipts to drop much more after the harvest
starts in earnest this month. The outlook is bleak because potato growers around
the country planted more acres this year and they have enjoyed enough rainfall
and no other major weather problems. [A14:1-2.]

Metropolitan

A spectacular fire in Passaic, N.J. engulfed a four-block industrial complex and
spread to several blocks of houses and apartment buildings, forcing the
evacuation of hundreds of people and leaving scores of families homeless. One
firefighter suffered a fatal heart attack and about 10 others were felled by
smoke and heat as the blaze burned out of control all afternoon and through the
night. The flames destroyed about 20 houses and small apartment buildings and a
cluster of nine factories. [A1:5.]

New York City's top water official, Joseph T. McGough Jr., said he would soon
advise Mayor Koch whether the city should compel the installation of water
meters in all of New York's 600,000 residential buildings as a conservation
measure. [A1:5-6.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Store, Then the Scent, and Now the Movie

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


FOR a while there, Manhattan's hopelessly trendy Upper West Side smelled more
exotic than usual. That was because the resident Yuppie pacesetters had been to
Bloomingdale's and were dousing themselves with something called Camp Beverly
Hills. Jeff Stein wasn't really very surprised.

''I thought it would do well,'' he said.

Mr. Stein is president of Camp Beverly Hills. Technically neither he, a
42-year-old New York lawyer turned California businessman, nor his partner, John
Lasker, whose father was president of the New York Stock Exchange, actually
developed the new, warm, overpoweringly sweet Southern California-style scent.
Colonia, a subsidiary of the House of 4711, did that.

What the partners did was to found the multimillion-dollar casual clothing
business seven years ago, then license its name for fragrances and cosmetics to
Colonia through Lorimar, the entertainment and advertising conglomerate. Now
comes the movie. The movie? ''Absolutely,'' Mr. Stein said. '' 'Camp Beverly
Hills' is about seven young people who meet in a store like Mel's Diner in
'American Graffiti.' They're 19 to 25 and out of high school. It'll take up
their problems, some issues, comedy, music.''

And the clothes will be from Camp Beverly Hills?

''You got it,'' Mr. Stein said. ''But it's a real movie. For theaters. We're
looking at the screenplay now. It should be out the summer of 1986.''

Mr. Stein is a serious man. His mother, Mrs. Rae Nelson, says he ''painted
magnificently'' as a boy. ''But his father thought that was a little out of the
way.'' So he went to New York University Law School. ''To please his mother and
father,'' she explained. She was surprised when he joined Columbia Pictures,
moved to California, and with Mr. Lasker opened the first store.

''Darling, no one in our family was ever in the retail business,'' she said
firmly. ''No one. We're real estate and the law.''

Maverick or not, Mr. Stein came east for the fragrance launch. He was tan,
confident and neatly tailored at Mr. and Mrs. Joshua L. Logan's cocktail party
for everyone involved in the promotion. His Army shirt and Gurkha pants came
from his store, and he topped it all with a white cotton twill jacket from Comme
des Garcons.

He thanked Colonia, Bloomy's, the Logans and a raft of public relations people
led by the irrepressible Audrey Wertheim, and said he hoped sales would benefit
the Actors Fund, Mrs. Logan's cause. That was after the irrepressible Mr. Logan,
the prodigious director-producer, serenaded guests (whom he described as
''uppity-up in the world'') with ''Nowhere to Go but Up'' from ''Knickerbocker
Holiday'' and ''The September Song.''

After that, Bloomingdale's launch was something of an anticlimax. The sale was
structured so anyone who bought a palm-logo chain flask ($18 to $38) had ''an
opportunity'' to have herself color photographed with a celebrity. Each
opportunity cost an extra $5. That money, matched by Colonia, went to the Actors
Fund.

There was only one hitch. The sale location was such that the ''hype people,''
as Miss Wertheim persisted in describing them, had to yell to attract attention,
an activity middle-management found ''not befitting the Bloomingdale's image.''
But Marvin Traub, Bloomy's president, came by. The hawking continued, he had his
picture taken and contributed $5.

Melba Moore was the big draw. Karen Akers's father was first in line to be
photographed with her. And Gilles Kohler, a soap opera hunk, was nice to women
who insisted on hugging him. Observing it all, Colonia executives were amused.

They hadn't expected so many old ladies to buy ''the splash.'' ''I don't know
how you explain that,'' said Harold Griffin, Colonia's P.R. man. ''Maybe because
it's so flowery.'' Like Chantilly, Ruffles or any of the really sweet perfumes.
But it doesn't matter.

Camp Beverly Hills had scored again. The fragrance grossed $250,000 the first
week. The parent company expects to gross more than $9 million this year. And if
there's a lesson here it has to do with the novel (some would say Yuppie) way in
which the empire is being built.

Arriving in California, Mr. Stein took a long look at the retailing successes
along Beverly Hills's fabled Rodeo Drive and pronounced them expensively
pretentious. ''Beverly Hills,'' he said, ''needed something more casual. Less
expensive. Not trendy.''

The first C.B.H. store was little more than an Army-Navy surplus outlet on Santa
Monica Boulevard: Men's clothes for men and women. Baggy. Unpressed. The
just-back-from Vietnam or ''I always sleep in my clothes'' look, and it worked.

Now, three stores (two in California, one in Great Neck, L.I.) and a wholesale
division later, the clothes are still casual, comfortable, inexpensive and very
trendy. Walk on Columbus Avenue in the West 70's or upper Madison Avenue, and
you can see the look. Or smell it. And wonder which theater will get the movie
first.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CALLS HANOI TALKS 'MOST POSITIVE' IN 12 YEARS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3


The Reagan Administration said today that talks last week with Vietnamese
officials in Hanoi were ''the most positive'' to date in the 12-year effort to
resolve the problem of Americans unaccounted for in the Vietnam War.

A State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said that ''I am pleased to
state that the talks were very productive'' and that the meeting ''took place in
a constructive atmosphere.''

Last Wednesday and Thursday, a four-member United States team led by Richard
Childress, the political and military affairs director of the National Security
Council staff, met with the acting Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Vo Dong Giang,
and with Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son.

Originally, a higher-level American delegation, led by Richard L. Armitage,
Assistant Secretary of Defense, and Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, had been scheduled to meet with
Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach. But when Mr. Thach informed Washington on Aug.
23 that he had to travel to Moscow, Mr. Armitage and Mr. Wolfowitz canceled
plans at the last minute to fly to Hanoi.

The assumption at that time in Washington was that the Vietnamese, who at first
had proposed ''high-level talks'' to resolve the question of unaccounted-for
Americans ''in two years,'' were having second thoughts. The lower-level
Childress mission was authorized to have ''technical talks.''

State Department officials said today that Mr. Childress, who was accompanied by
Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, was surprised to find the Vietnamese
officials ready, even at the secondary level, to discuss for the first time all
aspects of the issue.

''This was the first time that we had a totally nonpolemical discussion with the
Vietnamese,'' a State Department official said. ''They did not raise any
preconditions for cooperation.'' In previous meetings, Hanoi had indicated that
progress on the missing-in-action issue depended on the United States improving
relations with Vietnam or granting it foreign aid.

Neither issue was raised this time, but American officials believe that Hanoi
still hopes to achieve both.

During the talks, Mr. Redman said, the United States conveyed to the Vietnamese
''an outline of a process to resolve the issue in Vietnam within two years.''
Vietnam ''presented its own plan to resolve the issue in a short time.''

'A Number of Common Elements'

''There are a number of common elements between the two concepts,'' he said.

A total of 1,820 Americans in Vietnam are carried on one of two rolls - those
who were at one time listed as prisoners of war, or missing in action, and those
who were believed to be killed in action but whose bodies have not been
recovered. Despite movies that portray Americans being held in Vietnam, State
Department officials said there is no evidence to indicate that any are alive.
But there is a desire, they said, to clear up questions raised by reported
sightings of Westerners who could be Americans.

According to State Department officials, the United States suggested a
three-part approach to the Vietnamese: first, to obtain the release of any
prisoners or at least to resolve the issue of live prisoners; second, for the
Vietnamese to step up their efforts to recover the remains of dead Americans;
and third, to undertake surveys and excavations in areas where the United States
believes remains may be found.

The thrust of the American plan, a State Department official said, was for joint
American-Vietnamese efforts, with American teams being allowed to observe the
Vietnamese efforts and to aid in the search.

The Vietnamese, in their plan, put the stress on increased Vietnamese efforts
and showed little enthusiasm for joint teams, but did not rule the idea out, an
official said.

Hanoi Denies G.I.'s Are Alive

Hanoi denies that any missing Americans are still alive, officials said.

The most contentious issue deals with the Vietnamese turning over remains.
Washington believes that Hanoi has stored the remains of hundreds of Americans,
some of which it returns periodically to the United States. Most recently, Hanoi
turned over the remains of 26 Americans. Altogether, Vietnam has returned the
remains of 99 men.

State Department officials said the Vietnamese seem much more determined to deal
with the question of the unaccounted-for Americans. ''They know they have to do
so to improve relations with us,'' one State Department official said.

''We believe the talks were the most positive step yet in the ongoing process
toward resolution of this issue,'' Mr. Redman said.

Ever since the cease-fire agreement was signed in 1973 on ending the Vietnam
War, the United States has been seeking a full accounting of its men in Vietnam.
But the effort has had the highest priority in the Reagan Administration, which
was critical of the way past administrations dealt with the question.

The United States has said it would not improve relations with Hanoi until the
missing-in-action question was resolved and until Hanoi withdrew its forces from
Cambodia. The Vietnamese have occupied Cambodia since crushing the Communist
Government of Pol Pot in early 1979 but have recently said they foresaw pulling
out by 1990. There are believed to be about 160,000 Vietnamese in Cambodia
bolstering the Government of Heng Samrin.

U.S. Comments on Pol Pot

In another development, the State Department said it would be ''a positive
step'' if Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge, has actually retired from
active command of his forces. Since the Vietnamese victory over his forces in
1979, Mr. Pol Pot has led the Khmer Rouge in a continuing insurgency, with the
aid of China. There are two non-Communist rebel groups in Cambodia, one led by
the former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the other by Son Sann, a
former official in the old Cambodian Government.

Because the Pol Pot regime has been charged with the deaths of more than two
million Cambodians during its rule, the United States and most other countries
have had no contact with it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Robert C. Byrd and Mikhail Gorbachev (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
COACH WAS ALWAYS THERE

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


Bruce Gehrke was a high-school coach of such epic measure that he could be in
two places at once. It was not unusual for him to be at home in one town, yet at
the same time be patrolling the streets of Mineola, L.I., where he was the
football and basketball coach.

Jack Emmer, the lacrosse coach at West Point, is convinced he caught glimpses of
Gehrke's old station wagon wheezing along Jericho Turnpike in an effort to spot
his players coming home from the soda shop as late as 10 o'clock at night. But
John Waters, who is the athletic director at Papillon-LaVista High School in
Nebraska, thinks Gehrke may have been an apparition, like the Headless Horseman
or the Loch Ness Monster.

''I never saw him, myself,'' Waters says. ''But it was the idea that he might be
out there. . . .''

Those perhaps mythical evening prowls still loom in the minds of many who played
for Bruce Gehrke at Mineola High School from 1950 through 1975, until he died in
1976, at the age of 50, of a blood disease with almost no warning. The players
took the example of their coach with them to college, to work, to their adult
homes, and in the case of Rollie Stichweh, to the fire-raked hills of Vietnam
during the 1968 Tet offensive.

His former players call him ''Gurk,'' with a ''G'' as hard as the man, a rugged
6-foot-2-inch Navy veteran with a crewcut that had not changed since World War
II. Some people may have preferred a more flexible, more diplomatic model for an
educator, but to Jim Litterelle, who went on to play football at Penn State,
''Gurk was my idol; he was what I wanted to be when I grew up.''

Most teachers going back to work this month would hope one or two of their
pupils would feel that way about them; Bruce Gehrke's former players are forming
a network to nominate him for the National High School Sports Hall of Fame.

From 1958 through 1975, Gehrke's football teams won 91 games, lost 48, tied 6
and were awarded the Rutgers Cup, as the outstanding team in Nassau County, in
1960 and 1967. From 1950 through 1970, his basketball teams won 260 and lost
145, with a county title in 1959-60. He is the only coach in the history of his
county to win the Rutgers Cup in football and the Nassau basketball tournament.

The Hall of Fame award is not based upon a coach's own athletic achievement, yet
certainly the players were aware that Gehrke was the last Columbia University
athlete to earn letters in three sports, football, basketball and baseball, for
four years. He was the ''other end'' on the Columbia team that upset powerful
Army, with Bill Swiacki making a diving catch for a touchdown in 1947, and he
played two years for the New York Giants before finding his life's fulfillment.

''He enjoyed coaching that age group,'' says Jim Litterelle, who was voted the
Tom Thorp Award as the outstanding football player in Nassau in 1962. ''But I
don't think he would have liked coaching in college as much. It's like my
college coach, Joe Paterno. I think he'd go crazy if he left Penn State for the
pros.''

Jack Emmer, a star football and lacrosse player at Rutgers, recalls: ''He had
certain standards, and God forbid you should cross them. If you walked down the
hall holding hands with your girlfriend, he'd make you run a few extra laps and
he'd say something about 'your outside social interests.' ''

Even in the early 60's, the players knew Gehrke was a throwback, ''a simple
guy,'' Jack Emmer recalls, ''walking the sidelines in tattered sweat pants, a
beat-up baseball cap on his head. He wasn't pretty. He was not contemporary. He
wore these dreadful argyle socks his grandmother must have sewn, but nobody ever
kidded him about them.''

The players recall Gehrke talking about standards, not about victory. John
Waters, for whom Gehrke later arranged a much-needed scholarship to Peru State
(Neb.), recalls: ''We rode a bus to practice, and nobody ever talked. Gurk
didn't tell us that. We just knew. When we warmed up, there was no clapping or
loud chanting. He was not a rah-rah guy. He believed in simplicity, in doing a
few things perfectly.''

The coach made some enemies in the late 60's, when his players missed practices,
grew their hair and used foul language. Waters recalls returning to his alma
mater and finding Gehrke explaining to a mother why her son had to sit out a
game for violating the rules. When the mother had left, Gehrke told Waters,
''It's a great world - if you don't weaken.''

Gehrke's vision changed somewhat after he and his wife, Deidre, had three sons,
now 26, 24 and 20. Rollie Stichweh smilingly recalls Gehrke telling him that
boys ''need the freedom to just stare out the window and daydream'' - not a big
priority when Gehrke had been Stichweh's coach.

''By the early 70's, he had adjusted,'' says Robert Ricken, the superintendent
of the district. ''Bruce was a complex man, much more than just a jock. I
enjoyed talking with him, and I still talk about him as an example to students
and staff members.''

The relationship did not end when the players were graduated.

Rollie Stichweh vividly recalls being ''deeply depressed'' as a plebe at West
Point, thinking of resigning, and how Gehrke drove to the academy in a
snowstorm, ''and in the turning point of my life, reminded me of the necessity
to suck in your gut, no matter what the challenge.''

Stichweh recalls the tears on both their faces during the meeting, and how
Gehrke's words stayed with him in the victory over Navy and Roger Staubach in
1964, and the bitter times in Vietnam. Now a businessman in Massachusetts,
Stichweh, in his letter of support to the National High School Sports Hall of
Fame, calls Gehrke ''one of the finest coaches this country has produced.''

It is a tricky business trying to measure a high-school coach on any kind of
national basis. At the very least, Bruce Gehrke affected the lives of the people
he was supposed to affect, and he continues to affect them today, rumbling
through their consciences the way his beat-up old station wagon once rumbled
through the streets of Mineola, even on nights when he was not, in fact,
anywhere near the school district.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bruce Gehrke

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 863 words




International

Black mine workers halted a strike against selected gold and coal mines in South
Africa after less than three days. The mine workers' union said its decision to
end the walkout, called over pay demands, was taken to protect strikers from
threatened dismissal from their jobs and eviction from their homes. [Page A1,
Col.6.]

The President will meet the Kremlin ''halfway in an effort to solve problems,''
the White House said in response to critical remarks by Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
[A1:5.]

Moscow denied visas to 3 Americans who had planned to take part in the Fifth
Moscow International Book Fair, which opens next Tuesday. The three Americans -
Bernard Levinson, Robert Bernstein and Jeri Laber - have attended previous
Moscow book fairs. [C17:1-3.]

Less cool U.S.-Hanoi relations may be in prospect, the Reagan Administration
indicated. It said talks last week with Vietnamese officials in Hanoi were ''the
most positive'' to date in the 12-year effort to resolve the issue of Americans
unaccounted for in the Vietnam War. [A1:4-6.]

National

F.B.I. agents allowed Jackie Presser, the teamster union leader, to have ''no
show'' employees on the union payroll and later rejected several requests from
him to dismiss them, according to law enforcement officials. They said the
F.B.I. agents, who were using Mr. Presser as an informer, wanted the employees
retained to acquire information and because they feared that he might be harmed
if if he dismissed them. [A1:3-4.]

The Discovery glided safety to earth at Edwards Air Force Base in California,
completing what a space agency official called ''a near-perfect mission.''
[A14:1-2.]

Congress, returning from a recess, faces a series of major issues that will pit
the House against the Senate and both houses against President Reagan. This is
expected to make September one of the most fractious months of the year.
[D24:3-6.]

Chicago and Seattle teachers struck on the eve of classes. It is the third
walkout by the Chicago Teachers Union in three years. In Philadelphia, teachers
overwhelmingly approved a new three-year contract. [A14:1-3.]

Hurricane Elena fizzled out as it moved inland over Mississippi, Louisiana and
Arkansas. The storm, which had struck Mississippi's Gulf Coast with 125
mile-an-hour winds on Monday, had winds of only 15 miles an hour and was
downgraded to a tropical depression. [D25:1-3.]

The Titanic is intact with a hull ''like a museum piece,'' according to Dr.
Robert D. Ballard, the first person to view the 73-year-old wreck by television.
Dr. Ballard, the chief scientist of the American-French expedition that found
the luxury liner off Newfoundland, said that any salvage attempt would desecrate
the gravesite of the more than 1,500 people who died with the liner. [A15:1.]

Metropolitan

Fairchild Republic's aircraft plant in Farmingdale, L.I., would suffer if an Air
Force proposal to cancel a $3.5 billion program for a new training plane is
carried out. But officials said there was still a prospect the program could be
revived, either by a reversal within the Pentagon or in the House. The program
is the mainstay of the Long Island plant, which employs 3,600 people. [A1:4.]
CBS will offer early retirement to 2,000 employees, or about 7 percent of its
work force, to help pay for its costly effort to avert a takeover by Ted Turner,
the broadcasting entrepreneur. CBS said it would offer ''significantly
increased'' pension benefits to the employees, who are at least 55 years old and
have at least 10 years of pension credit. [A1:1.]

John J. McLaughlin was indicted on charges that included stealing more than
$250,000 from a woman he had represented as an attorney and financial trustee.
Mr. McLaughlin, who resigned last month as president of the New York City Health
and Hospitals Corporation, was also charged with filing false state tax returns
in 1982 and 1983, giving false information to city investigators and forging
airline tickets. [A1:2-3.]

Arsonists apparently set the fire that roared through a 40-acre industrial
complex in Passaic, N.J., on Labor Day, the authorities said. The spectacular
blaze destroyed 18 aged brick factories, damaged or destroyed 23 nearby houses,
leaving about 400 people homeless, and caused about $400 million in damage.
Officials said the fire destroyed 60 small manufacturing companies and left
2,200 workers jobless. [B3:3-5.]

A Police Cadet Corps will be started in New York City, Mayor Koch announced.
Under the program, college students will receive scholarships and police
training in exchange for a pledge to join the department after graduation. The
program is designed to attract more college graduates to the department - only
one-quarter of new police officers now have college degrees - and give them a
more realistic view of the work. [A1:1-3.]

Disputes over housing AIDS patients continued as Mayor Koch announced that he
was dropping a sharply disputed plan to move 10 homeless AIDS patients to a
city-owned nursing home in Rockaway Beach, Queens. Community residents had
angrily opposed the plan. [B3:6.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words


IN COUNTRY. By Bobbie Ann Mason. 245 pages. Harper & Row. $15.95.

PUBLISHED to much acclaim three years ago, Bobbie Ann Mason's ''Shiloh and Other
Stories'' possessed the texture and density of a finely-crafted novel - though
not interlinked, the stories worked together like episodes in a Robert Altman
movie, fitting snugly, side by side, to give one an extended glimpse of a
specific world. Miss Mason's setting was Kentucky - not the old Kentucky of
small towns and gracious farms, but that proud territory of the New South,
speckled with shopping malls and subdivisions, fast-food franchises and drive-in
movies, a shiny new place, vacuumed clean of history and tradition. Reeling from
the swiftness of the transition, Miss Mason's characters all seemed to wander
about in a fog, either spacing out in front of the television or passively
drifting away from their families and friends, aware, however dimly, that they
hadmisplaced something important along the way.

In her strong first novel, ''In Country,'' Miss Mason returns to this same
geographical and spiritual milieu, and she returns, too, to her earlier themes:
the dislocations wrought on ordinary, blue-collar lives by recent history - in
this case, recent history in the form of the Vietnam War. In that respect, ''In
Country'' may well remind readers of Jayne Anne Phillips's splendid novel
''Machine Dreams,'' for both books examine the intersection of that public event
with private lives, and both specifically look at the repercussions it had on
the psyches of young women who lost relatives to its horrors.

Miss Mason's narrative strategy and crackly voice, however, remain distinctly
her own. Whereas Miss Phillips built up to the war, using it as a coda to her
story of three generations - the disappearance of her heroine's brother in
Vietnam became a kind of symbol of the family's dissolution - Miss Mason uses it
as a starting point, moving backward from cold fact into a family's anomalous
history. It is only by coming to terms with the war that killed her father that
Miss Mason's heroine, Sam, can hope to discover her own relationship with him,
and her own identity as a late child of the 60's.

At 17, Sam has grown up in the town of Hopewell, almost thoroughly innocent of
history. One of her high school teachers tells her class that ''the biggies in
your lifetime were the moon landing, the assassinations, Vietnam, and
Watergate''; but Sam is only conscious of them vaguely, like events in a social
studies book. She pictures Vietnam as a place very much like Florida, a pleasant
countryside ''with beaches and palm trees and watery fields of rice and green
mountains'' and a sky ''crowded with wonderful aircraft - C-47s with Gatling
guns, Hueys, Chinooks, Skytrains, Bird Dogs,'' and she remembers thinking that
the death of Colonel Blake on the television series ''M*A*S*H'' seemed ''more
real to her than the death of her own father.''

Listening to her grandparents talk, Sam feels nostalgic for the old rules and
certainties that no longer exist, and listening to her mother's old collection
of Beatles records, she also feels nostalgic for the 60's that ushered in so
many of the changes. She envies the passion, the excitement of that decade;
certainly it makes her own existence - defined largely by watching television,
hanging out at the mall and working at the local burger joint - seem improvised
and vacant.

In fact, just about everyone around Sam seems afflicted by a similar
indifference and anomie. Her mother, Irene, has more or less erased her past,
having left behind her memories, along with her family, when she remarried and
moved away. Her Uncle Emmett, a Vietnam veteran who may be suffering from the
poisonous aftereffects of Agent Orange, has spent the years since his return
aimlessly hanging around the house, refusing to look for a job. Her boyfriend
Lonnie has also given up the idea of working - ''I wasn't getting anywhere,'' he
explains - and spends most of his time trying to think of ways to make the rest
of his time pass by. As for her unmarried friend Dawn, who's gotten pregnant,
she desultorily decides to have the baby because ''having a baby would be as
wild as anything I can think of.''

Like so many writers of her generation, Miss Mason chronicles these aimless
lives in prose that tends to be as laconic and stripped down as her characters'
emotional range. Where she parts company with such contemporaries as Ann Beattie
and Mary Robison, however, is in her willingness to venture the occasional
poetic image - ''up in the sky,'' she writes at one point, ''the daytime moon is
a white fingernail hanging against the pale blue'' - and in her desire to locate
some sort of pattern or meaning in her people's spiritual malaise. Sometimes
this can lead to rather strained configurations: Emmett's possible contamination
with Agent Orange becomes a blunt, obvious metaphor for the insidious
consequences of Vietnam; and Sam's attempt to imaginatively relive her father's
experience in the jungle by camping out in the woods feels more like a
novelist's contrived idea than a genuine gesture of passion.

Yet, all in all, the reader happily overlooks such miscalculations. It is Miss
Mason's largeness of ambition and generosity of vision that invests ''In
Country'' with the vitality of art; and her delineation of Sam's inner life
remains so assured, so spontaneous, that we are swept along in the story, our
trust sustained during such narrative lapses by our faith in the author's
intimate knowledge of her heroine. Miss Mason has not only mastered the way
teen-agers talk -their speech filled with allusions to television and
rock-and-roll, nonsequiturs and sarcastic comebacks -but she has also understood
and captured the ambivalence of youth: a young woman's craving for both
knowledge and pristine innocence, her need to be both idealistic and cool. In
doing so, Miss Mason has written a novel that, like a flashbulb, burns an
afterimage in our minds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Barbara Ann Mason

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 5, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOUGLAS AMARON

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Sept. 4


Douglas Amaron, a retired general superintendant of The Canadian Press, died
Tuesday in a Toronto hospital, where he had been admitted with a heart ailment.
He was 70 years old.

Born in the city of Quebec on Sept. 13, 1914, Amaron joined The Canadian Press,
the national newsgathering cooperative, in Montreal in 1936. He left in 1947 to
become managing editor of The Sherbrooke (Quebec) Record but rejoined the news
agency in 1953, becoming executive assistant and in 1963 general news editor.

He became general superintendent in 1969 and retired in 1979. After retirement
he did public relations work for the Canadian Bankers Association.

As a reporter he covered the World War II campaigns in Italy and Western Europe
for five years and was posted to Vietnam in 1966.

He is survived by his wife, Peggy; a son, Brian, who is living in Spain, and two
daughters, Estelle of Toronto and Beryl of Kelowna, British Columbia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPY SUSPECT SEEKS NAMES OF MILITARY SOURCES

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words


A naval intelligence analyst accused of espionage filed a motion yesterday
seeking to force the Federal Government to identify officials who might have
disclosed to the press part of the information he was later charged with
illegally disclosing.

The analyst, Samuel Loring Morison, was arrested by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation last October and charged with having classified intelligence
documents concerning an explosion at a Soviet naval base. The Government has
said that Mr. Morison provided a paraphrase of the documents to Jane's Defence
Weekly, a British publication that follows defense issues. The magazine
published an article in July, 1984, that the Government says was virtually
identical with the paraphrase it says Mr. Morison produced.

Mr. Morison was also charged with selling the publication American satellite
photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier under construction. His trial is set to
begin Oct. 8 in Federal District Court in Baltimore.

Lawyer Cites News Reports

Mark Lynch, a staff attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union, who is one
of Mr. Morison's lawyers, argued in the motion yesterday that information
regarding the explosion and its detection by satellite was widely reported in
June, 1984. News organizations attributed much of their information to
unidentified sources.

Mr. Lynch said the news reports indicated that the information regarding the
explosion was not closely held. And he said that if senior officials of the
Reagan Administration had disclosed the information, then any release of it by
Mr. Morison could not be considered potentially damaging to the nation's
security. To win a conviction on the espionage charge, Mr. Lynch said, the
prosecution must prove both that the information was closely held and that its
release represented a security threat.

But Michael Schatzow, the assistant United States attorney who is prosecuting
the case, said any material regarding the explosion that was disclosed to the
press by Government officials would be ''irrelevant'' to the case.

Motion Called 'Novel'

Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer who specializes in First Amendment cases, said
the motion was novel in that it sought to weaken the Goverment's case by
identifying the sources within Government who made disclosures to reporters.
Such a motion does not represent a threat to First Amendment freedoms, Mr.
Abrams said, but he described possible court action to force reporters to
disclose the sources as ''a grave threat.''

Mr. Lynch said defense lawyers were considering such an action as a last resort.
It would be an unusual move for the civil liberties organization, which has long
supported efforts by reporters to prevent courts from forcing the disclosure of
confidential sources.

The motion seeks information from the Defense, State and Justice Departments,
the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Council and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.

The motion asks for ''materials which identify individuals'' who disclosed
information about the explosion.

It also asked for a transcript of an interview given by Secretary of Defense
Caspar Weinberger on June 25, 1984, to news service reporters, or materials
concerning any investigation to discover the identities of the unidentified
sources refered to in news accounts.

The interview with Secretary Weinberger specificially named in the motion
resulted in a news service article quoted in the motion in which the Secretary
confirmed that there had been an explosion. The article also said that ''defense
sources'' said that the explosion ''was detected by U.S. spy satellites.''

Subpoenas Are Planned

In the event those who disclosed the information to reporters cannot be
identified, the motion seeks the identities of individuals who had access to the
information. Mr. Lynch said that he intended to subpoena them and question them
regarding disclosures. If the Government does not voluntarily comply, Mr. Lynch
said, defense lawyers would seek a court order.

Mr. Schatzow said that a formal response to the motion would be filed next week,
but he indicated that the Government's position would be to decline to comply
with the motion's request. ''I wouldn't have the first idea of how to go about
it,'' he said.

The case has prompted concern among news organizations and civil libertarians
because it defines Mr. Morison's providing classified material to a publication
as espionage. According to First Amendment lawyers, the only other such case
involved similar charges following publication of a Defense Department study of
the Vietnam War, known as the Pentagon Papers. In that case, charges were
dismissed without resolution of any distinction between espionage and news
leaks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Samuel Loring Morison (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REFUGEES ARE MOVED INTO HARM'S WAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Sept. 4


Last December the people of Site 7, a Cambodian refugee camp in Thailand also
known as Bang Poo, had begun to build new lives.

They had come to Site 7 after being driven out of Rithisen, a large settlement
inside Cambodia that had come under attack Dec. 25 by Vietnamese troops. All are
followers of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, one of the three
Cambodian guerrilla groups fighting the Vietnamese.

At Site 7, some had planted vegetable patches and started improving their small
bamboo homes.

But the Thai Government has now begun moving tens of thousands of people from
the security of Site 7, six miles inside Thailand, to a new camp further east,
within a mile or two of the Cambodian border.

For most of the 55,000 people to be evacuated, it will be the third move in nine
months.

Little Houses Torn Down

This week, a reporter visiting the camp saw the little bamboo houses being torn
down and carted away, leaving behind squash vines and flowers. Pieces of broken
houses bounced and crashed on the backs of trucks headed over the rutted dirt
roads to the Thai-Cambodian frontier.

Leaders of the displaced Cambodians say the move, which will consolidate all but
about 11,000 of the civilian followers of the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front at one border site, will also place them within close range of Vietnamese
artillery.

Thou Thon, the Cambodian civilian administrator of Site 7 camp, once an optimist
who was considered the border's model camp director, shrugged his shoulders
helplessly when asked about how he could keep up spirits.

''I can't see my future, either,'' he said. ''If there is fighting this year, we
cannot avoid the shelling.''

Only Sanctuary, Not Asylum

The followers of the non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front
account for about half of the 225,000 displaced Cambodian civilians who have
been given temporary sanctuary, not asylum, in Thailand because of fighting in
Cambodia.

Thai officials say the Government's intention is to return the evacuees to
Cambodian soil as soon as it is safe to do so. But refugee leaders and
international relief workers say that such a situation is not likely to prevail
soon and that the border camp, called Site 2, is itself vulnerable to attack.

Steps are being taken by the United Nations Border Relief Operation to prepare
another site six or seven miles deeper inside Thailand in case the area around
Site 2 comes under Vietnamese shelling, as it did repeatedly earlier this year.

The Vietnamese, who today fired into Thailand farther south during a clash with
Khmer Rouge rebels, are reported by Thai military officials to be strengthening
their forces north of here also, closer to Site 2. Thai officials express
confidence in their border security, however, and say they will not expose the
refugees to unnecessary danger.

Trucks began arriving early this morning at Site 7, adjacent to Thailand's
refugee holding center at Khao I Dang, 12 miles north of Aranyaparthet, to move
more than 3,000 displaced Cambodians and their possessions 30 miles northeast to
Site 2, a growing camp near the Dang Rek mountain range. When the move is
completed within a month, the authorities say, more than 55,000 people will have
been transferred from Site 7 to Site 2. #10,000 Moved in August Mr. Thon, the
Site 7 administrator, said an advance party of nearly 10,000 residents had been
moved in August, before heavy rains and other problems halted the relocation
that resumed today. The Thai Government has said that the move will alleviate
problems of overcrowding at Site 7.

The Khmer People's National Liberation Front, one of two non-Communist groups in
the three-way guerrilla alliance fighting the Vietnamese, has the largest
civilian exile following, but only about half the number of fighters fielded by
the Communist rebels, the Khmer Rouge. The third group is composed of followers
of Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

In the atmosphere of uncertainty, rumors are circulating among the refugees that
the Vietnamese may be planning to abduct them. Chea Sokha, a young man at Site
7, said Liberation Front spies had returned from Cambodian with stories of
''re-education'' camp being prepared to house border people forcibly
repatriated. ''Spies say the local Cambodian people have already been told to
supply food,'' he said.

The refugees at Site 7 say they are frightened to move not only because of the
Vietnamese, but also because the Dang Rek Mountains harbor brigand gangs whose
number is increasing.

''They come in with rifles at night, sometimes 16 of them,'' a young refugee at
Site 2 said.

Kem Sonn, who was coordinating the building of houses and distribution of food
at Site 2, said Tuesday: ''Security is our major problem. They have guns. We are
unarmed.'' #60,000 From Other Camps At Site 2, the former residents of Rithisen
and Site 7 will join more than 60,000 other Liberation Front followers from
other camps who had been previously settled at the border. Many of them have
also moved several times in the last year. In addition, there is a holding
center for Vietnamese who flee their country across Cambodia.

Son Sann, the Liberation Front president, said in a recent interview that he had
expressed his concern to the Thai Government about the risks of concentrating as
many as 120,000 people in such a vulnerable place. He said he had asked that the
move be delayed, but the request has not been granted.

Refugee leaders and relief officials say morale becomes a major problem when
dislocation is so frequent and the future is fraught with uncertainty.

Mr. Son Sann said he was concerned about the opportunity for indiscipline and
lawlessness among his followers, who have never been so strictly controlled as
the civilian camp followers of the Khmer Rouge.

But the Khmer Rouge are also frightened. Today at Site 8, about 40 miles south
of this border town, the civilian administrator of the largest Khmer Rouge camp
took a reporter to the window of his bamboo and thatched ''office'' and pointed
to a sharp rock outcropping less than a mile away.

''The Vietnamese are there, in the mountains,'' he said. ''We think they will
shoot when the dry season comes.''

The Cambodian guerrilla leadership acknowledges that it is in a difficult
position in Thailand, which allows in large numbers of civilians for sanctuary.
Guerrilla fighters also slip back and forth across the border between raids in
Cambodia. Without Thai sanctuary, casualties would be very high.

Crime Said to Increase

Thai officials say the annual influx of refugees - this year larger than at any
time in the seven-year-old war that followed Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in
1978 - is a burden on the local villagers and national Government alike. There
have been reports of increased crime around the camps, as smugglers enter and
leave by night, sometimes exchanging fire with border patrols.

There are also growing fears among some Thais that the Government has been too
openly supportive of the guerrilla armies and risks antagonizing the much
stronger Vietnamese, perhaps even to the point of a Vietnamese attack on
Thailand.

Vietnam, with the world's fourth largest armed force, is thought by diplomats in
the region to have about 160,000 soldiers in Cambodia, armed with artillery,
tanks and helicopters.

''We have boxed ourselves in diplomatically, militarily, in every way,'' said
Sukhumbhand Paribata, of Thailand's Institute of Security and International
Studies at Chulalongjorn University in Bangkok.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cambodian refugees (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Perot, Computer Executive, To Receive Churchill Award

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


H. Ross Perot, the computer entrepreneur who organized a 1979 rescue mission to
free two of his employees imprisoned in Iran and once underwrote a plan to
liberate American captives in Vietnam, will receive the Winston Churchill Award,
it was announced yesterday.

The award, which is given from time to time by the Winston Churchill Foundation
of the United States, will be presented to Mr. Perot at a dinner in Dallas in
February. The two previous recipients are W. Averell Harriman, the American
politican and diplomat, and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain.

''Mr. Perot, like Churchill, is one of the remarkable men of his time,'' John L.
Loeb Jr., president of the Churchill foundation, said in announcing the award.
The foundation was formed in 1959 by admirers of Churchill to honor him and
encourage a spirit of British-American cooperation.

Mr. Perot, who said yesterday that Churchill had long been his personal hero, is
chairman of the Electronic Data Systems Corporation. He founded the Dallas-based
company in 1962 with $1,000 and sold it last year to General Motors for $2.5
billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 7, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CLASSIC WORK CLOTHERS: ENDANGERED SPECIES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GROSS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 48, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words


Classic American work clothes such as chambray shirts, chinos, overalls and
surplus military uniforms were once worn primarily by working men. Ever since
the days of Pop and protest, however, they have become fashion statements for
both men and women.

The designer Ralph Lauren is probably best known for his high-fashion versions
of utilitarian garments. Jeans by Marithe and Francois Girbaud bear close
resemblance to Vietnam-era battle fatigues. Retail chains like Banana Republic
and Reminiscence stock a scattering of true classics, but mostly offer
re-creations of historical designs.

Those who seek the cheap chic of traditional American-made originals must look
elsewhere. Finding them isn't as easy as it used to be. But it can be done.

The Vanishing Chambray

Once, work clothes were available at almost any country store. No longer. A
clerk at the Speculator (N.Y.) Department Store in the Adirondacks shakes his
head ruefully at a request for a blue cotton chambray work shirt and says they
are no longer manufactured. At the Hudson Valley Department Store in Rhinebeck,
N.Y., all that's on sale are ''chambrays'' that are 65 percent polyester.
Natural-fiber, American-made work clothes are increasingly hard to find outside
of costlier advertised-brand, fashion and designer lines. Levi Strauss makes an
all-cotton chambray shirt that sells in New York for $19 to $25. Banana
Republic's costs $36. A chambray shirt with a Ralph Lauren label costs $40 at
Saks Fifth Avenue.

An abiding affection for true work clothing and military wear stems from an
appreciation of its basic, low-cost quality. John Weitz, the designer, collects
hunter's socks and loose work dungarees. ''Real dungarees,'' he says, ''are not
jeans. The trick is to find the original.'' Mr. Weitz buys his work wear in Sag
Harbor, L.I., and at the 59th Street Army/Navy Store (221 East 59th Street),
where his salesman ''knows he can't horse me around with labels,'' he says.

'We're Good Lookers'

At Kaufman Surplus Inc. (319 West 42d Street), one of Manhattan's surviving
work-wear specialty stores, Jim Korn, the owner, discusses his stock with the
pride of an environmentalist ticking off species he's saved from extinction. The
Five Brothers brand flap-pocket chambray shirts that Kaufman's sells for $12.99
''took us a long time to find,'' Mr. Korn says. ''They are a disappearing
item.'' He points out more endangered breeds: railroad engineer's striped cotton
shirts, selling for $18.99 to $24.99, and chinos made to military
specifications. ''Nobody can find them,'' Mr. Korn says, pointing to a rack of
new and used pants in khaki, black, gray and white that sell for $15 to $22.50.
''We're good lookers,'' he explains.

According to Eugene Mark, president of the GMP Sales Company, a garment
wholesaler in Manhattan, the basic work-wear business ''has petered out.''
Several factors account for its decline. Manufacturers frequently cite
competition from imports made in countries where labor costs are low. ''The
business is going to countries where you can pay 50 cents a day,'' says Henry
Gitenstein, senior vice president of the Riverside Shirt and Underwear
Corporation, which has its offices in Manhattan. The cost of all-natural fabric
has also risen tremendously. When Morty Appleton, president of Wolf Appleton
Inc., another Manhattan wholesale jobber, entered the business in the
mid-1940's, cotton chambray shirts wholesaled for $7.50 a dozen, he recalled.
The same quantity costs $102 at wholesale today.

Consumers also hastened the move away from natural fibers. ''Working people
today wear sports clothes'' on the job, Mr. Appleton says. ''The same factories
that made chinos are now making slacks that sell for two to three times as
much.'' Markups and profits are accordingly higher. Thus familiar work-wear
labels like Levi's, Lee and Wrangler now appear on a wide variety of ''related
but more sophisticated'' clothes, according to Meredith Sheperd, a vice
president of the Washington Manufacturing Company in Nashville, which markets
the Dee-Cee line. Oshkosh B'Gosh Inc., the Wisconsin-based work-wear
manufacturer, has also had great success in selling children's clothing in
department stores. ''A basic work-clothes manufacturer of the past would not be
in business today,'' says Martin Fine, the fourth-generation owner of M. Fine &
Sons in Louisville, Ky., which makes all-cotton chambray, chamois, flannel and
Western shirts bearing the Five Brothers label. ''We make whatever sells.''

Manufacturers explain that work-wear purchasers are primarily the wives of
working men, who these days often work themselves, but in any case prefer the
convenience of easy-care, blended fabrics. ''Permanent-press poly-cottons look
better,'' Mr. Mark contends. ''People have to wash those things,'' adds Ann
Richardson, merchandise manager of the Williamson-Dickie Manufacturing Company,
a major work-wear manufacturer in Fort Worth. ''Our customer is not your
natural-fiber yuppie. We've had an all-cotton khaki work pant, and it just
doesn't sell.'' Prisons are a big purchaser of Riverside Shirt's all-cotton
products, but, Mr. Gitenstein says, ''you've got a captive labor force'' to iron
them.

Sears, Roebuck & Company, which calls itself the ''No. 1 retailer of clothes for
the working man,'' sells many natural-fabric garments, but its work-wear
catalogue primarily shows blends. Sales of Dickies in natural fibers are
''infintesimal compared to blends,'' Mrs. Richardson says.

Foiling Night-Vision Devices

Even all-cotton military uniforms are increasingly hard to find. After the
Vietnam War, the military began looking for fabrics that would not reflect
infared lightwaves in order to foil enemy night-vision devices, and settled on a
50 percent nylon-50 percent cotton twill, according to John Poiesz of the
Defense Personnel Support Center in Philadelphia. When the new uniforms were
first used in combat, in Lebanon and Grenada, soldiers complained of the heat,
so the military has now developed all-cotton tropical fatigues. Temperate-zone
uniforms are still blends, however. Other changes in American military dress
have made olive-drab fatigues and 13-button wool melton Navy bell-bottoms
obsolete. Fatigues are now largely manufactured in woodland and desert
camouflage patterns, and new Navy bell-bottoms come in a wool-polyester blend
because the traditional melton fabric ''is so expensive the Government can't
consider making any more,'' says Mr. Korn of Kaufman's.

Many army-navy stores have changed, too. Some, like Ar-Bee (1598 Second Avenue,
at 83d Street), stock mostly well-known brands. Others, like the block-long
Hudson's (97 Third Avenue, at 12th Street), have shunted military surplus and
work wear into corners in favor of sweatclothes, printed T-shirts and
sportswear.

Drawstring-Bottom Fatigues

But shoppers can still find surplus and work-wear bargains. Hudson's has
olive-drab G.I. sweaters for $9.98. Kaufman's and its main competitor, Weiss &
Mahoney (142 Fifth Avenue, at 19th Street), both retain large stocks of khaki
and olive-drab surplus. A best-selling item this fall is drawstring-bottom,
heavy cotton jungle fatigues that compare favorably to fashion brands in quality
and design, and, at $30 to $35, match or beat them in price. A.B.C. Army and
Navy (2050 Lexington Avenue, at 124th Street) stocks all-cotton chinos for
$13.98. Used chinos at Weiss & Mahoney go as low as $2.95. Items as diverse as
engineer's-stripe caps ($3.99), Oshkosh overalls ($24.99) and surplus Navy-issue
peacoats ($79.99) can all still be found at Kaufman's. At Dave's Army and Navy
(779 Avenue of the Americas, near 27th Street), denim shirts are $22, and
chambray shirts are only $8.

All-natural American work clothes are ''all definitely still available'' for
those willing to seek them out, says Bob Levy, owner of Dave's. Ray Peterson,
general manager of the work-wear division at Oshkosh, says work clothes ''had
really been a dying category,'' but lately he has seen ''a dramatic turnaround -
the American story is starting to make some sense again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of fashions (NYT/Gene Maggio; Model; Elly Gibson,
Powers/Foster-Fell Agency)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND SOVIET SET HIGH-LEVEL TALKS ON THE FAR EAST

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


The Soviet Union has agreed for the first time to hold high-level talks with the
United States on their differences over Indochina, Korea and other areas of
potential trouble in the Far East, State Department officials said today.

They said that Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs, would lead a three-member delegation to Moscow for
discussions next Thursday and Friday with Mikhail S. Kapitsa, the Deputy Foreign
Minister in charge of Asian affairs, and other experts.

The Reagan Administration has been seeking full-scale talks on Asia with the
Russians since 1981, officials said, because of the continued tensions in
Indochina due to the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. The occupation is backed
by military, economic and political help from Moscow.

Talks Proposed Last Month

The Asian talks were proposed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz during his
meeting with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, in Helsinki
last month, State Department officials said.

This is the latest in a series of relatively unpublicized high-level discussions
by the superpowers on regional problems that have the potential for widening
into major conflicts. In the last year, the two sides have discussed the Middle
East, Afghanistan, and southern Africa.

Little Is Said Publicly

Because countries in the various regions are sensitive about having Moscow and
Washington talk about them without taking part themselves, neither side has
chosen to say much publicly about the talks. But the talks are seen here as
important because they deal with those parts of the world in which war involving
the superpowers is more likely to erupt than in Europe, where both sides already
face each other with large-scale nuclear-armed forces.

Such regional questions will be a major part of the meeting between President
Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, in Geneva on Nov. 19 and 20,
and will be discussed when Mr. Shultz and Mr. Reagan meet with Mr. Shevardnadze
during his visit to the United Nations and Washington later this month,
officials said.

'It Is Helpful'

''Our main philosophy is that it is helpful to be as clear as possible about one
another's position toward situations which could lead to wider conflicts and
that a clear understanding of our positions will help to avoid additional
crises,'' a senior official said.

The official said Mr. Wolfowitz will raise with the Russians the
Administration's concern over what it regards as a threatening Soviet military
buildup in the Far East. In recent months the Soviet Union has begun modernizing
the arsenal of North Korea with advanced MIG-23 aircraft. It has also created
the largest overseas Soviet naval and air base at Cam Ranh Bay, a former
American base in South Vietnam.

An official said Moscow has also increased the number of its divisions on the
Chinese border to 55, from about 50 four years ago, and has begun heavily
deploying long-range Backfire bombers out of Vladivostok, giving the Soviet
Union an ability to penetrate the Pacific much more widely than before.

In recent weeks, there have been signs that Vietnam has an increased interest in
lowering tensions in Southeast Asia. Three weeks ago, in talks with American
officals, it professed willingness to resolve questions dealing with Americans
unaccounted for in the Vietnam war. A senior official said Mr. Wolfowitz will
urge the Soviet side to use its influence with the Vietnamese to bring about
negotiations with its neighbors to end the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam was in the Soviet Union last month
for talks with top Soviet leaders, and some officials believe the trip was
scheduled to allow the Soviet side to be prepared for the Wolfowitz mission.
American officials said they expect the Soviet side to repeat Moscow's view that
the problems in Indochina are caused by the continued Western and Chinese
backing for the Khmer Rouge, the main guerrilla force in Cambodia that had been
headed by Pol Pot before his announced retirement last week.

Korea a Source of Tension

A senior State Department official said Mr. Wolfowitz will not be negotiating
with the Russians about solving any local issue. But, he added, ''obviously, if
a clear and forceful exposition of our position can move things forward in a
positive direction, we'll welcome it.''

A major area of trouble for the two sides is Korea, where American officials say
the Soviet Union in recent months has increased its influence through high-level
visits and the first major influx of advanced Soviet military systems in years.
The Soviet Union has begun supplying MIG-23's to North Korea, officials said, in
addition to stationing them in Cam Ranh Bay.

The North and South Korean Red Cross organizations recently held talks on
reunifying families, and economic discussions have also been held. So far, there
have been no breakthroughs on easing tensions between the halves of Korea,
officials said. But, with the 1988 Olympic Games due to be held in Seoul, South
Korea, there is hope here that there will be some rapprochement to prevent the
Games from again becoming a source of international tension, as they were when
they were held in Moscow in 1980 and in Los Angeles in 1984.

China is not seen as a ''regional issue'' as such, but is sure to be discussed,
a senior State Department official said. Moscow and Peking have recently signed
accords on improving economic and trade ties and on widening contacts, but
tensions persist along the border. The Russians may raise the question of their
concerns about any American military sales to China, an official said.

American officials said that they expect the Soviet Union to express concern
about increased military spending in Japan, and that the United States will in
turn complain about the continued Soviet unwillingness to discuss the return of
Japanese islands seized at the end of World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PHOTOJOURNALISM MAKES A COMEBACK

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 43, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1669 words


Photojournalism - photography's most visible claim to fame as recently as 25
years ago - is back. Galleries and museums, whose ostensible interest in the
medium is as a form of art, are turning their attention this fall to images made
primarily for the sake of reportage, not personal expression. On the agenda are
major retrospectives of the legendary careers of Robert Capa and W. Eugene Smith
(each accompanied by a biography), a historical survey of war photography from
the Crimea to Nicaragua, and new insights into the work of Henri
Cartier-Bresson, Andre Kertesz and William Klein, each of whom has influenced
today's photojournalistic style.

The renewed interest in photojournalism is mainly historical; most of the
attention is being focused on work done in the 1930's, 40's and 50's.
Nevertheless, it seems to reflect a new sense of vitality within the genre -
and, possibly, a renewal of social consciousness throughout the culture. It also
reflects a growing dissatisfaction with the ability of so-called art photography
to grapple with issues that are political, rather than esthetic or
psychological.

The shift is not without irony, however. The arena of art photography, which
first seized center stage from photojournalism and now seems ready to cede it
back, remains in control. For the shows and books we will be seeing are not
photojournalistic in conception and design, but rather view photojournalism as a
wellspring of artistic imagery. This revisionism is indisputably well-intended
(artists have more cachet than reporters), but its effect is to alter - however
slightly - the meanings of the pictures by re-contextualizing them. In short,
photojournalism is not displacing art photography. It is being incorporated into
the fine-art fold, joining fashion, advertising and topographic survey
photography as subjects for scholarship and delectation.

Surely the most glamorous photojournalist of all time was Robert Capa, whose
career, from the 30's to his death in 1954, seems to have consisted of
alternating bouts of combat photography and romance. Among his best-known
photographs are one of a falling soldier presumably at the instant of his death,
and one of the D-Day landing taken from the vantage point of the English
Channel. Among his best-known romantic interests was the actress Ingrid Bergman.
More than 150 of Capa's photographs go on view Saturday at the International
Center of Photography, an institution founded by his brother, Cornell Capa. The
exhibition is accompanied by two books: a biography by Richard Whelan, which
details the Bergman affair and much else, and a catalogue of his pictures edited
by Mr. Capa and Mr. Whelan.

Concurrent with the Robert Capa retrospective at the center will be an
exhibition of 60 portraits by Henri Cartier-Bresson, who with Capa helped found
the photo agency Magnum shortly after World War II. The show marks the
publication of a book of 255 of Cartier-Bresson's portraits taken over 50 years,
called ''Henri Cartier-Bresson Photoportraits.'' Fans of Capa and
Cartier-Bresson will also take pleasure in ''From the Magnum Archives:
Photographs 1932-1967,'' a show at the Pace-MacGill Gallery consisting of prints
selected from the agency's picture files and recycled into objects for sale.

The man to follow Capa as the most admired photojournalist of his time was W.
Eugene Smith. His classic photo essays for Life magazine, done in the late 40's
and early 50's, together with his later documentary projects on Pittsburgh and
Minamata, Japan (a town exposed to mercury poisoning), will be included in a
250-print show at the Philadelphia Museum of Art opening next month. It will be
the first retrospective of Smith's career since his death in 1978. If the City
of Brotherly Love seems too distant, one has two choices: wait until the show
wends its way to the International Center of Photography next year, or grab a
copy of the accompanying Aperture book, which contains an intriguing
biographical essay by Ben Maddow.

A third photojournalist worth the trouble of traveling to see is Carl Mydans,
whose retrospective opens this week at the Institute for Contemporary Art in
Boston after premiering at the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth. Mydans is, with
Capa and Smith, part of a select circle of extraordinary photographers of World
War II. Anyone wanting to learn more about war photography as an act of courage
and as an instrument of persuasion should see the shows of all three.

And then there is what promises to be the most comprehensive collection of war
photography ever assembled: ''The Indelible Image: Photographs of War, 1846 to
the Present.'' Its 200-plus pictures, many of them anonymous and unknown, were
uncovered by Frances Fralin of the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, but
the show opens Sept. 25 at New York University's Grey Art Gallery. The
well-known photographers it includes range from Mathew Brady, image impresario
of the Civil War, to Larry Burrows, arguably the greatest photographer of
Vietnam. (A chance to see the face of post-Vietnam photojournalism won't really
come until next March, when a traveling exhibition called ''On the Line: The New
Color Photojournalism,'' with Mary Ellen Mark, Susan Meiselas, Gilles Peress,
Alex Webb and eight others, opens at the Walker Arts Center in Minneapolis.) Not
all photojournalism is of wars, of course. Just how far afield it can range will
be obvious when the final installment of the Corcoran Gallery's three-part
survey, ''The New York School,'' opens there Oct. 26. Featuring work by Diane
Arbus, Bruce Davidson, Richard Avedon and others, the exhibition argues the
existence of a ''New York documentary style.'' Happily, part three will include
a recapitulation of parts one and two, for those who missed them. Unhappily,
this show-of-shows ready-made for a New York City audience isn't scheduled to be
shown here.

The sad fact, this fall more than any other, is that some of the most promising
exhibitions being organized in photography manage to avoid New York altogether.
This is certainly true of two of the year's most important exhibitions: ''In the
American West,'' Richard Avedon's remarkable life-size and larger portraits of
miners, drifters and drinkers, sponsored by the Amon Carter Museum in Houston,
and ''L'Amour fou: Photography and Surrealism,'' opening at the Corcoran Gallery
in Washington. ''In the American West,'' a significant milestone in Avedon's
journey across the grain of fashion, seems to be traveling everywhere but New
York. It will get as close as the Corcoran, in December, and some of the
portraits will be shown at the Pace-MacGill Gallery the same month. ''L'Amour
fou'' (the phrase, alluding to boundless love, is appropriated from the writings
of Andre Breton) is the eagerly awaited study by the contentious art historian
Rosalind Krauss and the Corcoran's Jane Livingston of the wealth of incongruous
photographic imagery made between the world wars by the likes of Man Ray and
Rene Magritte. Its travels include stops in San Francisco, Paris and London.

The situation may change, however. The Metropolitan Museum of Art has a new
photography curator in Maria Morris Hambourg, the Atget scholar. Unlike her
counterparts at the Museum of Modern Art, Mrs. Hambourg seems open to playing
host to shows originated outside her own domain. In addition, the International
Center of Photography is readying a new midtown space - donated by the
International Paper Company - for an October opening, which will give it the
ability both to harbor more exhibitions from out of town and to enlarge its own
esthetic base.

Meanwhile, there is no dearth of local activity. The Metropolitan's once-delayed
Kertesz show, organized with the Art Institute of Chicago, arrives in December.
Among its 161 pictures are some of the nonagenarian's most poetic images. A key
figure of the 1950's - and of any account of a postwar ''New York School''
-William Klein, will be showing new photographs, as bold and frenetic as ever,
at Zabriskie Gallery late next month. And for relief from the clash and clamor
of photojournalism, try the Brooklyn Museum in November, where the sweet-sad
strains of summer will linger in the form of Joel Meyerowitz's ''Summer's Day''
- 66 color photographs that recall not only the season past but also the
photographer's earlier success, ''Cape Light.'' More Meyerowitz can be savored
at the Daniel Wolf Gallery in December.

Also in the contemporary arena, the Museum of Modern Art has just weighed in
with its view of the new, choosing Zeke Berman, Antonio Mendoza, Judith Ross and
Michael Spano as heralds of ''New Photography'' (now through Dec. 3). Other
options include Lois Conner's platinum panoramas of China (at Marcuse Pfeifer,
beginning Saturday), Robert Adams's nighttime reveries (Burden Gallery, starting
Tuesday) and Susan Unterberg's and Gay Block's explorations of family
relationships (through Oct. 5 at Laurence Miller). And the phenomenally
successful Cindy Sherman will again test the limits of her self-absorbing genre
next month, at Metro Pictures. But the most chic show of all may be ''Weird
Beauty,'' organized by Carol Squires at the Palladium Dance Club starting Sept.
26.

As for the past, the season brings to view such classic figures in 20th-century
photography as Ilsa Bing, Florence Henri, Clarence John Laughlin and Christian
Schad (at Zabriskie, Daniel Wolf, Robert Miller and Prakapas Galleries,
respectively). None is currently considered central to the development of the
medium, but all made charming pictures that have attracted at least a cult
following. And who in photography has a following that's not cult-sized? The
late Ansel Adams, for one, whose 75-print ''museum set'' of what he considered
his greatest work goes on exhibit at the National Gallery of Art Oct. 6, in a
show titled ''Ansel Adams: Classic Images.'' This, together with the Corcoran
Gallery's ''L'Amour fou'' show, makes a fall trip to the capital almost
mandatory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article about photojournalism in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday
misstated the time and place of a Carl Mydans exhibition. It opens this
Wednesday at the Boston University Art Gallery. Elsewhere in the article, and in
an accompanying caption, the Amon Carter Museum was located incorrectly. It is
in Fort Worth.

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Richard Avedon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THEATER: SEASON PREMIER;
ON BROADWAY, THE ACCENT WILL BE DECIDEDLY BRITISH

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2021 words


Surveying the theater season used to be a simpler thing.

Only a generation ago, theater was Broadway and September was the time new shows
lined up like incoming planes at LaGuardia on a Friday night. Occasionally the
artistic radar picked up a blip from London, Los Angeles or downtown Manhattan,
but Broadway was unquestionably the center.

The coming season shows just how interwoven and interdependent the theater world
has become. And ''world'' is the operative word. Broadway will evidence a
decidedly British accent, with a number of notable imports among both dramas and
musicals. While the works of two of America's greatest playwrights, Eugene
O'Neill and Tennessee Williams, also will grace Broadway, their leading
contemporary heirs will work primarily Off and Off Off Broadway. And the work of
foreign playwrights, from South Africa to Poland to Peru, will find stages in
New York.

At least that's how it looks now. Any theater season is a study in hype, luck
and surprise. Who could have guessed last September that ''Big River'' would be
selling out now? That ''Grind,'' with talent like Ben Vereen and Harold Prince,
would already be a $5 million memory? Serendipity is the soul of theater.

The most significant event of the coming year, artistically if not commercially,
is the return of live theater to Lincoln Center. After five years of almost
total darkness in the Vivian Beaumont and Mitzi Newhouse theaters, the new
regime of the director Gregory Mosher and the producer Bernard Gersten will
begin a three-play season in the late fall at the 299-seat Newhouse. The
selections have not been made final but the likely prospects are: David Mamet's
''Shawl,'' a psychological mystery starring Mike Nussbaum and Lindsay Crouse; a
play by John Guare, the author of ''Landscape of the Body,'' and either Athol
Fugard's ''Road to Mecca,'' a drama about political and artistic soul-searching,
or a revival of Mr. Fugard's ''Blood Knot.'' (The latter production, starring
Mr. Fugard and Zakes Mokae as South African brothers, will play at the Yale
Repertory Theater late this month.) As for Broadway, after a season in which it
took nine months for a hit musical to appear in the form of ''Big River,'' the
first candidate arrives only two weeks after Labor Day. ''Song and Dance'' is
the latest musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose Broadway hits include ''Cats''
and ''Evita.'' The musical stars Bernadette Peters, a Tony Award nominee in
''Sunday in the Park With George,'' as an Englishwoman in America; its conceit
is that the first act is entirely sung and the second entirely danced.

''Song and Dance'' also sets the English tone for much of Broadway this season.
One of the season's other musicals is the Royal Shakespeare Company's ''Poppy.''
Described by its director Terry Hands as a ''fairy tale with teeth,'' ''Poppy''
uses Panto - an English amalgam of vaudeville, pantomime and music - to satirize
English involvement in the opium trade. Yet another musical, ''The Mystery of
Edwin Drood'' is written by an American, Rupert Holmes, and was first produced
by Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival in Central Park this summer, but
it is modeled on the Charles Dickens novel. ''Edwin Drood,'' directed by Wilford
Leach and starring Betty Buckley in the title role, is scheduled to open at the
Imperial on Dec. 2.

Broadway's other musical possibilities include: ''The News,'' a look at the
editor of a New York tabloid, set to open Oct. 24 at the Helen Hayes; a revival
of ''Sweet Charity'' starring Debby Allen of television's ''Fame,'' due in the
spring at the Minskoff; ''Captain America,'' starring 1975 Tony winner John
Cullum as a superhero hitting middle age; ''Mr. Jelly Lord,'' with Gregory Hines
as jazz great Jelly Roll Morton, and ''The Wind in the Willows,'' an adaptation
of Kenneth Grahame's novel. Town Hall once again will welcome a Yiddish musical,
''A Match Made in Heaven,'' set for an Oct. 23 opening .

For dramas, the mood of Broadway is part British and part American-revival.
Michael Frayn, last represented on Broadway by the farce ''Noises Off,'' is due
back in December with something quite apart -''Benefactors,'' a drama of
disenchanted idealists. Mi/ chael Blakemore will direct a cast including 1984
Tony winner Glenn Close, Mary Beth Hurt, Simon Jones and Sam Waterston. Jessica
Tandy and Hume Cronyn are scheduled to return to Broadway together in April for
the first time since ''Foxfire'' in Brian Clark's ''Petition.'' Another English
entry is ''Corpse.'' Gerald Moon's comedy-thriller, directed by John Tillinger
and starring Milo O'Shea. It is set to open in early December. Rosemary Harris
will star in a revival of Noel Coward's ''Hay Fever,'' scheduled for Nov. 14.

After critically acclaimed revivals of Eugene O'Neill's ''Moon for the
Misbegotten'' and ''Strange Interlude'' in the last two years, the coming
Broadway season will see new productions of two more classics. ''The Iceman
Cometh'' reunites Jason Robards and Jose Quintero from the famous Off Broadway
production in 1956. And Jack Lemmon will star as James Tyrone in Jonathan
Miller's revival of ''Long Day's Journey Into Night,'' which opened on Broadway
in 1956. (Audiences will get a different look at O'Neill in Barbara Gelb's ''My
Gene,'' a drama about the playwright's wife Carlotta that will star Colleen
Dewhurst at the Public Theater.) Tennessee Williams will be represented on
Broadway with a November revival of ''Night of the Iguana,'' starring Jeanne
Moreau, Michael Moriarty, Eileen Brennan and Roy Dotrice.

As for new American playwrights, Andrew Bergman is scheduled to make his
Broadway debut in March with ''Social Security,'' a comedy about New York and
the art world. Marlo Thomas will star and Mike Nichols will direct. Emily Mann's
''Execution of Justice,'' a drama about the trial of Dan White for the murder of
San Francisco Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk, is due on
Broadway in February. John Pielmeier (''Agnes of God'') has two new plays in
line for Broadway openings - ''The Boys of Winter,'' a drama about Vietnam
veterans, and ''Sleight of Hand,'' a thriller about an amateur magician. The
Circle in the Square will start its 35th season with Richard Nelson's adaptation
of Beaumarchais's ''Figaro.'' Anthony Heald, who won raves last year in ''The
Foreigner'' and ''Digby,'' will play the title role. And Lily Tomlin, a
performer who fuses theater and stand-up comedy, is bringing in a one-woman show
written by Jane Wagner to the Plymouth on Sept. 26.

Typically, though, much of the new American writing will emerge Off and Off Off
Broadway. The most eagerly awaited play may well be ''A Lie of the Mind'' by Sam
Shepard. The drama, Mr. Shepard's first since ''Fool for Love'' three years ago,
will star Aidan Quinn, Amanda Plummer and Rebecca de Mornay. Lanford Wilson -
who with Mr. Shepard and Mr. Mamet forms the front rank of American drama today
- also will be represented this season. ''Talley and Son,'' a drama about the
Missouri family that also populates ''Talley's Folly'' and ''Fifth of July,'' is
to open the Circle Repertory Company's season. Horton Foote, the prolific
playwright and screenwriter (''Tender Mercies''), has adapted the William
Faulkner short story ''Tomorrow'' for the stage. It is due Off Broadway in the
late fall with actor Randy Quaid (''True West'' and ''The Golem'') making his
directorial debut.

Off Broadway will see two other intriguing directorial turns this fall. The
actress Dianne Wiest (''After the Fall,'' ''Serenading Louie'') will direct
Edward Herrmann and Dylan Baker in ''Not About Heroes.'' The portrait of the
British poets Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen is scheduled to open Oct. 21 at
the Lucille Lortel. And Alan Arkin, an actor who also has directed several of
Jules Feiffer's plays, will direct Pamela Lengyl's ''Jung on the West Side,'' a
comedy about trying to stay sexually, mentally and emotionally young, due next
month.

The New York Shakespeare Festival will open its season next month with David
Hare's ''Map of the World.'' The new drama by the author of ''Plenty'' arrives
after an acclaimed run at England's National Theater. Mr. Hare will direct
Zeljko Ivanek, Elizabeth McGovern and Roshan Seth. Wallace Shawn's ''Aunt Dan
and Lemon,'' now at London's Royal Court Theater, is set to open at the Public
Theater on Oct. 21. The dark comedy, about the corruption of an innocent, stars
Linda Hunt, an Academy Award winner for ''The Year of Living Dangerously.'' The
Shakespeare Festival also will produce Gerard Brown's ''Jonin,''' a serious
comedy about a black college fraternity.

Among the other major institutional theaters, Playwrights Horizons will present
new works by several of its regular writers. Wendy Wasserstein and the director
Gerald Gutierrez, who last collaborated on ''Isn't It Romantic,'' join talents
again on a musical titled ''Miami.'' Ted Tally (''Terra Nova'') has a comedy
about a couple trying to conceive, ''Little Footsteps.'' A. R. Gurney (''The
Dining Room'') will be represented by both ''The Perfect Party'' and ''Another
Antigone.'' Manhattan Theater Club will open its season with Paul Osborn's
''Oliver, Oliver,'' a comedy about money and matrimony, and will follow it with
''It's Only a Play,'' Terrence McNally's jaundiced look at the fickle fortunes
of Broadway. Stockard Channing, the Tony winner for ''Joe Egg,'' will star.

Roundabout, known for its star-studded revivals, will begin its season with Lee
Richardson, Tammy Grimes and Carol Shelley in Jean Anouilh's ''Waltz of the
Toreadors.'' Ensemble Studio Theater, one of Manhattan's havens for new writers
and plays, has James Ryan's ''Dennis,'' a drama about the murder of Congressman
Allard Lowenstein. John Patrick Shanley (''Danny and the Deep Blue Sea'') will
have two plays on the boards this season -''Savage in Limbo'' at the Double
Image Theater and ''Women of Manhattan'' at Manhattan Theater Club.

There are also several notable theater events as part of larger festivals. Next
month the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music will present ''The
Golden Windows'' by Robert Wilson (''The Civil WarS''). The American Place
Theater will continue its ''Women's Project,'' a series of works about women
that will include shows on the anarchist Emma Goldman and the author Flannery
O'Connor. Also next month, the La Mama Theater will play host to the Polish
author Tadeusz Kantor and his Cricot 2 Theater. And in January Intar will
celebrate its 20th anniversary with a festival of Hispanic plays by such authors
as Mario Vargas Llosa of Peru, Manuel Puig of Argentina and Fernando Arrabal of
Spain.

AWAITING THEIR TURN AT CENTER STAGE ''Song and Dance,'' a new Andrew Lloyd
Webber musical starring Bernadette Peters. Royale. Sept. 18. ''Talley and Son,''
the third chapter in Lanford Wilson's Talley Family Trilogy. Circle Repertory
Company. Sept. 20. ''The Search for Intelligent Life in the Universe,'' a new
one-woman show by Lily Tomlin. Plymouth. Sept. 26. ''The Iceman Cometh,'' a
revival of Eugene O'Neill's 1946 play, starring Jason Robards and directed by
Jose Quintero. Lunt-Fontanne. Sept. 29. ''A Map of the World,'' David Hare's
drama about the clash of ideas at a Unesco conference. Public Theater. Oct. 1.
''A Lie of the Mind,'' a new drama by Sam Shepard about a family in the American
West. Promenade. Late October or early November. ''Night of the Iguana,'' a
revival of the 1961 Tennessee Williams drama. A Broadway theater to be
announced. Nov. 21. ''Poppy,'' a musical about British involvement in the opium
trade, directed by Terry Hands of the Royal Shakespeare Company. St. James. Dec.
5. ''Benefactors,'' Michael Frayn's drama about disillusioned Britons in the
1960's. Brooks Atkinson. Dec. 22. ''Long Day's Journey Into Night,'' a revival
of Eugene O'Neill's autobiographical drama starring Jack Lemmon and directed by
Jonathan Miller. A Broadway theater to be announced. April 17. ''Petition,''
Jessica Tandy and Hume Cronyn as an elderly couple in Brian Clark's drama,
directed by Peter Hall. Golden. April.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A listing and a caption in the Arts and Leisure section today misstate the title
of Lily Tomlin's one-woman show that is scheduled to open Sept. 26 at the
Plymouth Theater. It is ''The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the
Universe.''

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernaddette Peters, Alfre Woodard, Roshan Seth, Sam Shepard,
Mike O'Shea, Keith Bazler, Lily Tomlin, John Cullum, Kathryn Pogson, Linda Hunt,
and Jack Lemmon

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PUZZLE OF POL POT'S 'RETIREMENT'

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Prince Norodom Sihanouk called it a farce. Others made jokes about gold watches.
Such was the reaction to last week's guerrilla radio announcement that the Khmer
Rouge had instituted a retirement policy, and that the first person to be
pensioned off at the age of 60 was none other than Pol Pot.

In the speculation that followed, however, provocative questions were raised
about the past, present and future of the Communist guerrilla army that
brutalized Cambodia for three years, eight months and 20 days before being
overthrown by its former ally, Vietnam. Had Mr. Pol Pot really stepped aside? If
so, why? And who would replace him? Had the Khmer Rouge changed their style,
their beliefs or only their image? If this move, following an earlier
declaration in support of political pluralism and economic liberalism, was
merely a public relations ploy, what prompted it?

In Peking and elsewhere, some saw the hand of China, the most important backer
of the Khmer Rouge. In China under Deng Xiaoping, the reasoning goes, the moving
aside of old leaders has become the order of the day. Peking is also aware,
diplomats say, that Mr. Pol Pot's harsh reputation limits international support
for the three-part resistance coalition fighting to drive the Vietnamese from
Cambodia.

Vietnam has made the ''elimination'' of Mr. Pol Pot a sine qua non for talks
about Cambodia's future. Even the Khmer Rouge's two partners, the followers of
Prince Sihanouk and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, headed by Son
Sann, regularly express public revulsion at having to work with Mr. Pol Pot.

Prince Sihanouk, head of the resistance coalition, said recently that he had
offered Mr. Pol Pot a retirement home in Peking, but that the Khmer Rouge leader
had not been interested. Like everyone else involved with Cambodia, the Prince
was surprised by last week's announcement. ''The Khmer Rouge are my allies,'' he
said, ''so in my official capacity I must believe them. But if you ask me for my
personal opinion, I would say that it is better not to believe what they say.''
He discounted the theory that Peking and the Soviet Union, which underwrites
Vietnam's huge military machine, had been quietly discussing how to settle the
Cambodian war. On his recent visit here, the Prince said the Chinese had tried
to raise the subject with Moscow but had been rebuffed.

Other theories abound. One is that only an agreement between the Soviet Union
and the United States (with China as a party) could undo the knots of
self-interest in which Cambodia is snarled. When Secretary of State George P.
Shultz was in Southeast Asia in July he expressed his willingness to raise the
issue with the new Kremlin leadership. Also, both Hanoi and Washington appear to
want to leave the impression that talks on the missing Americans in Vietnam,
which might clear the air for talks on Cambodia - have been going well. But
while a March meeting foresaw joint searches of crash sites by summer, they have
yet to take place.

Yang Mu, the Bangkok correspondent for the Chinese news agency, feels that the
Khmer Rouge, Mr. Pol Pot included, have come to believe that their reputation
under the present leadership can never recover and that the change is real.
Others note that Mr. Pol Pot's successor as guerrilla commander, Son Sen, is
hardly a ''moderate''; he is believed to have been responsible for some of the
worst damage when the Communist guerrillas took over Phnom Penh in 1975.

Along the Thai-Cambodian border, news of the ''retirement'' spread rapidly. At
Ta Ngoc, the largest Khmer Rouge civilian settlement in Thailand, Mey Mann, a
64-year-old former teacher who was an early supporter of the Communist
revolution in Cambodia, said he thought times had changed and the Khmer Rouge
were changing, too. They had begun, he said, as a ''patriotic'' crusade led by
French-educated, Marxist-influenced young men, but were subverted by the
Vietnamese, who saw them as a route to power in Cambodia. When that hope was
dashed, he said, Hanoi worked to overthrow Mr. Pol Pot and cloak his revolution
in horror. Again in guerrilla opposition, the Khmer Rouge are once more becoming
nationalists first, willing to take any steps necessary to liberate Cambodia
from the Vietnamese.

Seng Sok, a Khmer Rouge veteran who is the civilian administrator of Ta Ngoc, is
not as philosophical. Asked what the retirement of Mr. Pol Pot means to the
camp's 28,000 residents, he said simply: ''Nothing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk inspecting Khmer Rouge soldiers at a
camp in Cambodia last month (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: Sept. 8, 1985

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1353 words

                                                               Weeks
This                                                     Last     on
Week  Fiction                                            Week   List
 1    LUCKY, by Jackie Collins.                             1      3
      (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of
      a crime lord takes on the heiress of a
      shipping tycoon in fashionable spots all
      over the world.

 2    LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor.               7      2
      (Viking, $17.95.) Recollections of a
      small American town.

 3    SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King.                       2     12
      (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
      horror set in contemporary America.

 4    THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders.           3      8
      (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of six suspects
      murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

 5    THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy.              4     25
      (Naval Institute Press, $14.95.) A Lithuanian
      submarine driver defects to the United States
      with the Soviet Union's most
      advanced nuclear secrets.

 6    THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne.           5      4
      (Crown, $14.95.) Romance, scandal and murder
      in New York's high society.

 7    THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving.                6     16
      (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a Maine
      orphanage earlier in this century.

 8    LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry.                     8     11
      (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old West
      seen larger than life.

 9    TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline Briskin.           12      3
      (Putnam, $17.95.) Three sisters find their
      destinies bound by an obsession with the same
      man.

10    IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon.                11     33
      (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman destroys the
      crime lords who got her an undeserved
      prison term.

11    THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras.                      13      8
      (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual initiation of an
      adolescent girl by a rich
      Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.

12    JIAN, by Eric Van Lustbader.                                 1
      (Villard, $17.95.) Martial arts, spies
      and counterspies, and an intrigue
      to control all Asia.

13    JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour.                      9     16
      (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner to
      the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer
      scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

14    HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford.          10     17
      (Doubleday, $17.95.) Continuing the family saga
      begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

15    FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins.                   15      8
      (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Machinations by
      spies, double Bagents and a beautiful
      woman on the eve of D-Day.

      Nonfiction

 1    YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager
      and Leo Janos. (Bantam, $17.95.)
      From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II
      fighter pilot to the first man to fly
      faster than sound.

 2    IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca             2     45
      with William Novak. (Bantam, $19.95.) The rise of
      an immigrants' son to top jobs at
      Ford and Chrysler.

 3    A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters               4     18
      and Nancy Austin. (Random House, $19.95.) Ways to
      achieve distinction in management.

 4    SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell              3     23
      Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
      Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists
      analyze the successes and failures of modern
      women in looking for acceptable men.

 5    LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.                 12     53
      (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions for ''setting
      our priorities right in order to enjoy
      life to the fullest.''

 6    THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck.           5      7
      (Doubleday, $15.95.) The autobiography of
      the Oklahoma farm boy who became a
      New York Yankee baseball star.

 7    THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam.                    6      4
      (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men seek
      the 1984 Olympic gold medal
      for single sculling.

 8    HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga,           10      5
      by Stephen Davis. (Morrow, $15.95.) The
      British heavy metal group's boisterous
      tours of the 1970's.

 9    FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer.                         11      6
      (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding
      the 1982 collapse ofthe Penn Square
      Bank in Oklahoma City.

10    CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope                  8     17
      with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
      Memories of more than 50 years
      of golfing, by the comedian.

11*   NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander.                       9     10
      (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery, mystery and
      high society in the 1978 murder of
      a Mormon multimillionaire.

12    FINAL CUT, by Steven Bach.                                   1
      (Morrow, $19.95.) How the making of the
      film ''Heaven's Gate'' proved the unmaking
      of United Artists.

13    THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick F. McManus.         13      3
      (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing pieces about
      pursuing pleasures in the great outdoors.

14    MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with                  7      8
      George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.) The
      autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born
      tennis champion.

15    THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach.          14     53
      (Morrow, $16.95.) How the author of
      ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' sought a true
      love.

And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

A CERTAIN PEOPLE: American Jews and Their Lives Today, by Charles E. Silberman.
(Summit, $19.95.) This study, at once objective and personal, argues from a mass
of evidence that Jews suffer no handicaps in American society, though some of
the ways in which Jews are Jewish are under revision.

STRINDBERG, by Michael Meyer. (Random House, $24.95.) Mr. Meyer offers a large
and fully detailed picture of the racist, untruthful misogynist who was Sweden's
greatest playwright.

RETURN TRIPS, by Alice Adams. (Knopf, $14.95.) In her third book of short
stories, Alice Adams's protagonists, usually women, fall in love while knowing
better and take the consequences; the stories are brief and adult, the writer's
hand lightning fast.

THE RED FOX, by Anthony Hyde. (Knopf, $17.95.) Treason most foul for motives
most idealistic is the background for this thriller, which involves a treasure
hunt and the usual perilous journey while addressing as well the moral and
ideological problems of the spy who rejects a democratic society in favor of the
Soviet Union.

THE MANTLE OF THE PROPHET: Religion and Politics in Iran, by Roy Mottahedeh.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A gifted scholar traces the sacrifice of a national
tradition of restraint and tolerance by mullahs reacting to the ambitions of the
Shah.

DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Visions of Gender in Victorian America, by Carroll
Smith-Rosenberg. (Knopf, $19.95.) The changes, from female bonding to reform
movements, wrought in woman's role by the dislocations of 19th-century
industrialization.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF WILLIAM HUMPHREY. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence, $19.95.)
These 22 stories possess a refined sensibility and a rustic energy, a Jamesian
psychological penetration and a spirit that expands before nature's forces.

Advice and Self-Help
                                                               Weeks
This                                                     Last     on
Week                                                     Week   List
1     DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by                    1     13
      Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books, $14.95.) A regimen
      designed to produce weight loss while improving
      health and increasing energy.

2     WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.            2     42
      (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work
      updated in 1983.

3     WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood.            3      4
      (Tarcher/St. Martin's, $14.95.) Ways to avoid or
      end addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

4*    THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.                    4     23
      (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for dishes prepared
      at moderate cost.

5     FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond                       5      3
      and Marilyn Diamond. (Warner, $16.50.) A diet for
      weight loss and physical fitness.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RURAL UNITS SEEK NEW FUNDS AS U.S. HOUSING EFFORT SLOWS

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1836 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, Ky., Sept 4


The people of Clay County live in a variety of houses along the creeks and
rivers deep inside the Daniel Boone National Forest. Some live in sleek
ranch-style houses; others in mobile homes or the ancient, sagging shacks that
have served generations of mountain families.

For although the Federal Government has spent billions of dollars over the past
25 years to change the face of poor rural communities here and elsewhere, the
miseries of inadequate shelter persist for a large portion of the rural
population.

Meanwhile, the flow of Federal housing assistance funds is slowing. The Reagan
Administration is committed to getting the Government out of housing
construction and has sought to abolish the Farmers Home Administration, the
agency that provides most rural housing aid. So far, the agency has survived but
Congress cut its budget for the fiscal year beginning next month by 41 percent,
to $2.1 billion.

According to a range of experts, efforts to achieve the long-held goal of decent
housing for all have reached a crisis. Public officials and nonprofit groups are
increasingly turning to state governments and private donors for help.

The Administration has proposed replacing many Federal housing programs with a
voucher system under which the Government would provide payments to local
housing agencies, which would in turn make rent payments to landlords on behalf
of tenants. Administration officials say the private housing market would
respond to the increased demand for good housing a voucher system would produce.

Proponents of improved rural housing say, however, that a voucher system would
be impractical in rural areas because many of them do not have an adequate
supply of good housing.

''Vouchers are no substitute for Farmers Home Administration new housing
resources,'' said Harold O. Wilson, executive director of the Housing Assistance
Council, a nonprofit Washington agency that provides assistance to public and
private organizations.

''Imagine a voucher holder trying to find decent rental units in the hollows of
Appalachia or the deep South.'' he said. ''Whole communities are made up of
shacks crowded together with only outhouses for bathroom facilities.''

Veterans Build Houses

The Government estimates that about 4.5 million rural families have inadequate
housing. New efforts to help them are combining remnants of Great Society
antipoverty programs from the 1960's and 1970's with state and private
assistance.

For example, a group of Vietnam veterans was at work this week on a small house
being built in a pleasant valley of the headwaters of the Kentucky River near
Manchester, about half way between Lexington and Knoxville, Tenn. The house is
one of several projects being financed with state and private aid by the
Kentucky Mountain Housing Development Corporation, a nonprofit, private
organization. The veterans' wages are covered by a $1.2 million state grant,
which will help reduce the cost of the house to the point that a poor family
could afford to buy it.

David Lollis of the Federation of Appalachian Housing Enterprises, a nonprofit
group, said the grant, provided by the Kentucky Housing Finance Corporation, a
state agency, also provides jobs and training for veterans who have no other
recourse for employment.

''For many years we looked to Washington for housing assistance,'' Mr. Lollis
said. ''But frankly I now find it more productive to work mostly with the state.
I feel I can get more done that way at this time.''

New Housing Difficulties

Efforts to improve rural housing have run into so many new difficulties that
there is widespread concern that the poor rural areas of the nation may fall
even further behind other parts of the country in terms of housing.

Prolonged high interest rates, increased construction costs, a depressed
agricultural economy and increased foreclosures on home mortgages have raised
both the number and percentage of rural families with inadequate shelter, said
Mr. Wilson of the Housing Assistance Council.

He added that losing the assistance provided by the Farmers Home Administration
would produce a gap that ''could not be filled by either state or local
government.''

Because the problems of rural housing are frequently so different from those of
urban housing, the Government has kept the two under separate laws and agencies.
The Farmers Home Administration, a division of the Department of Agriculture, is
a decentralized agency whose chief responsibility is handling farm loans and
other aspects of agriculture.

Its housing efforts consist largely of subsidized mortgage loans and rental
assistance to rural families.

Criticism of Agency

Over the years its practices in loans and subsidies for building and repairing
housing have been criticized by friend and foe alike. A few years ago, for
example, it was accused of assisting luxury developments at the expense of
housing for more needy people. Since then, a variety of changes have taken place
at the agency.

But David A. Stockman, the former director of the Office of Management and
Budget, has testified before Congressional committees that the agency should be
abolished. He charged that its practices were far too costly and its housing
programs ought to be put under the control of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development.

Most Congressional criticism, however, centered around the agency's failure to
assist the poorest families. Two years ago, Congress passed a provision
requiring it to spend 40 percent of its single-family housing assistance on
subsidies for families with ''very low'' incomes, which in this mountain area
means a yearly income of about $6,000 or less per family of four.

Private Efforts for Poor

But the Administration has not quite met that requirement. For the fiscal year
that ends this month, it has spent 38 percent of the $579 million it is required
to spend on subsidized loans to ''very low'' income people. ''We cannot find
people with that income who can afford to pay the money back,'' said a spokesman
for the agency.

But some nonprofit agencies, by-passing the Administration entirely, have found
a way to turn very low income families into homeowners who regularly pay their
notes.

These efforts can be seen in Clay County. It is one of the many rural areas of
the United States where deep poverty has persisted for decades. Its economic
base is coal mining, which enjoyed a boom in the energy shortages of the 1970's,
but has since fallen back to scanty production.

About 21,000 people live in its valleys and hollows, and 3,000 more live in
Manchester, the county seat. The Manchester Advocate publishes the names of
applicants for marriage licenses and lists them by occupation. Often, the
category for both bride and bridegroom is ''unemployed.''

''There are no jobs,'' said Chuck Combs, a young unemployed man with a wife and
child who recently moved into a subsidized home near that of his parents. ''The
only good jobs are in the mines and you have to have connections to get those.''
The young as well as the old sit for hours on porches in late summer staring at
the roads and mountains. Some of them derive some income from gardening or other
activities, but many subsist on welfare benefits.

Some statistics put half the population, which is predominantly white, below the
poverty line.

Many Families in Mobile Homes

Many have moved out of dilapidated shacks into mobile homes, which in many rural
areas have become the dominant form of housing. They are much cheaper than
conventional housing, but most of the ones in use in rural areas were built
before the Government enacted efficient energy standards. Utility bills
frequently run more than payments on the home.

''The next step is to put in a flue and wood stove and the trailer goes up in
flames,'' said Mr. Lollis.

The Kentucky Mountain Housing Development Corporation, along with similar
nonprofit groups operating under the Federation of Appalachian Housing, set up a
revolving fund with state and private help to make home loans with low interest
rates in the same way Farmers Home does.

To reach very low income families Kentucky Mountain and other nonprofit
organizations designed a tiny but well-insulated house costing considerably less
than houses financed by either Farmers Home or the Housing and Urban Development
Department.

The house does not meet Federal building standards, in part because of an
unorthodox plumbing arrangement. But Hubert Allen, chairman of Kentucky Mountain
Housing, said: ''If a family wants a new home but has no place to leach the
effluent created by a flush toilet, why can't they at least have a warm house
with running water and a bathtub?''

'' If a man can only afford a $15,000 home,'' he went on, ''why not create
sources of finance so he can build a $15,000 house and tear down his old
shack?''

The average home built and financed by Kentucky Mountain costs about $26,000,
including land. With subsidies a family with $6,000 income may have monthly
payments of about $110, including utilities. Kentucky Mountain has built scores
of its ''warm and dry'' houses over three years. Reuben Hacker, finance director
for the organization, said failure to make payments is rare.

''They are right here at the first of the month,'' he said. The extensive
counseling the organization provides is one of the reasons, he added.

Innovations in Other Areas

Such innovations have been taking place in other areas where there is a high
rate of rural poverty - among Hispanics in the Southwest, blacks in the rural
South and among migrant workers in various areas of the country.

But public and private housing officials say only a handful of states have
well-financed housing financing agencies. New York and California are at the top
of the list, they say. For example, when the Federal Government failed to
provide funds to finance its program of grants for housing for migrant workers,
the state of New York picked up the cost of continuing the program within its
borders.

Connecticut and New Jersey also have initiatives for fostering economic and
housing development in rural areas, but as in most states these efforts are
overshadowed by what the Federal Government has done.

Stronger State Agencies

But the trend in rural housing for the poor is clearly toward strengthening
state agencies that can work through organizations like Kentucky Mountain
Housing, which over the past few years have combined state money, remaining
Federal assistance and volunteer labor and contributions.

At its headquarters here on Muddy Gap Road, Kentucky Mountain has a new building
to house volunteers sent by Protestant and Roman Catholic churches in various
regions of the nation. Every day they spread out over the area providing manual
labor to rebuild and repair houses, thus reducing costs.

''Some arrive without any construction skills,'' said Mr. Hacker, ''but they
soon learn and it is surprising what they accomplish.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of amount spent by Federal Government for rural housing programs,
in billions of dollars (Source: Farmers Home Administration) (page B12)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Roots of Cambodia's Misery

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 444 words


If the heavens could weep over a people's suffering, Cambodia would never know
drought. The 15-year toll has been terrible enough: murderous aerial bombing
followed by brutal revolution, famine and civil war, claiming the lives of
perhaps a third of Cambodia's seven million people. Compounding the injury is
the annual charade by which rival Communist warlords try to cleanse their record
and feign moderation.

Thus we get broadcasts from the jungles contending that the indigenous
Communists, the Khmer Rouge, have embraced democratic rights and are
''retiring'' their notorious tyrant, Pol Pot. In the same spirit, Vietnam now
promises to withdraw 180,000 occupation troops by 1990 (and also to free some of
its domestic prisoners and to search further for missing U.S. soldiers). These
September songs are a sure harbinger of the annual United Nations debate on who
represents Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge say Pol Pot has reached the guerrilla army's retirement age of
60. More likely, if he's really stepping aside, he finally overtaxed the
patience of his Chinese allies. For it was Pol Pot's butcheries that gave
Vietnam the pretext for invading Cambodia in 1978. The Khmer Rouge, in any case,
would continue to be led by his henchmen, notably Ieng Sary.

There is not much new either in the statements from Hanoi, which has recast its
annual prediction of troop withdrawals. It is still holding out for
international acceptance of the client regime it installed in Cambodia. Its
offers on prisoners and M.I.A.'s are worth exploring but with an awareness that
similar promises have come to nothing in the past.

These maneuvers recall Lord Acton's remark that after the strong man with a
sword comes the little man with a sponge. What cannot be sponged away are the
Khmer Rouge's butcheries in 1975-1978, now called ''mistakes.'' And Hanoi
persists in claiming to have ''liberated'' Cambodia, which it has actually
subjugated and impoverished.

As The Times's Barbara Crossette reports, journalists are allowed only a glimpse
of Phnom Penh. And Cambodia was closed to the Lawyers Committee for
International Human Rights, which obtained persuasive evidence from refugees of
''arbitrary arrest, brutal torture and indefinite detention under degrading
conditions.''

The heart of Cambodia's misery is that neither of the contending Communist
forces has the strength to prevail or the character to acknowledge that it has
forfeited the right to rule. The only moderating force is a non-Communist
resistance that remains militarily weak. Perhaps international pressure may yet
induce the exhausted belligerents to permit a nonaligned, broadly-based regime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NBC REPORTER KILLED

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


The NBC bureau chief in Bangkok, Neil Davis, was killed when he and an NBC sound
technician were recording the fighting around a radio station in the center of
the city near Government House at 10 A.M. Bangkok time, an NBC News spokesman in
New York said early this morning.

Mr. Davis, a 52-year-old Australian who was the Bangkok bureau chief for 10
years and who covered Indochina since 1964, was pronunced dead when he arrived
at the Seventh Day Adventist hospital in the Thai capital, the spokesman, Mary
Lou O'Callahan, said. A correspondent for The Washington Post drove the two men
to the hospital.

The sound technician, William Latch, was still in surgery, she said. It still
was unclear exactly how the two men had been wounded.

''He was highly respected by all his peers, and showed tremendous courage,''
Miss O'Callahan said of Mr. Davis. ''He did everything, he was a one-man band.''

''He stayed to cover the fall of Saigon and came out unscathed,'' she added.
''To think that this could happen now is very sad.''

Mr. Davis was born in Tasmania and went to Indochina in 1963 as a cameraman with
Visnews, an international news film agency, she said. Over the next decade he
worked in Singapore, Cambodia and Vietnam, often filing written dispatches for
Reuters, the British news agency, as well as film reports.

He was one of the few Western correspondents to remain in Saigon after the
collapse of the South Vietnamese Government. According to Miss O'Callahan, he
provided the only American network film of North Vietnamese tanks ramming
through the gates of the presidential palace.

Since 1975, he worked full-time for NBC, filing reports from around Asia. He was
one of the major contributors this spring to NBC's 10-year retrospective
coverage of the fall of Saigon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'CAN'T BUT THAT THRILL'

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.


IN the Giants' locker room about two hours before yesterday's season opener,
Phil McConkey turned to Phil Simms.

''What other job in the world,'' Phil McConkey said, ''can make you feel like
you're 12 years old all the time?''

After a 40-yard return of the opening kickoff and a 37-yard punt return that
quickly propelled the Giants toward their 21-0 victory over the Philadelphia
Eagles, Phil McConkey would feel even younger.

''I've dreamed about doing that,'' he was saying now at his locker, ''since I
was 8 years old.''

His 40-yard return of the kickoff preceded Phil Simms's 23-yard touchdown pass
to Lionel Manuel; on the Eagles' first punt, his 37-yard return to the 11-yard
line positioned Joe Morris's touchdown run on the next play. Including six other
punt returns, Phil McConkey supplied a total of 143 yards - 10 more than Phil
Simms's passing total. And so the Giants, hoping to qualify for the National
Football League playoffs for the second straight season, got off on the right
foot, thanks to Phil McConkey's fast feet.

''To have the ball in your hands and run with it is a great thrill,'' he said.
''The richest man in the world can't buy a thrill like that.''

Phil McConkey has what every kick-return specialist needs - the soul of a
daredevil, the instincts of a startled cat and the vision of a wide-angle
camera. He talked about having seen pictures of himself on a runback with ''my
eyes as big as silver dollars.'' And he described how returning a kickoff or a
punt puts him ''almost in a different world, things happen almost in slow
motion'' as he hurries past onrushing tacklers.

''It's a little like how Wayne Gretzky plays hockey,'' he said. ''Gretzky is the
smallest and the slowest player on his team, and his shot isn't the hardest, but
he has the ability to see things in slow motion and to react off that. I think I
have a little of that.''

Whatever he has, Phil McConkey is here to stay as the Giants' kickoff-return and
punt-return specialist. When the N.F.L. reduced each team's roster to 45 players
this season, he was in jeopardy. But his versatility saved him. He is also a
backup wide receiver and the far-right coverage man on the kickoff team. And for
his performance above and beyond the call of duty yesterday, the 28-year-old
former Navy helicopter pilot, discharged as a lieutenant, was awarded a
promotion by Wellington Mara, the Giants' co-owner. ''Commander,
congatulations,'' the co-owner said. ''Thank you, sir,'' Phil McConkey said.

Phil McConkey, sir, a graduate of the Naval Academy, joined the Giants two years
ago when it appeared he would be discharged after four years of duty because of
seasickness. But he suddenly was ordered to complete his five-year service
commitment. He returned to the Naval Air Station at Pensacola, Fla., where he
now lives in the offseason. Determined to rejoin the Giants, he worked out with
a Navy teammate, Kit McCulley, the son of the former Jet assistant coach, Pete
McCulley, now on the Kansas City Chiefs' staff.

''I did everything I could to be ready,'' he recalled. ''Running, lifting,
catching. Kit had been a quarterback at Navy, he threw to me.''

The year before, Phil McConkey had written to the Giants, asking for a tryout.
He knew several of the Giant assistant coaches. He also wrote to the Buffalo
Bills, his hometown team.

''But when the Giants answered, I came here first,'' he said. ''And they signed
me.''

Phil McConkey grew up in Buffalo two decades ago when the Bills were one of the
best American Football League teams. In those years,, he was playing for the
West Side Bills in the Tyro Football Conference.

''It was a 105-pound league,'' he said, smiling, ''but I probably only weighed
82 pounds.''

Phil McConkey, who appears shorter than his listed 5 feet 10 inches, also
appears to weigh less than his listed 170 pounds. But he has a weight-lifter's
torso.

''I've heard less about my size here than I have anywhere else,'' he said.
''People thought I was too small in the Tyro league, too small in high school,
too small at the Naval Academy, but here they just let me play. That's all I
ever wanted to do. Back in Buffalo as a kid, sometimes the snow made it hard. It
was so cold, none of the other kids wanted to go out and play, but I'd go out by
himself, throwing the football around and diving into snowbanks to catch it.''

The son of a police detective, Phil McConkey set several records at Navy as a
wide receiver and punt-return specialist. He then served as a helicopter pilot
at various naval stations in the United States and in the Mediterranean on fleet
service. And as he spoke of his naval duty yesterday, he put his role as a
runback specialist in perspective.

''On a kickoff or a punt, I'm back there saying to myself, 'Don't drop the
ball,' that's all I'm thinking about,'' he said, ''but even if I do, it's just a
change of possession. If you're a helicopter pilot, it's a lot different. If
you're landing a helicopter on an aircraft carrier at night, if you miss, you
may lose yourself and your friends.''

Three decades ago, the Giants had one of the best punt-return specialists in
N.F.L. history in the late Emlen Tunnell, a Hall of Famer who holds the club
record with 147 yards in one game. During his Giant career, Emlen Tunnell
returned punts for a total of 2,206 yards. In recent years, Leon Bright had been
the Giants' most successful punt returner and most daring. He hardly ever called
for a fair catch. And now Phil McConkey is the man back there.

''Nobody does it alone,'' he said. ''On that kickoff return, I had help from my
blockers. Nobody was within 20 yards of me, so I just took off.''

What else would a helicopter pilot do? His success despite a five-year Navy
hitch is similar to that of Roger Staubach, the 1963 Heisman Trophy winner who
joined the Dallas Cowboys in 1969 after having served in Vietnam as a supply
officer.

''Like they say,'' Phil McConkey said. ''It's a great place to start.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Phil McConkey

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SMALL BUSINESS IS DRAWN TO CHINA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 8


A little more than 20 months ago, Michael A. Andreottola was out of a job, his
position as an engineer and designer with Applicon Inc. eliminated when a French
company, Schlumberger, took over the American concern and transferred part of
its operations to France.

Last week, Mr. Andreottola was in China as the president of his own company, the
American Ink Jet Corporation of Woburn, Mass. While here, the 38-year-old
executive made fresh inroads into a market that has provided his company with
$80,000 of business in little more than a year. His company's total first-year
revenues were about $600,000.

Since President Nixon's visit in 1972 opened the way for a resumption of trade
between the United States and China, the dominant corporate players have been
large multinational corporations such as the Boeing Company, the General
Electric Company and the International Business Machines Corporation. The
Chinese like to buy from companies that are market leaders, and big corporations
are better equipped to meet the often heavy costs of building up a relationship
here.

Nonetheless, entrepreneurs like Mr. Andreottola are proving that there is a
niche in the Chinese market for small businesses, and not only in the arts and
crafts trade that has flourished since Mr. Nixon's visit opened the door.

A Ready Match

Mr. Andreottola, making his first visit here, found little time to see the
sights. At Applicon, he specialized in the development of computer-aided
plotters and the inks used with them, notably in seismology. He has built up his
own business in maintaining and servicing plotters, supplying inks and
consulting, which provided a ready match for Chinese companies involved in the
burgeoning oil exploration here.

In a few days here and in Canton, which is close to the major explorations being
conducted by Chinese and Western oil companies in the South China Sea, Mr.
Andreottola met with the buyers of his inks and identified the operators of
several plotters previously sold here who are potential customers of his
company. Along the way he also sounded out the possibility of selling the
Chinese second-hand plotters from United States companies hit by slumping oil
exploration at home.

''About 90 percent of my business is seismology-oriented, and in the United
States that's going down fast,'' Mr. Andreottola said. ''Here, it's headed in
the opposite direction -there's a lot of oil exploration, and a lot of
seismology.'' He added, ''I can see where I will be doing 10 to 15 percent of my
business here, more or less offsetting losses in the market at home.''

Sending Delegations

Mr. Andreottola's effort to enter the Chinese market has been aided by another
Massachusetts-based company, the Small Business Service Bureau Inc. Under the
leadership of Francis R. Carroll, who founded the company in 1968, the
Worcester-based S.B.S.B. has organized two small-business delegations to China
in the past year that have produced promising links for participants.

Mr. Carroll's company has signed up 35,000 small businesses in the United States
as members, and provides them with a broad range of services from management
assistance to electronic mailing, access to group medical insurance and
legislative lobbying.

Years ago, before the Communist takeover in Vietnam, Mr. Carroll was involved in
a business that built concrete-hulled shrimp boats there. Later, he was the
prime mover behind an appeal that raised $100,000 in the Worcester area for a
small hospital in the Vietnamese central highlands that was dedicated to
Americans who died in the war. From those experiences grew a conviction that an
American company did not have to be listed in the Fortune 500 to be competitive
overseas.

Visit by Chinese Official

The opening to China came when the Governor of Guangdong, one of the most
populous of China's provinces, visited Massachusetts in 1983. At Mr. Carroll's
invitation, the official, Liang Lingguang, spent two days looking at business
and industry in the Worcester area and reciprocated by inviting Mr. Carroll to
lead a small-business delegation to Guangdong. That trip, in November 1984,
provided the contacts for the most recent visit.

''As the Chinese explained it to us,'' Mr. Carroll said, ''a lot of their
companies have no opportunity - and insufficient funds - to deal with I.B.M. or
G.E., but they are eager for the advantages that can flow from dealing with
smaller companies that provide a match for their activities.'' He added: ''I
think they realize that smaller companies are more flexible, can make their
decisions more quickly and can work on smaller profit margins.''

On the negative side, many small companies could be daunted by the high costs
and the time involved in visiting here. But Mr. Carroll, whose company charges a
basic fee of $1,000 for organizing a business executive's trip and setting up
introductions, says that a first journey here can be budgeted at less than
$5,000, half or less of what the same trip would cost if organized through one
of the United States banks that are now offering introductions to the China
market.

Other Satisfied Participants

In addition to Mr. Andreottola, several other members of the S.B.S.B. group
found business openings during the recent visit. One satisfied participant was
Roger Broederdorf, president of R. O. Broederdorf Inc., a company based in Lake
in the Hills, Ill., that specializes in industrial automation. Mr. Broederdorf
negotiated a deal to form a joint-venture company with a Chinese electronics
factory to produce machine-controlled loading equipment for a Guangdong coal
mine.

Another participant in the Carroll group who went away happy was Albert J.
DiGregorio, president of the United Lens Company of Southbridge, Mass., who came
to China wondering whether the market his father found here in the 1930's could
be revived.

After a visit to an optical factory, the American concluded that the Chinese
have little need for United States products. However, he was impressed by the
quality and cost of the plant's silica and quartz materials, and will
investigate the possibility of buying some of his own plant's supplies here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAI COUP CRUSHED BY LOYALISTS IN A 10-HOUR BATTLE WITH REBELS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 9


An attempted coup led by former Thai Army officers was thwarted today after
Government troops forced the rebels to surrender after less than 10 hours of
fighting.

At least four people were killed in artillery and automatic weapons fire, and 60
people, at least 29 of them soldiers, were reported wounded.

Two of those killed were members of an NBC News television crew who were slain
during a battle at an army compound shortly after the rebels proclaimed the coup
early this morning. A soldier also died, and a civilian Thai riding in a taxi
was fatally wounded when a shell landed in traffic in central Bangkok. #400 to
500 Soldiers Involved Officials here estimated that 400 to 500 soldiers and
officers were involved in the uprising, and that most of them had surrendered by
midafternoon. Most were said to have returned to their barracks.

Interviews with rebel troops by reporters for the Bangkok Post indicated that
most had acted because they had been coerced or because of loyalty to a former
colonel, Manoon Rupekachorn.

The coup attempt began early this morning with rebel tank attacks on key
military installations in Bangkok and the seizure of the state radio, which the
rebels used to broadcast announcements that the coup was under way. The radio
said the rebels, who called themselves the ''Revolutionary Party,'' had decided
to oust the pro-Western Government of the Prime Minister, Gen. Prem
Tinsulanonda, because of ''the seriously deteriorating situation of the
economy.''

Prime Minister Was Away

Both the Prime Minister Prem and his armed forces chief, Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek,
were out of the country when the coup attempt occurred.

Thailand, a strong ally of the United States in Southeast Asia, is considered by
many Western officials to be the region's front-line state in the conflict
between the Vietnamese-installed Government in Cambodia and a coalition of rebel
forces trying to overthrow it.

Thai military officials said today that Colonel Manoon was the ringleader of the
attempted coup.

Echoes of 'Young Turks'

Colonel Manoon was one of the ''Young Turks,'' a group of ambitious officers who
attempted to overthrow General Prem in 1981 during his first term in office.

Colonel Manoon's whereabouts were not certain tonight, although local reporters
said they saw him being driven into the Internal Security Command headquarters
here in Bangkok. An army spokesman, who had suggested earlier that Colonel
Manoon might have escaped as his supporters were surrendering, later warned the
former officer in a broadcast after the rebels had been given a 3 P.M. surrender
deadline:

''This is the second time you have created chaos for the nation, and you will
have to bear the responsibility.''

Former Prime Minister Kriangsak Chomanand was also reported in Government
custody tonight under suspicion as a leader of the uprising.

Order was restored to the capital by late afternoon, when a temporary state of
emergency was ended and curious crowds began milling around buildings damaged in
the fighting.

Prime Minister Returns

Prime Minister Prem, who was in Indonesia on an official visit, returned this
evening and was reported to be staying in southern Thailand with the Royal
Family. General Arthit, the military commander, was reported to be coming back
from Europe, where he had been traveling since Saturday.

The coup attempt, Thailand's 16th coup or attempted coup in half a century, was
announced this morning by one of General Arthit's predecessors, Gen. Serm Na
Nakorn.

But by early afternoon, when the rebels' radio broadcasts had stopped, the Thai
military, whose command structure remained loyal throughout, announced that
General Serm appeared to have been forced into his role as spokesman by the
plotters. The head of the Thai Air Force was also reported to have been dragged
at gunpoint into the plot.

Colonel Manoon, who was cashiered by the army with 38 other officers after the
1981 coup attempt, was picked up for questioning last September during another
tense period when coup rumors were sweeping Bangkok. He was released, reportedly
after what was described as only a ''conversation'' with officials of the
Government's Crime Suppression Division.

Others Taken Into Custoday

Another of the ''Young Turks,'' a former army deputy commander, Gen. Yod
Thephadsadin, was also named as an instigator, and was in Government custody
tonight. Colonel Manoon's brother, Manat Rupekachorn, a former air force
officer, was also reportedly being held in the plot.

The journalists killed in the fighting today were Neil Davis, 52 years old, an
Austalian-born reporter who was the unofficial dean of the Bangkok press corps,
and William Latch, 35, his sound technician from Durango, Colo.

Mr. Davis, the NBC Bangkok bureau chief since 1982, had distinguished himself in
more than two decades of reporting in Indochina. He was among the few reporters
to remain in South Vietnam after the fall of Saigon to North Vietnamese forces
in 1975. Obituaries of Neil Davis and William Latch appear on Page B6. The Thai
military command was led in General Arthit's absence today by Gen. Tienchai
Sirisumpum.

In a marathon television broadcast on the army-controlled television and radio
stations beginning at midmorning and continuing into the night, General Tienchai
and two military spokesmen, Maj. Gen. Uthan Sanidvong Na Ayutthaya and Arkom
Mokharanond, a civilian, kept the public informed of events and responded to the
rebels' stated concerns.

The rebels said they had acted because Thailand was drifting into a worsening
economy, unemployment and increased crime. The spokesmen replied that the
Government was aware of the difficulties, but that a military coup was not the
way to solve them. ---- White House Offers Regrets WASHINGTON, Sept. 9 (AP) -
The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said today that the United States
''regrets the violence that has taken place in Thailand'' and said the
Government ''appears to have the situation under control.''

''We particularly regret the deaths of two representatives of the U.S. news
media,'' Mr. Speakes said, referring to the deaths of the two NBC employees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of wounded loyalist soldier (AP) (page A10); photo of civilians
diving for ground to hide from fire (AP) (page A10); photo of tanks in Bangkok
(AP) (page A10); photo of tank firing around of shot (Reuters) (page A10); photo
of Gen. Tinsulanonda (AP); photo of rebel officer greeting Col. Putalond
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AN OLD STORY FOR THAILAND

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 9


Four days ago, the Thai Foreign Ministry brought together a group of local
reporters and foreign correspondents at a pleasant seaside resort on the Gulf of
Siam to talk about the country's image.

Thailand, the officials said, was a developing country struggling toward
democracy. It was a country menaced on the east by the Vietnamese war machine in
Cambodia. The Thai economy was being battered by falling commodity prices and
rising protectionism abroad. Its evolving civilian Government was under constant
pressure from an entrenched military.

In short, Thailand needed sympathy and understanding from those who reported on
it, the journalists were told.

This morning, one of those correspondents, together with a colleague, died in a
burst of shrapnel in central Bangkok. The two journalists were among the victims
of an attempted military coup. The damage to the country's carefully nurtured
image was self-inflicted.

Uncertainty About Country

''We can never really be sure about Thailand,'' a Malaysian scholar told a
reporter recently. ''It is our line of defense against the Vietnamese, but its
military officers seem to be more interested in politics.''

It may not be known for some time what really happened today, or how deep the
roots of this unsuccessful coup go into the history of military dictatorship in
Thailand. The country has had 16 coups or attempted coups since a military
Government replaced the absolute monarchy in 1932, and the takeover attempt
today bore hallmarks of former seizures of power. The nation's movement toward a
civilian polticial system is very recent.

But it is possible that the abortive coup today against the Government of Prime
Minister Prem Tinsulanonda was the last gasp of a disaffected officer class that
was also thwarted in power grab four years ago. Certainly today the solidarity
of the country's military command structure was a major factor in the rapid
defeat of the plotters.

Another factor was the self-confident, almost casual way the spokesmen for the
military dealt with the public. They reassured the Thai people all day on
television and radio that everything was under control and chided the coup
plotters for their ''inappropriate'' way of dealing with the acknowledged
problems of this country.

Military Long a Concern

Thailand's expanding professional and academic class has frequently expressed
concern that the steady movement toward a civilian Government over the last five
years would eventually provoke a response from a military establishment, or
factions of it, that sensed its power was being whittled away.

But those fears might have been reduced, politicians and commentators say, had
the Government been stronger and more combative in the face of the military
challenge. Last autumn, when rumors of an impending coup circulated with some
regularity, Prime Minister Prem fell ill and spent several weeks away from his
duties.

His absence prompted Kukrit Pramoj, Thailand's elder statesman and General
Prem's strongest civilian polticial supporter, to suggest in an interview that
the head of Government might be ''too sensitive to be a really dashing Prime
Minister.''

''He works very hard, but I don't think he can tolerate criticism,'' Mr. Kukrit
said. But he, like others, never expressed doubts about the Prime Minister's
commitment to seeing the democratic process through.

Looking Toward '87 Vote

''If we can get through the next election, in 1987,'' Mr. Kukrit said, ''then I
believe democracy will come to stay.''

Today the Thai Foreign Ministry rushed onto the radio and television to assure
foreign investors and others interested in aiding Thailand's development that
the attempted coup posed no danger to people or property.

Any harm caused by the military to the country's growth, has not occurred,
economists say, because of coups and rumors of coups. Rather, it has been the
byproduct of the Thai military's traditional involvement in public services,
banking, commerce and industry. For example, the country's telephone system, one
of Southeast Asia's worst, is run by the country's supreme military commander.

In ''The Thai Young Turks,'' a book by the political scientist Chai-Anan
Samudavanija, which is widely regarded as the best analysis of the military's
role in Thai politics, the author describes what he calls the ''reluctant ruler
army syndrome.''

Contrast to Neighboring Nations

''Unlike their counterparts in Pakistan, Bangladesh or Indonesia,'' Prof.
Chai-Anan writes of Thai military rulers, ''they would prefer leaving to elected
politicians and technocrats the onerous task of handling society's vexing
problems. This would allow the military to concentrate on issues of greater
concern: national defense, counterinsurgency, factional power balances and
personal commercial activities.''

Thailand is an important member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which includes Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and Brunei as well as
neighboring Malaysia. This country faces a growing Vietnamese presence in
Cambodia, where an estimated 160,000 of Hanoi's troops are based, and also in
Laos.

Because of its vulnerable position, Thailand has often been deferred to when the
Asean alliance makes collective diplomatic decisions.

Asean, partly out of fear of Vietnamese intentions and the consequent need to
maintain a united front, its leaders say, has not openly challenged Thailand.
This is at least partly, Asean diplomats and political leaders say, a measure of
the nonconfrontational political styles preferred by most of the nations in the
region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 10, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEIL DAVIS OF NBC NEWS, 51; KILLED IN THAI COUP ATTEMPT

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


Neil Davis, a correspondent and cameraman for NBC News, was fatally wounded
yesterday by tank fire during an attempted coup in Bangkok. His sound man,
William Latch, was killed at the same time.

Mr. Davis, 51 years old, lived in the Thai capital, where he had been chief of
the NBC News bureau since 1982. He was known for his courage in covering
assignments.

Joseph A. Angotti, vice president for news at NBC News said:

''He just had it in his gut to want to be where the action was. He wanted to be
as close as he could be. He was fearless. Being a cameraman was what he loved
doing most, and that was his most memorable work. He believed in the picture
story. He felt very strongly that, on our side of journalism, the power of
pictures was in most instances more effective than words.''

An NBC spokesman said Mr. Davis - an Australian citizen who was born in Hobart,
Tasmania - had filmed the only American network film footage of the arrival of
North Vietnamese troops when Saigon fell in 1975.

Subject of a 1980 Documentary

Mr. Davis's work in Indochina and the region itself were the subjects of a
documentary film, titled ''Front Line,'' which was produced and directed by
David Bradbury, a fellow Australian.

A critic for The New York Times, John J. O'Connor, reviewing the documentary in
1980 when it was aired on WNET-TV, said: ''Mr. Davis is a big, gentle,
soft-spoken man, making his tales and scenes of brutal destruction all the more
shattering.''

The NBC spokesman, William R. McAndrew, Jr., said Mr. Davis was also, in early
1973, the first Western journalist to film the Vietcong, accompanying them in
the field and photographing a strafing attack by a South Vietnamese helicopter
gunship.

Mr. Davis described that experience in a Reuters dispatch in 1973.

''As the helicopter swung upward for a second run,'' he wrote, ''we all sprinted
to squeeze into an underground bunker covered with foliage. The helicopter
sprayed the area for 30 minutes as we sweated underground. Bullets got through
the thick bamboo-and-earth ceiling.''

He was unhurt that time, but he was wounded on other occasions. His body was
crisscrossed with scars from shrapnel, bullets and surgery.

Reported from Angola in 70's

In 1975 and 1976, during the Angolan war, Mr. McAndrew said, Mr. Davis was the
only American network correspondent to get reports and film out of Angola with
any regularity.

Mr. Davis was the author, in collaboration with Robert Shaplen, of a Letter from
Saigon that appeared in the New Yorker of Oct. 6, 1975. In describing Saigon
after its fall, Mr. Davis wrote:

''The predominant impression I had was one of growing bewilderment among the
city's people. For the most part, they are both puzzled because there has been
no immediate revolutionary change and increasingly apprehensive becasuse they
expect their traditional way of life to be obliterated in the months ahead.''

Mr. Davis worked for Visnews, an international news organization, from 1963 to
1973, being based in Singapore, Saigon and Phnom Penh. He also did reporting
about events in Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong
Kong, Thailand and Japan.

For the next two years, he worked for Reuters as a correspondent in Cambodia
while also doing freelance work for NBC, Visnews and other news organizations.

He went to work for NBC News in November 1975 and then reported from many parts
of the Far East as well as from Kenya, the Sudan, Rhodesia and South Africa.

Mr. Davis is survived by his wife, Chou Ping Davis, and a son, who live in
Taiwan, and a sister and brother in Australia. ----NBC Sound Man Killed BANGKOK,
Thailand, Sept. 9 (AP) - William Latch, who was killed today along with Neil
Davis, had been with NBC News since 1979. He was 35 years old.

Bruce Mac Donell, the Tokyo-based NBC News general manager for Asia and the
Pacific, said Mr. Latch was shot in the chest and leg. He died in a hospital
during surgery.

Mr. Latch was born in Abilene, Tex. His parents, Mr. and Mrs. Billy Latch, live
in Durango, Colo.

He joined NBC News as a radio reporter based in Bangkok. In June 1980 he became
a sound man for television while keeping his radio job.

He had been a freelance still photographer and English teacher in Bangkok before
working for NBC News.

Mr. Latch's wife, Sonunong Poopipat, a Thai national, was at the hospital when
he died. They have two children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Neil Davis (Reuters)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
STRONG LIBERAL AT EPISCOPAL CHURCH HELM: EDMOND LEE BROWNING

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Edmond Lee Browning of Hawaii, the new Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church,
is described by friends and colleagues as a relaxed man who nonetheless can be
expected to be a very strong liberal presence on issues that affect church and
society.

A man who enjoys travel and can converse in Japanese, he brings to the post of
leading 2.8 million Episcopalians an awareness of world concerns, having served
as a Bishop in Asia and Europe.

In the past, Bishop Browning, who is 56 years old, has spoken out on moral,
social, economic and political issues. He has supported the ordination of women
in his church and civil rights and has opposed the Vietnam War and the nuclear
arms race.

''Though he's quiet, there will be no mystery about who the Presiding Bishop is
for the next 12 years,'' said Canon Richard J. Anderson, a spokesman for the
Episcopal Church.

Member of Executive Council

For the last three years the Bishop has been a member of the executive council,
an elected group of lay people and clergy that directs the church between
general conventions. His voting record, according to Canon Anderson indicates
that ''he's more willing to move ahead in trust as opposed to maintaining the
status quo.''

On Jan. 1, 1986, when he moves into an office at the Episcopal Church Center at
815 Second Avenue in New York City, He will be replacing Bishop John M. Allin,
65, a moderate who retires in December. Bishop Allin worked to bring
conciliation to a church that had been divided over a number of issues,
including the ordination of women and changes in prayer.

''Bishop Allin was a healer,'' said the Very Rev James Parks Morton, Dean of the
Cathedral of St. John the Divine, in New York City. ''All these issues were very
divisive, and he was there to pour oil on these wounds. But you can't pour oil
forever, and Bishop Browning's appointment represents that the church is ready
once again to move ahead.''

Philosophy on Commitment

In addressing the Diocese of Hawaii Convention last year, Bishop Browning
demonstrated his philosophy of church commitment when he said, ''It is terribly
important, I believe, for the institutional church to speak and seek to give
evidence on critical moral and ethical issues.''

But in the next sentence, he showed what Canon Anderson said was his ability to
be leader and team player at the same time. ''It is also important,'' he
continued, ''to realize that resolutions or stands of this sort do not go very
far unless the spirit of those convictions, informed by a lively faith, is lived
out in the lives and labor of the lay people of this Church.''

Edmond Lee Browning was born March 11, 1929, in Corpus Christi, Tex., the son of
Edmond Lucian Browning and Cora Mae Lee.

He attended the University of the South, but had to drop out for a while to
work, before receiving his B.A. degree in 1952. He received a bachelor of
divinity degree in 1954 and doctorate of divinity in 1970. He attended the
Japanese Language School in Kobe, Japan, from 1963 to 1965.

He was married Sept. 10, 1953, to Patricia Alline Sparks. Bishop Browning, a
golden-haired man with stunning, light blue eyes, said he does not have much
time to read books but favors mysteries when he does. He reads magazines,
however, to keep up on current events. Whatever free time there is, he said, he
likes to spend with his family, which includes four sons and a daughter, ranging
from 17 to 30 years of age.

He was named a deacon in July 1954 and ordained to the priesthood in May 1955.
On Jan. 5, 1968, he was consecrated Bishop of Okinawa.

From 1974 to 1976 he was with the Executive World Mission in Hawaii, and since
1976 has headed the Diocese of Hawaii, where his addresses have focused on
nuclear disarmament, peacemaking, racism and Namibia, a country also called
South West Africa that has been administered by South Africa in violation of
United Nations resolutions.

Bishop Browning, a friend of Bishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa, has said that
he expects the church to continue ''its very supportive role for the black
majority.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edmond Lee Browning

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STANFORD AND HOOVER INSTITUTE AT ODDS AGAIN

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 11


Antagonism between Stanford University and the Hoover Institution for the Study
of War, Revolution and Peace. has boiled over again. This time the dispute
involves charges by a Vietnam War hero that a course he planned to teach at
Stanford had been canceled because of his ties to Hoover.

The war hero, James B. Stockdale, a retired admiral, is a senior research fellow
at Hoover. He has said that the course on ''Moral Dilemmas of War and Peace''
had not been listed by the Stanford department of philosophy because of tension
between the two institutions.

The Hoover institution was founded in 1919 to specialize in 20th century
political, social and economic change. It is administered but not controlled by
Stanford and has come to be regarded as an intensive research organization with
a conservative political orientation and strong ties to the Reagan
Administration.

Demands by some Stanford faculty members that the university re-examine its
relationship with Hoover culminated in a faculty report in May urging that
Stanford take greater control or consider a ''divorce.'' In a session last
month, Hoover scholars discussed the ramifications of severing the connection
with Stanford.

He Has Stanford Degree

Admiral Stockdale, who holds a master's degree from Stanford, was shot down over
Vietnam in 1965 and was awarded the Medal of Honor after eight years as a
prisoner of war.

The only facts about which everyone agrees are that Admiral Stockdale and Philip
Rhinelander, a professor emeritus in philosophy at Stanford, taught the course
jointly in 1983. The two hoped to teach it again this winter and discussed the
possibility with the Stanford philosophy department, which would have had to
sponsor the course, subject to a review by the curriculum committee. The
curriculum committee, whose approval is required for all courses taught by
nonfaculty members, approved the course for 1983.

Admiral Stockdale says that two years ago he was told by the department
chairman, Julius Moravcsik, that he could teach the class again this winter.
''That to me constitutes a promise,'' Admiral Stockdale said.

When he learned in June that the course had not been scheduled, Admiral
Stockdale said, he was told by a member of the philosophy department whom he
declined to identify that it had been canceled because of his connection with
Hoover.

Prof. John Perry, former chairman of the philosophy department who is now
chairman of its curriculum committee, called the charges ''completely untrue''
and ''a colossal misunderstanding.''

Discussion in April

Professor Perry said that in April the philosophy department discussed with
Professor Rhinelander the need to have him teach a course in philosophy of law
in the winter rather than the course with Admiral Stockdale and that Professor
Rhinelander had agreed to that.

Professor Rhinelander, a former acting director of the Hoover Institution, said
that he spoke with Admiral Stockdale ''fairly quickly'' after that. ''It didn't
occur to me that Hoover was a factor because if it had been, they wouldn't have
given the course in the first place,'' he said.

Admiral Stockdale ''may have misinterpreted something I said or picked up from
somebody else'' the idea that the Hoover connection was a factor, he said,
adding, ''I have no recollection of saying anything that would suggest that.''

The episode might have died there had Admiral Stockdale's friend Kevin Starr not
heard about it. Mr. Starr, the co-chairman of the San Francisco-Sydney,
Australia, sister city committee, was working on a proposal to raise $1 million
to endow a chair in Australian, New Zealand and South Pacific studies at
Stanford.

Stockdale Says It's True

When Mr. Starr asked Admiral Stockdale about the rumor that his class had been
canceled because of the Hoover connection, the admiral said it was true.

Incensed by what he considered ''shabby'' treatment of an American hero, Mr.
Starr told Stanford that he would not try to raise the money after all. He also
accused Stanford of ''small-minded cowardice that is loathsome to contemplate.''

Mr. Starr, once a newspaper columnist, said that he did not attempt to verify
the Stockdale information. ''It's not my position to cross-examine Admiral
Stockdale,'' Mr. Starr said.

A spokesman for the Office of Development at Stanford said that the proposal for
the endowed chair was still in the discussion stage when Mr. Starr abandoned the
project. As to the chair, the university is not sure that this would be very
high on the ''academic priority system,'' the spokesman said.

Professor Perry said that accusations of shabby treatment of Hoover scholars
were ironic since he had worked to help put the course together and get the
philosophy department to sponsor it two years ago.

The university said Tuesday that the provost, James Rosse, would begin a review
of the matter next week. Until the accusations are cleared up, the curriculum
committee will not review the course, Professor Perry said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Foreign Veterans Share U.S. Award

BYLINE: By United Press International

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 89 words


A Federal judge decided yesterday that Australian and New Zealand veterans of
the Vietnam War could share in a fund set up to help American victims of the
herbicide Agent Orange.

The judge, Jack B. Weinstein, chief judge of District Court in Brooklyn, ordered
$3.6 million to be given to the Australian veterans and $400,000 to those in New
Zealand from the $180 million Agent Orange fund. Private trusts in the two
countries are to serve as repositories for the money and as trustees for
distributing it to eligible veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 12, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COUSIN BRUCIE'S UP FOR THE COUNTDOWN

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words


He is 48 years old now, on his second marriage and living in Manhattan, in
Greenwich Village no less, for the first time in his life. The skin around his
eyes wrinkles when he laughs. But he is still someone who laughs a lot, someone
who scans the blackened redfish and blanquette de veau on the menu of a midtown
restaurant, then settles on a cheeseburger and shrugs, ''What can I say. I'll
always be from Brooklyn.'' Bruce Morrow, in other words, will always be Cousin
Brucie. And now, after a seven year absence from the New York radio scene he
once dominated as few others have, Cousin Brucie is back on the air. Five weeks
ago he inaugurated a Saturday night program on WCBS-FM - opening it, by personal
tradition, with Chuck Berry's ''Maybelline'' - and last night he brought back
the show that made him most famous, the hit song countown.''

His old ''WABC Superhit Survey'' tallied the Top 20 songs. The new ''Cousin
Brucie New York Countdown'' has 15 and most of the groups are products of the
1980's, from Wham (''Freedom,'' No. 15) to Huey Lewis (''Power of Love,'' No.
1). But a few familiar voices went out into the night sky - Aretha Franklin,
Stevie Wonder, Tina Turner - and celebration characterized Studio 17A. Someone
sent balloons and Bob Shannon, whose show precedes Cousin Brucie's, welcomed him
to the strains of Southside Johnny's ''First Night.''

''When you sit in a radio booth in New York,'' Mr. Morrow said, ''there's a
magic. To this day, I'm still thrilled. I feel the Mayor listening. I feel the
Lincoln Tunnel toll collector listening. I feel the guy who just got off the
subway after work and is having a beer with his wife. And they know I'm going to
bring them laughs, sweetness and a sense it'll be all right. I'm a corny
character, but I'll never sever myself from my audience.''

Letters From Study Hall

He has, in fact, discovered a new audience, the children of his first listeners,
the kids who think the Beatles were the band Paul McCartney had before Wings.
''Most of my mail still comes on loose-leaf binder paper,'' Mr. Morrow said.
There is no way of determining how much of it was written in study hall.

''Boy, you are wild,'' a 16-year-old from Flushing named Jackie recently wrote.
''I guess my parents are not always wrong.'' Another teen-ager, named Stephanie,
asked Mr. Morrow to play ''Desiree'' by The Charts, a doo-wop chestnut from
1957.

In Cousin Brucie's heyday - his stint on WABC from 1961 to 1974 - his countdown
show glued thousands upon thousands of teen-agers to their transistor radios.
From 7 P.M. to 9 P.M. every Tuesday, the paperboys, the babysitters, the kids
who played wiffleball and subscribed to ''Tiger Beat'' all hung on the mixture
of hit songs, advertisements for acne remedies and the tireless, propulsive
patter of Cousin Brucie.

New York radio - New York popular culture - has rarely seen Cousin Brucie's
equal since then. At the height of his appeal, he commanded nearly one-quarter
of the region's audio audience, reached 40 states and Canada on clear channel
and worked South America (on tape) as ''El Primo Brucie.'' Cousin Brucie boasted
a 250,000-member fan club; his dog had one numbering 70,000.

Broken Hearts and Suicides

The point was more than popularity. In that special sorcery of radio, where a
disembodied voice becomes the best friend to thousands of atomized listeners,
Cousin Brucie spoke to and for a generation of teenagers. ''To call Bruce Morrow
a disk jockey,'' the National Observor once put it, ''is a little like calling
Leonard Bernstein a piano player.''

Letters poured in Cousin Brucie at the rate of 7,500 a week. There were
invitations to weddings, bar mitzvahs, confirmations, even funerals. Listeners
called Cousin Brucie when they were suicidal, strung out on drugs or simply blue
because their steadies had just jilted them. National magazines asked Cousin
Brucie his thoughts on drug use, burning draft cards and United States
involvement in the Vietnam War. (He opposed all three.) Then things began to
change in commercial radio, and in Mr. Morrow's own career. The Top 40 stations,
dogged as far back as the 1950's by payola scandals and rumors, took increasing
criticism by the late 1960's for the limits and monotony of their play lists.
Even Mr. Morrow, upon leaving WABC for WNBC in 1974, complained of the longtime
station, ''It's becoming a jukebox.'' The more adventurous and less commercial
rock and roll found a home on the so-called ''free-form'' FM stations -whose
format sprang solely from each disk jockey's imagination - Top 40 radio suddenly
seemed distinctly un-cool.

But FM soon became as rigid as the AM stations it had rebelled against.
Consultants advised stations on how they could make more money by tightly
controlling their songs to appeal to a particular audience - teen-aged boys for
the Album Oriented Rock format, black adults for the Urban Contemporary format
and so on. At the worst, stations simply bought syndicated, pre-recorded reels
of songs. An announcer would occasionally explain that it was, say, ''Twelve
minutes past the hour,'' so the tapes could be played as easily in Norwalk as in
Nome.

Pasteurized Radio

Mr. Morrow spent most of those years in semi-retirement from live radio,
appearing occasionally on special shows but concentrating on his ownership of
six suburban radio stations and an Atlanta television affiliate. ''I was happy
because I was building bank accounts,'' he said, ''but my body and my soul were
unhappy.'' Last year he sold all the properties and, convinced the time was
right, prepared his return.

''I'd been fighting this for a decade or more,'' he said of the trend in
commercial radio. ''What happened about '68, '69, the feeling of radio left. The
friend left. The computer came in, and so did something attached to it - the
consultant. You had consultants from Denver programming New York stations,
consultants from New York programming St. Louis stations. Radio became
pasteurized.''

Mr. Morrow believes the antidote to all this is Cousin Brucie. A good deal, of
course, has changed. The one-time Brooklyn College student now teaches at New
York University. His former engineer, Bob Ryan, is a Nevada state senator. The
commercials, once for chewing gum and drag races, tout men's attire and
limousine services.

What remains unchanged is Mr. Morrow's character, city sharp yet homespun. It
was Cousin Brucie, after all, who made ''Kiss a cop'' his slogan, who visited
high schools for WABC's ''Principal of the Year'' contest, who moved no further
from home than Ocean Parkway when he got rich and famous.

Back in the Playground

''Bruce never made himself into a 'star' in front of his audience,'' Rick Sklar,
a former WABC vice president, wrote in his recent book ''Rocking America.'' ''He
never was above his fans and never was a snob. He still projected the
personality of a James Madison High School teen-ager.''

The revived countdown show also harkens to Cousin Brucie's past because, like
his WABC program, it draws the play list from the New York area rather than
nationwide. WCBS-FM factors the record-sale information into a computer, it is
true, but the figures come from several dozen record stores in or around the
city.

If Cousin Brucie does not qualify as the World's Oldest Teen-Ager - a title
claimed by soul singer Rufus Thomas - then he does submit that the old charisma
can charm the new crowd.

''Why are all of us dinosaurs still around?'' he asks, already knowing the
answer. ''Because we have personalities. Radio is the most personal of all the
mass media. You wake up to the radio. You drive your car to the radio. You have
sex to the radio. So radio has to be eclectic, have a catholic attitude, and
it's got to be a dependable friend.

''That's what was lost and I think people want it back. The playground is about
to open and I'll be right there, swinging on the monkeybars.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bruce Morrow

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Reports Clashes

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 52 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 12


Vietnam said today that its armed forces killed or wounded 50 Chinese soldiers
in repelling attacks along its northern border this week. A Vietnamese radio
broadcast monitored in Bangkok said Chinese troops fired nearly 20,000 artillery
rounds into Vi Xuyen district of Ha Tuyen province Monday and Tuesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'STAR WARS' FOES PRESS FOR BOYCOTT

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Sept. 12


A recently formed group of scientists and engineers is trying to get colleagues
across the country to sign an unusual pledge of refusal to participate in
research for the Reagan Administration's plan to create a space-based shield
against nuclear attack.

The campaign, formally announced here today, began simultaneously at Cornell and
the University of Illinois several months ago, just as most college campuses
were letting out for the summer. It has spread to 39 campuses, according to the
organizers, and so far has gathered signatures from about a thousand of the tens
of thousands of professors and graduate students in physics, chemistry,
engineering and the computer sciences.

Lieut. Col. Lee DeLorme, a spokesman for the Pentagon's Strategic Defense
Initiative Office, which is directing the antimissile program, said today that
the military did not expect the pledge to have any effect on the program.

''We are presently considering over 2,600 applications from individual
researchers and universities to participate in the S.D.I. program,'' Colonel
DeLorme said. ''Although we respect these individual scientists in their views,
we don't expect that it's going to impact on the program.''

A 'Watershed' Is Seen

Nevertheless, Prof. Zellman Warhaft, a Cornell University engineer, said, the
campaign was ''unprecedented'' and ''a watershed'' in the history of modern
weapons research. Scientists and engineers, he told a crowded news conference on
the campus of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had never before
organized so widely to boycott the development of a specific weapon.

At Cornell, in Ithaca, N.Y., Dr. Warhaft said, more than 500 faculty members and
graduate students in the hard sciences, or about half Cornell's total in these
fields, have signed the pledge ''neither to solicit nor accept'' Government
funds for research for the program, sometimes called ''Star Wars.''

Philip Morrison, Institute Professor of Physics at M.I.T. and a prominent
supporter of the campaign, recalled only two earlier periods in which
significant numbers of scientists publicly avoided weapons research: the late
1940's, in opposition to nuclear bombs, and the late 1960's, in opposition both
to the antiballistic missile system and also to the idea of constructing an
electronic ''wall'' between North and South Vietnam.

But several other scientists said that no earlier research boycott had been so
national in scope or so pointed as signing a simple pledge not to work on a
weapon.

Wording of Pledge

The four-paragraph pledge that is being distributed calls the Strategic Defense
Initiative ''ill-conceived and dangerous.'' The pledge continues:

''Antiballistic missile defense of sufficient reliability to defend the
population of the United States against a Soviet attack is not technically
feasible. A system of more limited capability will only serve to escalate the
nuclear arms race by encouraging the development of both additional offensive
overkill and an all-out competition in antiballistic weapons. The program will
jeopardize existing arms-control agreements and make arms-control negotiation
even more difficult than it is at present. The program is a step toward the type
of weapons and strategy likely to trigger a nuclear holocaust.''

The pledge, which has yet to be distributed at M.I.T. and many other schools,
also criticizes the Strategic Defense Initiative program as endangering open and
unclassified research. Some work on the program will need to be classified,
Pentagon spokesmen have said. Most university campuses either forbid classified
research or relegate it to semi-independent weapons centers, such as M.I.T.'s
Lincoln Laboratories.

Neither M.I.T. nor any comparable institution has taken an official stand on the
antimissile program, and one of the pledge's organizers, Sanford Gottlieb, said
he expected the campaign's efforts to be directed strictly at individual
scientists and engineers.

Although the program's research money is only beginning to be available,
scientists and engineers at many universities have reportedly submitted research
proposals to the Pentagon. Moreover, the research is expected to be performed at
many of the same institutions where other faculty members and graduate students
have signed pledges not to do such work, including the University of California,
Carnegie-Mellon, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, the Rochester
Institute of Technology and the University of Texas.

Other colleges where the pledge has been distributed include Columbia
University, the California Institute of Technology, the University of Chicago,
the University of Colorado, Harvard University, the University of Michigan,
Notre Dame University, Syracuse University and the University of Utah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of group members opposing Strategic Defense Initiative (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By John Gross

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


HONORABLE MEN. By Louis Auchincloss. 278 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $15.95. BLOOD
FOR BLOOD. By Julian Gloag. 302 pages. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. $15.95.

MARK ANTONY'S

''honorable men'' were assassins, and at one level Louis Auchincloss's new novel
is a study in the way destructiveness can wrap itself up in idealism and a sense
of duty. It follows the fortunes of Chip Benedict, the scion of a
glass-manufacturing dynasty that lords it over a small town in Connecticut, from
his prep school days in the 1930's to the moment of conscience-searching during
the Vietnam War when he resigns his post as special assistant to the Secretary
of State in the Johnson Administration. An honorable man, beyond a doubt; but by
the end of the book, we have learned a good deal about the price he pays for
living up to his standards, and still more the price he exacts from those around
him.

On the face of it, the cards are stacked heavily in his favor. He is
intelligent, good-looking, debonair; he flourishes at Yale, marries the
beautiful Alida, the debutante of her year, fathers two children (one of each
sex, it need hardly be said), and serves with distinction in the Navy during
World War II. When he assumes command of the family business, he wins praise
from Fortune and Forbes for the way he runs it, and when it is taken over after
a proxy battle, he moves to New York and soon becomes a valued board member of
all the best philanthropic institutions.

None of this insures automatic happiness. As a young man, Chip is haunted by the
sense of being a fraud; a residual puritanism fills him with dark thoughts about
his own unworthiness (and most other people's as well). But his technique for
coping with such feelings is every so often to enforce an inhumanly rigid code
of honor, insisting on fine moral points without being able to admit to himself
how much they serve his own interests. ''Ethics,'' says an embittered former
friend, ''are his stock-in-trade'' - and the same friend paints a disturbing
picture for Alida of how much deliberate damage Chip has accomplished in the
name of ethical scruples.

The indictment, fueled as it is by a rankling personal grievance, goes too far,
but Alida, who is herself one of the victims of Chip's urge to undermine and
subjugate, is forced to recognize that there is a good deal of truth in it. So
is the reader - it is not only the antiwar politics of his children that have
turned them against him, for example, and it is no accident that he has managed
to alienate them so thoroughly.

At the same time, his estimable qualities are genuinely estimable. He is no
simple self-deceiver, any more than those who suffer from his high-minded
ruthlessness are plaster saints. Mr. Auchincloss displays both shrewdness and
realism in the complicated distribution of moral qualities among his characters,
just as he does in the often ironical assignment of rewards and punishments.

Is there some wider moral about America and American politics that is meant to
be floating around the novel? Possibly; but if there is, it has not been very
effectively realized. The true strength of ''Honorable Men'' - Mr. Auchincloss's
characteristic strength - lies in its delineation of manners, its feeling for
social texture, the way it satisfies our curiosity about the customs and
furnishings (including the mental furnishings) of the not-insignificant corner
of the world with which it deals.

Julian Gloag's new novel opens with a funeral, and quickly turns into a
prolonged private inquest. Vivian Winter is a prominent British barrister - or
was, until an unknown visitor whom he let into his flat one night stabbed him
sixteen times and left him dead. He was also a commanding and unusually
sympathetic personality, much admired and now much mourned by his friends. One
of them, an unsuccessful writer called Ivor Speke, is enlisted by Winter's
mother to find out who killed him, and why -she has a cold determination to
avenge the murder that makes her unwilling to leave the investigation wholly in
the hands of the police.

Before long, Speke stumbles on a curious coincidence. One of Winter's cases had
involved successfully defending a man charged with murder and rape, though he
must have had a shrewd idea that the man was really guilty. Eighteen months
later, the same man struck again, and this time he was convicted. His first
victim had seven stab wounds, his second had nine. Seven and nine make sixteen.

After that, it is a short step to uncovering a pattern of similar crimes, with
the additional twist that they were committed by men who subsequently met their
own deaths under ''accidental'' circumstances that when they are put together
(something the police have failed to do) begin to make them look suspiciously
like revenge killings. It is a pattern that provides Speke with one way into the
labyrinth; another is supplied by Winter's will, which turns out to contain a
number of large legacies, most of them to unknown women but one -quite
unexpectedly - to Speke himself.

Peeling away one mystery, Speke repeatedly finds himself confronting another.
Old secrets surface; old wounds are reopened; old assumptions are re-examined in
a new and frequently sinister light. As suspicions multiply, the tension grows
nerve-racking, and even after the mystery has been formally solved, there is
still a chill in the air.

With his previous novels, notably ''Our Mother's House,'' Mr. Gloag has
established a reputation as a master of the macabre. ''Blood for Blood'' comes
closer to being a conventional thriller than some of the earlier books. But
there are few thrillers that can match its swift and psychologically telling
strokes of characterization - and whatever category we assign it to, it remains
an exceptionally gripping story.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Louis Auchincloss (Henry Grossman)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOLK CITY AT 25: THE TIMES THEY ARE A-CHANGIN'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1414 words


TOMORROW evening, the 60's will meet the 80's when two generations of folk
musicians gather at Pier 84 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Greenwich
Village club Folk City. Performers like Arlo Guthrie, Joan Baez, Tom Rush, and
Odetta, who spearheaded the 60's folk music boom, will share the stage with
talented acoustic-oriented artists like Suzanne Vega, the Roches, and David
Massengill.

The roster also includes Eric Andersen, Buskin & Batteau, Frank Christian,
Ferron, Roger McGuinn, Melanie, Tom Paxton, Richie Havens, the Violent Femmes,
Lili Anel, Lucy Kaplanski, Tom Intondi, and Libby Titus. The WNEW disk jockey
Pete Fornatale is emcee.

The anniversary concert kicks off a weeklong gallery of events to benefit Folk
City, which is one of a number of New York nightclubs facing hard times. Because
of stringent sound restrictions and the quadrupling of its rent, the club must
find a new home as soon as possible. There will be three nights of rock at
Irving Plaza (17 Irving Place at 15th Street) Tuesday through Thursday, a
two-evening songwriting celebration next Friday and Saturday at Folk City, and
an ''all-star comedy blast'' there the following Sunday evening.

A lot of music history has been made during Folk City's 25 years and it is all
being chronicled in a book, ''Bringing It All Back Home,'' by Robbie Woliver,
one of the club's three co-owners, to be published next April by Pantheon-Random
House.

''Before Folk City, the centers of the New York folk scene had been Washington
Square Park and the Folklore Center on Macdougal Street,'' Mr. Woliver recalled
the other day. ''Mike Porco, who ran a restaurant called Gerdes, was approached
by Izzy Young, who ran the Folklore Center, with the idea of booking folk acts
in the restaurant. When Izzy left after six months, Mike continued booking acts
and changed the name to Folk City.''

Where Baez and Dylan Met

Folk City, according to Mr. Woliver, was the first club to install a permanent
hootenanny. Bob Dylan, who had performed at the club's ''hoots,'' made his
professional debut there in April 1961. Peter, Paul and Mary had their first
appearances as a group there, and Simon and Garfunkel, who had begun their
career as Tom and Jerry, performed for the first time in Folk City under their
own names.

It was at Folk City that Joan Baez first met Mr. Dylan and where his song
''Blowin' in the Wind'' was performed for the first time in public by Gil
Turner. In the mid-60's when the folk scene exploded, the club and a less
tradition-oriented competitor, the Bitter End, were the hubs in a network of
some 40 clubs and coffee houses in the Village that offered folk music. A decade
later, Mr. Dylan kicked off his Rolling Thunder Revue in Folk City with an
informal gala attended by Bette Midler, Miss Baez, Patti Smith, and many members
of his early 60's entourage.

''Folk City was my classroom,'' Arlo Guthrie recalled last week. ''I remember
being taken there by my mother just after it opened. Since my dad was
hospitalized, that was how I first heard a lot of his songs. I had my show
business baptism there in 1961 when my dad's best friend, Cisco Houston, asked
me to come up and sing a few songs. It was the first time I played for grown-up
people, and I was scared out of my wits.''

Folk City moved from its original location, at 11 East Third Street, to its
present location on Third Street, off the Avenue of the Americas, in 1969, when
the folk scene was in decline. During the 70's, its booking policy became more
eclectic. Phoebe Snow, Melissa Manchester, Emmylou Harris and the first version
of Manhattan Transfer appeared there. In 1980, the club was purchased by its
three co-owners - Mr. Woliver, Marilyn Lash and Joe Hillesum - from Mr. Porco,
who had decided to retire.

Celtic to New Wave

Under its new ownership, Folk City has become the sparkplug of a still modest
but steadily building revival of acoustic music, spurred in part by the national
recognition of the Roches and Suzanne Vega. The club has given crucial exposure
to feminist folk-pop singers like Meg Christian and Ferron. Its annual festival
of Irish music, held around St. Patrick's Day, in conjunction with Green Linnet
Records, has presented high quality Celtic music. The club also instituted a
Wednesday night new wave music series, and its Sunday comedy nights feature
''jams'' involving members of improvisational groups from around the country. A
weekly songwriter's showcase has given important exposure to writers like Miss
Vega and Andy Breckman.

''I was drawn to Folk City after reading Bob Dylan's biography, which I knew
backward and forward,'' Miss Vega said recently. ''I dreamed that if I could
just get a gig there I would have it made, but it took me several years to work
up the courage to actually go inside.''

With people like Bruce Springsteen writing and performing the modern-day
equivalents of Woody Guthrie songs, but with hard-rock arrangements, the
definition of what exactly constitutes folk seems cloudy compared with 20 years
ago.

''A lot of people are afraid of the term 'folk,' because they envision a young
girl with flowers in her hair singing 'Michael, Row the Boat Ashore,' '' Mr.
Woliver said. ''We feel that the true folk process takes place any time a kid
brings home a Cyndi Lauper or a heavy metal album and starts learning the
song.''

Miss Vega also senses a close link between folk and certain kinds of new wave
rock. ''People who think the folk music audience is mainly baby boomers in the
their 30's and 40's who are nostalgic for a 60's sensibility are mistaken,'' she
observed. ''There are a lot of college-age kids for whom groups like R.E.M. and
the Smiths, who perform electric music with simple chords and introspective
personal lyrics, represent folk. In touring I've found that America is much
bigger than I had imagined it was, and I feel a double link between generations.
This summer I met Joan Baez, for whom I have very high respect. But besides
looking back to the folk singers from the 60's, I feel an equally strong link to
the new music of R.E.M., the Smiths, and Billy Bragg. The way the generations
are mingling seems very healthy.''

Today Arlo Guthrie, who lives in western Massachusetts and tours six months of
the year, is 38, married, and the father of four. Mr. Guthrie has lost none of
his wit and verve as a performer, and his songs still take an ultra-liberal
stand on issues. At tomorrow's concert, Mr. Guthrie will offer songs that deal
with such matters as the farm crisis and American missiles in Europe.

But there has been a deep and subtle change in his feelings about folk music and
politics. ''I tend to write less and less about the issues themselves and more
and more about the kind of people who get involved in them,'' he reflected.
''Two years ago, a guy came backstage who had been a helicopter pilot in
Vietnam. He told me that while everybody else used to put on the Rolling Stones,
he used to play 'Alice's Restaurant.' That seemed strange at the time. But I've
learned that times change and people change, and I'm pleased with the way things
worked out. Twenty years ago, to be opposed to the war in Vietnam was considered
unpatriotic. The attitude was 'America - love it or leave it.' Here we are 20
years later and there are serious debates going on about whether we ought to be
in Central America or Grenada or Lebanon, and it is not just a bunch of weird,
strange people on one side and well-dressed people on the other. That's a major
change and we should congratulate ourselves that it took only 20 years to have a
country where you can speak out on something and not be called bad names or be
labeled unpatriotic.''

Mr. Guthrie's views are reflected throughout the folk scene in the diversity and
complexity of the music that can be heard tomorrow night. It runs from Odetta's
staunch folk-blues to the Roches' ironic vignettes, from Buskin & Batteau's
folk-pop musical comedy, to Frank Christian's smoky blues. Even Joan Baez, once
the very model of a folk madonna, has evolved into a mature pop singer and
songwriter, still capable of righteous indignation but in no way naive. The
times have indeed changed.

Showtime tomorrow is 7:30 P.M. at Pier 84, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, Tickets,
which are $10 in advance and $11.50 tomorrow, are on sale at Folk City, 130 West
Third Street, and are also available through Ticketron, Teletron, and Chargit
outlets. Information: 254-8449.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arlo Guthrie (David Gahr)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Leslie Bennetts

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words


Friday HOME FIX-UP TIPS Your closet is too small to hold another shoe? Your
kitchen could only be comfortably utilized by its resident cockroaches? If
you've got a bad case of the New York City Apartment-Dweller Blues, the Big
Apple Fix-Up might be a good way to start making your living quarters more
livable. A three-day home improvement show starting today at the New York
Coliseum, the Big Apple Fix-Up will feature exhibits, seminars, workshops,
lectures and demonstrations on a wide variety of topics. You can bring a picture
of a decorating or structural problem and get on-the-spot advice from Parsons
School of Design experts at a home-improvement clinic; observe techniques like
marbleizing and trompe l'oeil, or learn about subjects that range from water
conservation methods to home security. The fix-up, which is sponsored by the
City of New York as a nonprofit public service, runs from noon to 10 P.M. today,
from 11 A.M. to 10 P.M. on Saturday and from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Sunday at the
Coliseum, Columbus Circle at 60th Street. Admission is $5, but if you bring an
apple (don't eat it; it has to be a whole one), you get a $1 discount; the
apples will be donated to charity. Information: 765-0350.

GROWING THINGS IN THE CITY

How big is the biggest zucchini grown in New York City this season? How unusual
is the most unusual-looking vegetable? These and other questions about growing
things will be answered this weekend at the Fifth Annual Harvest Festival of the
Horticultural Society of New York, when city gardeners from all five boroughs
bring hundreds of their best vegetables and flowers to compete for more than
$1,000 in prizes. The theme for this year's festival is the ''Contribution of
the AmerIndian to Agriculture,'' and displays of modern corn, squash and bean
hybrids along with early corn varieties will illustrate how many of today's
garden products are derived from plants grown by American Indians. A menu
listing such recipes as corn pudding will be handed out, and among the items on
sale will be a selection of imported Dutch hybrid spring bulbs and gardening
books. The festival is being held at the Horticultural GOG jump Society at 128
West 58th Street, and will be open today and Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and
on Sunday from 10 to 5. Admission is free. Information: 757-0915. Saturday CAPA
PHOTOS ON DISPLAY He covered the Spanish Civil War, the Japanese invasion of
China, World War II, the 1948 Arab-Israeli war, and the French Indochina War,
and he was killed on assignment in Indochina in 1954. Starting today, the career
of Robert Capa, the renowned war photographer, will be on display in an
exhibition at the International Center of Photography. ''Robert Capa: A
Retrospective, 1932-1954'' features 160 prints, more than half of which have
never been exhibited. Included are a sampling of work done far from
battlegrounds, such as pictures of Parisian children taken in the 1930's, images
of fashionable Parisian life in the 1950's, and portraits of Ernest Hemingway,
Pablo Picasso, Gary Cooper, Ingrid Bergman and Paul Robeson. Also opening today
is a smaller exhibition of photographs by Henri Cartier-Bresson that includes
portraits of William Faulkner, Andre Malraux, Saul Steinberg, Alexander Calder,
Marcel Duchamp, Truman Capote, Katherine Anne Porter and Samuel Beckett. Asked
how long it took to take a portrait, Cartier-Bresson once replied, ''A little
longer than at the dentist and a little less than at the psychoanalyst's.'' The
results of his efforts, along with the Capa photographs, will be on display
until Nov. 10. On Saturdays and Sundays, the International Center of
Photography, which is at 1130 Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, is open from 11 A.M.
until 6 P.M. Admission is $2.50. Information: 860-1777. 40-FOOT-HIGH CHARIOTS
One of India's largest annual festivals will be re-enacted in New York today in
a parade called the Rathayatra, or Festival of the Chariots. Starting at noon
and proceeding down Fifth Avenue from 57th Street to Washington Square Park, the
parade will feature 40-foot-high chariots rolling in procession like floats,
hand-drawn by robed devotees. Sponsored by the International Society of Krishna
Consciousness and members of the Indian community, the festivites also include
live Indian music and chants, free samples of vegetarian Indian cuisine and
demonstrations of yogic feats. Information: (718) 855-6714.

EMMA LAZARUS ORIGINAL

The original hand-written copy of the lines that have inspired millions and
served for generations as a symbol of America - ''Give me your tired, your poor,
your huddled masses yearning to breathe free'' - are among the highlights of an
exhibition opening today at the New-York Historical Society honoring the
centennial celebration of the Statue of Liberty. Emma Lazarus's famous poem,
''The New Colossus,'' was later inscribed on a bronze tablet on an interior wall
of the pedestal, but the original copy will be on view in this exhibition, along
with ''Proposed Statue of Liberty of 1876,'' Edward Moran's oil painting of an
early conception of the pedestal; original plaster models by Frederic Auguste
Bartholdi, the French sculptor and designer of the statue; three graduated sizes
of early models of the Statue; the official presentation document from the
National Archives showing the gift of the statue from France to the United
States; architectural renderings, diaries and other objects of interest. The
New-York Historical Society, which is at 170 Central Park West, is open on
Saturdays from 10 A.M. until 5 P.M. and on Sundays from 1 to 5. Admission is $2.
Information: 873-3400.

'PINAFORE' TO THE FORE

This weekend is your last chance to see the Light Opera of Manhattan's
production of Gilbert and Sullivan's ''H.M.S. Pinafore,'' which is playing at
the Norman Thomas High School at 111 East 33d Street. The current revival was
co-directed by Raymond Allen and Jerry Gotham, the company's artistic directors,
and Mr. Allen plays Sir Joseph Porter, with Mary Setrakian as Josephine and
Douglas Thom as Ralph Rackstraw. Performances on Saturday are at 3:30 P.M. and 8
P.M. and Sunday at 3:30 P.M. Tickets are $17.50 to $20. Box office: 532-6180.
Sunday 'SUMMER WINDS' CONCERT Summer may be waning, but a pleasant way to see it
out might be a free concert called ''Summer Winds'' in the South Garden of
Central Park's Conservatory Garden on Sunday. At 3:30 P.M., New York
Philomusica's six musicians will perform an all-Haydn program on pairs of oboes,
horns and bassoons. If you want to come early, there will be a free guided tour
of the Conservatory Garden starting at 2 P.M.. Itincludes a walk through six
acres of trees, shrubs, annuals and perennials. The tour starts from the
Vanderbilt Gate at Fifth Avenue and 105th Street. Information: 397-3156.

ZARZUELA RECITAL

Two Basque artists will give a recital of zarzuela music on Sunday at the Museum
of the City of New York. Mario Valdivielso, a baritone, will be accompanied in
the Spanish arias by the pianist Josu Gallastegui. The concert begins at 2:30
P.M. at the museum, on Fifth Avenue at 103d Street. Admission is $3.
Information: 942-2338.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CHINA-VIETNAM CLASHES

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 36 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 13


China said today that Vietnamese troops mounted 22 attacks against Yunnan
Province this week, killing ''large numbers'' of Chinese civilians. Peking said
the attacks began Sunday and continued through Thursday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Lmits on 500 at U.N. Take Effect Tomorrow

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 13


The United States, citing reports of spying by United Nations personnel, will
restrict the movements of about 500 United Nations employees from the Soviet
Union and five other nations.

The regulations, which take effect Sunday, apply to United Nations employees who
are nationals of the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Cuba, Iran, Libya and Vietnam.
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar asked the United States to reconsider
the measures, but his request was turned down, a United Nations spokesman said.

The rules require that affected workers who want to travel outside a 25-mile
radius of New York City on unofficial business get permission from the State
Department and use the department to make travel arrangements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WIRETAPS REVEAL DR. KING FEARED REBUFF ON NONVIOLENCE

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


Newly released transcripts of wiretapped telephone conversations of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. show that days before his assassination in 1968 he was
deeply disturbed about his standing as a civil rights leader.

He said he thought a planned civil rights march in Washington was doomed and his
leadership position had been damaged by vandalism that broke out at a Memphis
civil rights march he led in March 1968. His critics, he declared, were saying
''Martin Luther King is dead, he's finished, his nonviolence is nothing.''

The transcripts of wiretaps conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
obtained by a New York scholar, also disclose that in 1967 Dr. King gave
serious, if wavering, consideration to a ''symbolic'' campaign for the
Presidency to dramatize his opposition to the Johnson Administration's conduct
of the war in Vietnam.

According to the transcripts, the F.B.I. overheard Dr. King explain later that
he had agreed to be deterred from the Presidential candidacy by his advisers'
fear of alienating white financial contributors to the civil rights cause who
also supported the war.

Periods of Self-Doubt

The transcripts confirmed previous reports by aides and associates that Dr. King
periodically suffered bouts of gloom and self-doubt in his position as a leader
of the civil rights movement.

The conversation in which Dr. King discussed his doubts took place shortly after
black youths participating in a nonviolent march he led in Memphis on March 28,
1968, broke ranks and vandalized downtown stores. The next day President
Johnson, in remarks that were widely interpreted as a rebuke to Dr. King,
offered Federal assistance against what the President called the ''mindless
violence'' of ''looting and burning.''

These events took place a week before Dr. King's assassination in Memphis on
April 4, 1968, and a month before the scheduled start of his planned nonviolent
mass protest in Washington, to be called the Poor People's Campaign. The
afternoon after the unexpected chaos in Memphis the F.B.I. transcribed a
conversation in which Dr. King, shocked and demoralized by his inability to
control the young Memphis marchers, declared, ''I think our Washington campaign
is doomed.''

Delayed by Dr. King's death, a seven-week Poor People's encampment by thousands
on the Mall in Washington was held from mid-May through June 1968, but the
desired antipoverty legislation stalled in Congress.

Critics 'Vindicated'

In his concern over violence in Memphis, Dr. King was overheard a week before
his death remarking to Stanley D. Levison, a New York lawyer and businessman,
that his critics would now be ''vindicated.'' He included among them others in
the black leadership - Roy Wilkins, then the executive director of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Bayard Rustin, president of
the A. Philip Randolph Institute, and Representative Adam Clayton Powell,
Democrat of Manhattan. Despite Mr. Levison's consoling denials that his
leadership was tarnished, Dr. King went on:

''All I'm saying is that the Roy Wilkinses, the Bayard Rustins and that stripe -
and there are many of them -and the Negroes that are influenced by what they
read in the newspapers, and Adam Clayton Powell, for another reason, you know,
their point is: 'I'm right; Martin Luther King is dead; he's finished; his
nonviolence is nothing. No one is listening to it.' Let's face it, we do have a
great public relations setback where my image and my leadership are concerned.''

Andrew Young, one of Dr. King's top aides who is now Mayor of Atlanta, said
today in a telephone interview: ''That was really the low period in his life.
One thing about Martin, though, was that Stan was one of the few people that he
could really let down his hair with. As low as his mood would be -and I could
see it - he wouldn't talk that way to me. But there was no doubt he was
extremely depressed.''

''Every act of violence he took as a kind of personal repudiation,'' Mr. Young
continued. ''We tried to tell him how unrealistic that was in a society that was
so totally geared toward violence. But he just felt that the only way America
could survive was with nonviolence. When something went wrong, it was not just
his own personal loss, but it was almost a crushing repudiation of the
nonviolent movement.''

Conflicting Feelings on Vietnam

As far back as September 1965, the transcripts reveal, Dr. King felt
overburdened by the demands of the civil rights movement and pressures on him to
publicly oppose America's involvement in the Vietnam war.

In a conference call with Mr. Young, Mr. Levison and others that was recorded by
the F.B.I., Dr. King said: ''I don't really have the strength to fight this
issue and keep my civil rights fight going. The deeper you get involved the
deeper you have to go, and I am already overloaded and almost emotionally
fatigued.''

Dr. King's conversations are contained in thousands of pages of unpublished
F.B.I. documents obtained by David J. Garrow, an associate professor of
political science at City College of New York and the City University of New
York Graduate Center, under the Freedom of Information Act.

The F.B.I.'s secret electronic surveillance of Dr. King, through telephone taps
at his home and office in Atlanta and by hidden microphones in hotel rooms when
he traveled, had been hinted at in published reports in the mid-1960's. Dr. King
was generally aware of the wiretapping but dismissed its importance to him or
his leadership of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Hoover's Use of
F.B.I.  The broad scope of the F.B.I. surveillance was confirmed in 1975 and
1976 in Congressional testimony on F.B.I. abuses under J. Edgar Hoover, Director
of the bureau for 50 years until his death in 1972. Secret F.B.I. documents
disclosed then showed that Mr. Hoover and his top aides had sought to use the
bureau to destroy Dr. King by, among other tactics, circulating transcripts made
by Federal agents through microphones hidden in hotel rooms in which the civil
rights leader engaged in sexual encounters with women.

Because much of the bureau's covert file on Dr. King is under a court order that
will keep its contents sealed in the United States Archives until the year 2027,
no verbatim transcripts of wiretaps on Dr. King's home or office telephones or
from the secretly bugged hotel rooms can be made public under the Freedom of
Information Act. The Federal court seal was obtained in 1977 in the settlement
of a lawsuit brought by Dr. King's former aides.

The documents made public by Mr. Garrow were the fruit of diligence and a stroke
of scholarly luck in collecting material for his new book on Dr. King, ''Bearing
the Cross,'' to be published next year by Morrow. Mr. Garrow, 32 years old, is
the author of two earlier books on the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
under Dr. King, ''Protest at Selma'' and ''The F.B.I. and Martin Luther King
Jr.''

By focusing his requests for the F.B.I. files on lesser-known King associates,
Mr. Garrow believes he has, to some extent, bypassed the 1977 court order by
gaining access to transcripts of those with whom Dr. King had frequent telephone
conversations and whose wires also were tapped.

Warnings of F.B.I. Taps

The author's most fruitful requests were for the F.B.I. file of wiretaps on the
home and office telephones of Mr. Levison, an influential confidant of Dr. King.
Mr. Hoover and Robert F. Kennedy, who as Attorney General gave initial approval
to plans to wiretap Dr. King, believed that Mr. Levison was a secret member of
the American Communist Party, a liaison that Mr. Levison repeatedly denied
before his death in 1979 and that Dr. King refused to believe.

The Levison transcripts confirm that even after private warnings to Dr. King by
friendly Government officials that his contacts with Mr. Levison were being
monitored by the F.B.I. and that charges of a ''Communist connection'' could be
damaging to the civil rights movement, Dr. King consulted Mr. Levison frequently
by telephone. For a time Dr. King sought Mr. Levison's counsel through
intermediaries, but the telephones of the go-betweens were tapped too.

The files also reveal the huge cost in manpower and the numbing tedium involved
in the F.B.I. telephone surveillance. The Levison transcripts show that for more
than seven years, round-the-clock teams of bureau personnel recorded and typed
up such intelligence as Mr. Levison's consultations with his wife about New York
restaurants and movies at which he would meet her after work.

In an interview, Mr. Garrow said he had received 180,000 of transcripts and
other documents from the F.B.I. and that requests for 150,000 more were still
being processed. The F.B.I.'s surveillance of Mr. Levison, which continued for a
year and a half after Dr. King's death, was authorized by Mr. Kennedy and was
continued by his successors as Attorney General, Nicholas deB. Katzenbach,
Ramsey Clark and John N. Mitchell.

Possible Presidential Candidacy

The possibility of an antiwar Presidential candidacy by Dr. King was urged upon
him by such peace activists as Dr. Benjamin Spock.

After months of indecision, as revealed in the transcripts, over whether his
role as a ''moral leader'' required him to oppose the war more aggressively, Dr.
King finally declared at a news conference in Atlanta on April 25, 1967, that he
had no interest in being a candidate.

By then Mr. Johnson had already been given F.B.I. reports of Dr. King's
concession to his advisers, including Mr. Levison, that to preserve the
confidence of the political center he would have to avoid linking the civil
rights movement with the increasingly strident and radical politics of the
anti-war activists.

Dr. King was overheard by the F.B.I. describing his proposed Presidential
candidacy as an effort ''to punish'' Mr. Johnson for his conduct of the Vietnam
war by robbing him of black votes.

But according to Harry C. McPherson, a top Johnson aide who is now a Washington
lawyer, the equivocal plan for a King-led opposition was never regarded as a
threat by Mr. Johnson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David J. Garrow with transcripts of telephone converstations
of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (NYT/Dith Pran;AP); Photo of Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
VIETNAMESE CURRENCY IS DEVALUED AGAIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 14


Vietnam today announced the devaluation of its currency for the second time in
less than six months, according to a Hanoi radio broadcast monitored here.

Hanoi also canceled all flights in and out of the country.

Officials of the Vietnamese Embassy here were not available for comment.

The moves followed a Vietnamese decision to stop supplying subsidized rations to
Government employees.

Until this week the currency, the dong, was worth about 350 to 400 to the dollar
on the black market. But on Friday it was reported to be selling unofficially at
1,000 to the dollar in Ho Chi Minh City.

Vietnam, a country of about 60 million, last devalued its currency in April. At
that time the official rate of about 11 dong to the dollar was changed to 100 to
the dollar.

In both the north and south of the country, however, illegal currency exchanges
have become standard practice, with Vietnamese in shops and on the streets
crossing wrists in front of foreigners to indicate they wanted to buy hard
currency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RICH TEXANS RUB ELBOWS WITH REBELS

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Sept. 13


The 30-year-old scion of a Mississippi family with some money to spare came to
Dallas with his Puerto Rican-born wife for a $500-a-plate dinner and the chance
to rub shoulders with anti-Communist rebels from around the world.

One of the things he wanted to do was to meet Adolfo Calero Portocarrero, the
best known leader of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, largest of the
anti-Sandinista rebel groups. ''We're with you,'' the Mississippian, Charles L.
Irby, told Mr. Calero. As they shook hands a television crew from the CBS News
program ''60 Minutes'' closed in with lights and cameras.

Beside them was Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub, a retired Army officer and World War
II hero who was relieved as chief of staff of United States forces in South
Korea in 1977 after publicly criticizing President Carter's tentative decision,
later reversed, to reduce the number of United States troops there. The meeting
was the kind of thing he has become expert at arranging.

He says he wants to turn back Communism with a coalition of people who are
willing to risk their lives and people who are willing to risk at least part of
their fortunes.

Conference Ends With Dinner

General Singlaub, who has become a major figure in gathering money and supplies
for the Nicaraguan anti-Government rebels and in advising them on arms
purchases, uses as his organizational base the World Anti-Communist League and
its American affiliate, the United States Council for World Freedom. He is
chairman of the first group and president of the second.

The World Anti-Communist League, which says it has members in more than 90
countries, finished its four-day annual conference Thursday night with the
International Freedom Fighters Dinner, to which the general invited some
multimillionaires and other rich people. He estimated that 60 to 70 Texans came
to mingle with the delegates and representatives of guerrilla armies under the
crystal chandeliers of the ballroom of the Registry Hotel.

Mr. Irby said he had given about $25,000 to the United States Council for World
Freedom, confident that General Singlaub would spend it in the best way. The
Mississippian, who runs a family construction business in Jackson, said that
seemed ''little enough,'' coming from someone who had never had to fight in a
war for his country. ''I feel like certain people have given so much for
freedom,'' he said.

Though more reticent about their financial commitment to the cause, Nelson
Bunker Hunt and some associates gathered against one wall during the reception
before the dinner. His wife confirmed that she and her husband were contributors
to the United States Council for World Freedom.

Countries Long Communist

Many of the delegates represented countries that have long been Communist and
are not viewed as ripe for revolution or insurgency. There were Americans who
used to be Ukrainians, Americans who used to be Chinese, Swedes who used to be
Estonians, many people from Taiwan, many West Europeans, a few Africans and
Middle Easterners, an occasional Latin American and more.

During the days of meetings, the delegates heard reports on the status of
anti-Communist rebel movements in Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Mozambique, Angola,
Ethiopia, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. General Singlaub called the existence of
these groups the most significant international political development of the
last 40 years.

The delegates said they felt encouraged by President Reagan's tough talk against
Marxist-Leninist Governments. Taiwan academics warned the delegates not to be
misled into thinking China's economic changes meant it was moving toward
political democracy. Arnaud de Borchgrave, editor in chief of The Washington
Times, told them not to be misled about reports to the effect that Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the new Soviet leader, is a charming lawyer type who is committed to
give and take.

They met a Soviet soldier who defected in Afghanistan. They heard from Dr. Haing
S. Ngor, the Cambodian star of the movie ''The Killing Fields.'' The Israeli
researcher and author Avraham Shifrin, once a Soviet concentration camp
prisoner, brought them up to date on Soviet prison conditions, things he said
they would not otherwise know. Speakers complained about the ''naivete'' of the
''liberal establishment'' over Central America.

Photo Sessions With Rebels

At the closing dinner, the delegates and the affluent contributors and would-be
contributors had photographs taken with rebels who wore a variety of garb. Dr.
Ikram Gran of Afghanistan, dressed in the short, baggy trousers and unbuttoned
camouflage shirt he wore to all the meetings, was sought after for photographs.
Mr. Calero wore a business suit, as did Holden Roberto of Angola. Mr. Irby wore
a tuxedo and a shirt with gold buttons, and the television crews wore blue
jeans.

President Reagan sent greetings, and so did 25 hotel employees, many of whom
General Singlaub said were ''refugees from Communist tyranny.''

The dinner guests stood and cheered at every opportunity, especially for Hubert
Rodriguez, a 21-year-old Nicaraguan rebel whose left leg was amputated because
he developed gangrene after he had to walk and crawl 13 days to find medical
care. Mr. Rodriguez received one of the ''freedom fighter of the year'' awards.
The other went to an Afghan who, according to General Singlaub, led an action
that cut off the electricity of Kabul for more than a week. He could not be in
Dallas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LATEST CAUSE ON CAMPUS: SAYING NO TO 'STAR WARS'

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 13


Sanford Gottlieb is a self-described ''peace activist'' who achieved a certain
note in 1965 when he helped organize one of the first big protest marches in
Washington against the Vietnam war.

Lisbeth Gronlund, a graduate student in theoretical physics at Cornell
University, was a child when the United States withdrew from Vietnam. But the
gray-haired Mr. Gottlieb and the 26-year-old physicist have found a common
ground in the latest academic political cause - an effort to get scientists and
engineers to sign a pledge against doing research on space-based weapons.

The campaign, under way for several months but not formally announced until
Thursday, involves much of the passion and many of the lobbying techniques
developed by university-based movements of the 1960's, and indeed some of the
same people, shuttling between Eastern campuses and Washington on their mission.
The titles sound familiar, too: Mr. Gottlieb, based in Washington, is the
nonacademic political executive director for United Campuses to Prevent Nuclear
War.

Possible Effect of Pledge

Supporters of the no-research pledge seem divided on whether it will do much
good, but even some of those who doubt it seem to relish the fight.

Miss Gronlund, who composed the pledge with another physicist, David Wright of
the University of Pennsylvania, said of the response, ''I've never seen anything
like it before.'' She said about a thousand scientists around the country had so
far signed the promise not to participate in work on what the Pentagon calls the
Strategic Defense Initiative.

The Defense Department says the opposing point of view is implicit in the fact
that it has 2,600 applications from people and universities wanting to take
part.

Prof. Sheldon L. Glashow, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist at Harvard, signed the
no-research pledge a couple of weeks ago. He said today that the sort of
theoretical physics he practiced would not usually cause him to apply for
support from the Pentagon, but he thought he should sign anyway. ''I would give
'Star Wars' a 'D,' '' he said in an interview, ''because it is a danger to
peace, a dis-inclination to arms control, deleterious to American science, and
it is destabilizing, dumb and damned expensive.''

'It Seems to Me Right'

In at least one sense the campaign seems novel. It is apparently not aimed at
forcing universities into banning specific types of research on campus, as
campaigns in the Vietnam era sought to do. The drive has focused instead on a
public testimonial that the signer refuses to work on a particular military
project.

''I've just signed because it seems to me right,'' said Carl Sagan, the Cornell
astronomer, author and television-show host. He said there would always be
scientists with a wide range of political views and that military establishments
would probably always be able to find scientists to apply themselves to the
scientific and technical problems of war.

The largest numbers of signers are concentrated in the Northeast. At Cornell,
the campaign's heart, organizers say signatures have been gathered from 112
faculty members including 69 engineers, and from 409 graduate students,
including 217 engineers. A large majority of the physics faculty at
Carnegie-Mellon in Pittsburgh has signed, according to Prof. Lincoln
Wolfenstein. At Princeton, Cornell and elsewhere, several Nobel laureates in
addition to Dr. Glashow of Harvard have added their names. Some scientists and
especially engineers who have signed have been willing, in the past, to perform
other kinds of weapons research.

Historical Parallel Offered

Signers are still a tiny minority of those qualified to do such research, but
''counting up the votes does not make Star Wars work,'' said Prof. Philip
Morrison, a physicist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who worked
closely with the Manhattan Project 40 years ago in which the first atomic bomb
was developed.

Kosta Tsipis, a physics professor at M.I.T., has been campaigning more actively
than most, often flying from Cambridge to Washington to lobby lawmakers and
Administration officials. One argument Professor Tsipis advanced recently was a
comparison of the United States' recent military and economic posture with that
of Portugal in the 16th century.

''They discovered everything there was to be discovered,'' he said of Portugal's
great navigators and dreamers of empire. ''But the British and French exploited
these discoveries. The Portuguese were spending all their wealth on weapons.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTOGRPAHY VIEW;
THE MODERN FOCUSES ON CONTEMPORARY VISIONS

BYLINE: By Andy Grundberg

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words


What's new? The question, endemic to our fashionable culture, can never be put
to rest. We have seen, in photography in the last 20 years, ''New Documents,''
''New Topographics,'' ''New Pictorialism,'' ''New Landscapes,'' ''New Color'' -
all categories invented to designate the presence of something novel and
therefore, it is assumed, interesting. Now there is ''New Photography,'' an
exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art of 45 photographs by four relatively
little-known image makers. Given the show's title, and the authority of its
curator, John Szarkowski, who directs the museum's Department of Photography,
''New Photography'' could be expected to satisfy our yearning for the new for at
least the immediate future.

The four photographers are Zeke Berman, Antonio Mendoza, Judith Joy Ross and
Michael Spano. They range in age from the early 30's to early 40's, and they
live and work in New York except for Miss Ross, who hails from Pennsylvania.
None is exactly an unknown; they all have been making photographs for several
years and have gained some recognition for their efforts, including fellowships
from the Guggenheim Foundation and National Endowment for the Arts. But in terms
of their careers, it would be fair to say that they are just hitting their
strides.

Mr. Berman's pictures are still lifes of unprepossessing objects arranged and
often fabricated in his studio. They play trompe d'oeil tricks, using the
camera's single-point perspective to frequently humorous effect. In ''Interior''
(1983), a vase, book and water glass appear to sit on top of a small end table;
however, close inspection reveals that the table is merely a flattened piece of
cardboard lying on the studio floor. In other of his pictures, the reverse is
true: what appears in the print as flat is actually three dimensional.

Having studied sculpture before teaching himself photography, Mr. Berman
manipulates the territory between three and two dimensions with considerable
sleight of hand. But he takes pains to give away the illusions he so carefully
constructs. In his most recent work he lets the strands of glue that hold up his
constructions become elements of his cerebral-but-childlike compositions.

Antonio Mendoza combines snapshot-style images with typewritten text in his
autobiographical opus ''Stories'' (1951-1984). Although the complete series
consists of 64 panels and we are shown only 14, we get a fair sense both of the
photographer's life and of the work's self-effacing, humorous tone. Underneath a
picture of a cocktail party, he explains that since his family tends to be hard
of hearing, and since his family also tends to imbibe freely, family gatherings
tend to be loud. Revealing his love of long morning showers, he shows us a
picture of himself in the shower. Revealing the difficulties of being a
free-lance photographer in New York, he shows us two of his magazine rejection
slips.

Whether one finds such self-revelation primarily endearing or self-indulgent
depends on one's mood. At his best, Mr. Mendoza balances his irrepressible humor
with considerable poignancy, as when he writes of feeling a need to be married,
and shows us a family portrait onto which he has pasted his own face in place of
the original's father.

None of the pictures on view match the emotional intensity of Judith Joy Ross's
portrait series of visitors to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington.
Taken with an 8-by-10-inch view camera, the images have a monumental quality
that is at once stylized and penetrating. The experience of seeing the memorial
seems as etched into the faces of her subjects as the names of the war dead are
etched into its black stone slabs. Their eyes are variously downcast, pinched,
or transfixed in the kind of far-off gaze that suggests a great deal but eludes
translation. There is a high seriousness to the mostly middle-American faces in
these photographs. What they tell us about post-Vietnam America or about the
tragedy of the war is by no means explicit, but the photographer clearly has
created a visual theater that serves to remind us -like the memorial itself - of
the war's enduring scars.

Michael Spano's work derives its power not from an external source but from its
maker's relentless urge to experiment. His imagery encompasses a breadth of
subject matter and formal approaches, recalling the halcyon days of the
Bauhaus-influenced Institute of Design in Chicago. But its frenetic energy is
very much of New York and the 1980's. The most visually active of Mr. Spano's
pictures were taken with a panoramic camera, the lens of which turns as the
exposure is made, and with a portrait camera that arranges eight serial
exposures on one piece of film. For these images he has used the city streets as
his proving ground, placing himself in a hybrid territory between traditional
street photography and pure formalism. Yet he also appears interested in
printmaking as an esthetic challenge. His large, untitled portrait of a woman,
partly solarized, and a totem-shaped photogram that hangs beside it, are the
most memorable single images in the show, although it is hard to forget his two
striking nude studies.

These are, in short, four very talented photographers. But whether together they
constitute something called ''New Photography'' is another matter. Certainly it
is new in the sense of being recently made, but the title suggests something
more. When Mr. Szarkowski calls something new, chances are he means it; after
all, it was his ''New Documents'' show in the mid-60's that launched the careers
of Diane Arbus, Lee Friedlander and Garry Winogrand.

The last time Mr. Szarkowski weighed in with his view of the new, in 1976, it
was to introduce William Eggleston, whose color pictures presaged a new era of
polychrome photography. So it is worth noting that the present exhibition
consists entirely of black-and-white pictures. One could take this as a sign of
recursion or regression. Indeed, there is so much about ''New Photography'' that
harks back to earlier photographic practice, the word ''new'' almost seems
ironic. Mr. Berman's illusionistic still-life constructions recall not only
Robert Cumming's photographs of the last 10 years but also the Surrealist images
and objects of Man Ray. Miss Ross's technique is resolutely turn-of-the-century;
Mr. Spano's experimental repertory has a sense of pastiched deja vu.

Perhaps, then, what the show tells us is new is a self-conscious return to the
past, to the models of Pictorialism, Surrealism, the Bauhaus and, in Mr.
Mendoza's case, the family album. But the resurrection of historical styles,
usually with their ideological baggage thrown away, is a central characteristic
of Post-Modernist culture as a whole. In photography, it has been going on since
at least the end of the 70's.

What could be said is that these four photographers are representative of four
tendencies in contemporary art. Mr. Mendoza's pairing of image and text, for
example, is part of a widespread interest in combining the visual and the verbal
that finds its roots in the ''story art'' of the early 70's. Miss Ross's attempt
to deal with large public issues can be compared to Robert Adams's anti-nuclear
series ''Our Lives and Our Children,'' shown on exactly the same wall a year and
a half ago. Mr. Berman's urge to construct his images from scratch is shared by
at least two dozen photographers who work within the rubric of ''fabrication.''
And Mr. Spano's eclecticism seems of a piece with the freewheeling, why-not
ethos of Lower East Side art.

Mr. Szarkowski suggests that in conventional terms Mr. Berman might be
considered a ''straight'' photographer, Mr. Mendoza a reporter, Miss Ross a
documentarian and Mr. Spano a formalist. But what distinguishes their work is
something else: Mr. Berman's has intelligence, Mr. Mendoza's has wit, Miss
Ross's has sincerity, and Mr. Spano's has raw energy. These qualities, too, are
nothing new, but they are rare. In combination they suggest not ''new
photography,'' but the health of contemporary practice, its vitality and its
promise.

''New Photography'' will be at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street,
through Dec. 3.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Antonio Mendoza

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY COLLEGES GETTING BACK TO BASICS

BYLINE: By JOHN W. FINNEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala.


Sometime within a few months, the next generation of generals and admirals will
sit down at their computer terminals hundreds of miles apart and ''fight a war''
on the northern plains of Europe.

The students at the Air War College, here at Maxwell Air Force Base, will move
tactical air units to intercept invading Warsaw Pact forces. At the Army War
College in Carlisle, Pa., student-colonels will move ground forces north. Future
admirals at the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., will order ships and planes
to stop Soviet submarines trying to sneak through the Greenland Gap. And the
Navy, Army and Air Force officers at the National War College in Washington will
act as theater commanders. The computers, programmed to show the Soviet
responses, will tell the students whether they have won or lost the battle.

War gaming with computers is at least a decade old. But only now is it about to
be used to train tomorrow's military leaders to fight a war in a cooperative
way. The Army War College and Air War College agreed four years ago on the joint
war games, but the Naval War College, which had pioneered war gaming when
Admiral Stansfield Turner was commandant more than a decade ago, did not get
aboard until this year.

The teachers at the Air War College hope the war games will reintroduce the
concept of war into the training of future admirals and generals.

Since the creation of the Naval War College in 1884, the war colleges have had
the mission of turning the specialist - the fighter pilot, the destroyer captain
or the regimental commander - into the generalist. They have also become rungs
on the promotion ladder for any promising officer who wants to ascend to flag
rank. In the postwar period, however, the colleges have been uncertain of their
roles: Should they be trying to train soldier-statesmen, in the pattern of Gen.
George C. Marshall, or soldier-warriors, in the tradition of Gen. Creighton W.
Abrams?

For 30 years after the National War College was established in 1946 at the
initiative of Generals Marshall and Dwight D. Eisenhower, who had encountered
problems of interservice cooperation in World War II, the pendulum swung toward
the soldier-statesmen. But in the last 10 years, the service colleges have moved
toward training soldier-warriors, leaving the National War College to prepare
the big thinkers.

A Poor Imitation

The change has been most pronounced at the Air War College, which was founded in
1946. Despite its reputation as the most innovative and best managed of the
services, the Air Force has always been slightly self-conscious about its lack
of intellectual heritage. That attitude was reflected in the early evolution of
the school here. It became a poor imitation of the National War College, where
the most promising Air Force officers continued to go.

That trend has begun to change in recent years. Now, 15 to 25 percent of the Air
War College's graduates go on to become generals, about the same ratio as the
graduates of the National War College. The rest become career colonels - as much
a backbone of the officer corps as senior noncommissioned officers are in the
enlisted ranks. The change can be traced to 1975, when Lieut. Gen. Raymond B.
Furlong took command of the Air War College, determined, as he put it, that ''we
were going to study war.'' From Samuel P. Huntington's classic book ''The
Soldier and the State,'' he had drawn the lesson that the primary mission of the
professional military was ''to know their trade,'' and to him that meant
students had to learn to apply military force and think under the stress of
combat.

So war has been been reintroduced into the curriculum. The focus today is on
events starting with World War II, and there is greater emphasis on joint
operations with the other services. As one faculty member put it, ''We knew a
great deal about flying off into the wild blue yonder, but very little about how
a division moves on the ground.''

Post-Vietnam Mellowing

The curriculum for the 10-month course is divided into three main areas:
military deployment, which involves a study of Soviet and American military
doctrine; national security affairs, which emphasizes the geopolitical side of
strategy, and leadership and management. In addition, students are required to
take elective courses that range from the role of the base commander to the
connection between war and morality.

Of the 42-man faculty, only six are civilians; the rest are colonels and
lieutenant colonels. Their average age is only two years older than that of
their students. They say the current class of 232 students, including 36 foreign
officers, seem to be more eager and more competitive and to have broader
interests than their predecessors. The teachers report a mellowing of Vietnam
memories, less of the animus, once pervasive in the military, growing out of the
conviction that the Vietnam war was lost because of restrictions by civilian
overlords and criticism by a callow press.

Most of those now in the college fought in Vietnam, but in four or five years,
few will have had any wartime experience. That fact alone will make it more
urgent and difficult to turn out soldier-warriors able to cooperate with the
other services, as the Air War College is trying to do.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND'S MILITARY SUFFERS SOME SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


It was a dismal attempt at a coup that stood for nothing and solved nothing.
Last Monday, for the second time in just over four years, Manoon Rupekarchorn, a
disaffected former colonel followed by 22 tanks and about 500 men, tried to
overthrow the Government of Prime Minister Prem Tinsulandonda. Again, he failed.
But what may seem like the end of the story may be just the beginning.

A newly aggressive Thai press, which owes much of its freedom to the Prem
Administration, has been pursuing every possible lead to the origins of the
ill-fated coup. From press reports and results of the official inquiries being
conducted by the police and the military, it is becoming apparent that a
fundamentally more serious challenge to the civilian Government may have been
intended, involving labor leaders and disaffected farmers and workers as well as
at least some business interests, including the fugitive head of an illegal
investment scheme.

What is less certain is the extent of complicity within the military. It is
perhaps this aspect of the attempted coup and the murkiness surrounding the
instigators' political attitudes, if any, that is of most interest to Thailand's
allies in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, judging by editorials in
regional newspapers and interviews with commentators in neighboring nations.

Many Southeast Asians say they had come to accept the idea that coups ''were
just Thailand's way of making changes,'' as one political observer put it. But
several expressed surprise that this ''military mechanism'' had resurfaced at a
time when Thailand did not seem to have insurmountable domestic problems.

However the coup investigations end, Thailand's powerful military establishment
is likely to be affected, local commentators suggest. If an open inquiry
implicates higher ranking officers, there would have to be a restructuring of
commands while the army is facing tens of thousands of Vietnamese troops on its
Cambodian border.

Ironically, it is the proximity of the Vietnamese and Thailand's open support
for Cambodian guerrillas battling them that cause some Thais to express public
fears that the military rather than the Government stands to gain from an
atmosphere of danger. A continuing confrontation with Vietnam over Cambodia
would not bode well for Thailand's democratic experiment, many Thais believe.
Although the lower house of parliament is elected democratically, the Prime
Minister is still appointed in consultation with the military.

Divisions in the military explain most of Thailand's 15 to 20 coups or coup
attempts over the last half century. Ex-Colonel Manoon, who fled to Singapore
after last week's attempt collapsed, was dismissed from the army after he and a
group of officers known as the Young Turks, the most influential army faction at
the time, tried to oust Prime Minister Prem on April 1, 1981. That coup
collapsed when King Bhumibol Adulyadej and Queen Sirikit gave their support to
the Prime Minister.

Last week the King again appeared to have used his influence in support of the
constitutional system.

The Young Turks, many of them members of the same class at Thailand's
Chulachomkhlao Military Academy, were once described as ''reformers.'' They
supported Gen.

Kriangsak Chomanan, who became

Prime Minister in 1977 after a coup that overthrew a repressive military regime.
The Young Turks later switched their support to General Prem, if only briefly.

Personal Rivalries

Although ''forgiven'' for their April Fool's coup, the Young Turks have always
been under suspicion. A feeling is growing in Bangkok that this time, whether or
not former Colonel Manoon acted with higher authority, the Young Turks should be
retired once and for all.

Apart from factional divisions, there are also personal rivalries bedevilling
the army. Prime among them is the unspoken contest between two powerful generals
who are seen as candidates to succeed General Arthit when the Supreme Commander
retires next year. One of them, Lt. Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyuth, an intellectual
close to the Prime Minister, is to become army chief of staff in October. He
rallied immediately to the Government's side last week and apparently played a
big role in holding the armed forces together during the crucial morning hours.

The other is Lieut. Gen. Pichitr Kullavanijaya, a tough and laconic graduate of
West Point who was not promoted in this year's annual military reshuffle,
according to local press reports. An unsigned opinion column in the
English-language newspaper The Bangkok World on Thursday expressed for the first
time publicly the belief that ''resentment of a ranking army officer over the
annual army reshuffle'' may have contributed to the atmosphere leading up to the
coup, if not to the coup itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a tank of rebel forces (Special Features/ Sipa Press/Phansak)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


THE ESSENTIAL ROYSTER: A Vermont Royster Reader. Edited by Edmund Fuller.
(Algonquin Books, $18.95.) England has its essayists, whose perfect diction,
public-school trained, flows periodic from their pens on almost any subject at
all. We have our journalists, many of them Southern, some of them eventually
columnists, who turn their various American languages and sensibilities where
they will, generally several times a week. They write ''the stuff of history,''
as Vermont Royster of The Wall Street Journal puts it, because the essence of
journalism ''is the setting down of observations on the current state of
things.'' Mr. Royster, now over 70 and twice honored by his peers with the
Pulitzer Prize, is among the best of our unaccredited historians; ''The
Essential Royster'' is a collection of nearly 100 pieces, mostly for The
Journal, that with one exception have not been pulled together in a book before.
They are on means and ends in Watergate, supply-side economics, the university
system and the difference between a learned and an educated person, Franklin
Roosevelt's aristocratic heritage and his conduct of the Presidency (''unawed by
the office''), the equal rights amendment, Maria Callas, Vietnam and suffering a
small stroke. mund Fuller, does him, and us, only one disservice. The pieces are
arranged first by subject; only within subjects is the sequence chronological.
How nice it would have been to read Mr. Royster in the order in which he wrote,
wheeling his eye from thing to thing, reflecting, moving on, practicing his
craft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


Sept. 15, 1985 Fiction

* 1 2 3 LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $17.95.) Recollections
of a small town.

* 2 1 4 LUCKY, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of a
crime lord takes on the heiress of a shipping tycoon in fashionable settings.

* 3 3 13 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
contemporary horror.

* 4 4 9 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 5 6 5 THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $14.95.) Romance,
scandal and murder in New York's high society.

* 6 5 26 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States.

* 7 8 12 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West larger than life.

* 8 9 4 TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $17.95.) Three
sisters find their destinies bound by an obsession with the same man.

* 9 7 17 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 10 13 17 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) A restless
explorer scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

* 11 10 34 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 12 14 18 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.''

* 13 1 LESS THAN ZERO, by Bret Easton Ellis. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
hedonistic lives of Los Angeles's rich kids.

* 14 17 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $17.95.) What happened to five
members the class of 1958 after they left Harvard.

* 15 15 9 FALL FROM GRACE, by Larry Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Machinations by spies, double agents and a beautiful woman on the eve of D-Day.

* 16* 1 A MAGGOT, by John Fowles. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Five travelers in
18th-century England have mysterious, wonderful and eerie adventures.

* 17* 11 9 THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. (Pantheon, $11.95.) The sexual
initiation of an adolescent girl by a rich Chinese in Saigon in the 30's.
Nonfiction

* 1 1 10 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to the first
man to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 46 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 3 19 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 4 4 24 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 5 5 54 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 6 6 8 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankee baseball
star.

* 7 7 5 THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men
seek the 1984 Olympic gold medal for single sculling.

* 8* 8 6 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 9 12 2 FINAL CUT, by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) How the making of the film
''Heaven's Gate'' proved the unmaking of United Artists.

* 10 10 18 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 11 15 54 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) How the
author of ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' sought a true love.

* 12 11 11 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Treachery,
mystery and high society in the 1978 murder of a Mormon multimillionaire.

* 13 8 THE HEART OF THE DRAGON, by Alasdair Clayre. (Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.)
Companion volume to the PBS television series on China.

* 14* 14 9 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.)
The autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis champion.

* 15 13 5 THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing
pieces about pursuing pleasures in the great outdoors. And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE ACCIDENTAL
TOURIST, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $16.95.) This poignant and funny novel follows
the tracks of an unimpassioned man and two women (one of them his wife) as they
try to switch him from the rails of his comfortable routines.

OUR THREE SELVES: The Life of Radclyffe Hall, by Michael

Baker. (Morrow, $17.95.) A fine biography of the popular novelist whose courage
possibly exceeded her literary skills but whose frankly lesbian ''Well of
Loneliness'' shocked England in 1928 by its articulate claim for a place in
society for people like herself.

CRIME AND HUMAN NATURE, by James Q. Wilson and Richard

J. Herrnstein. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A massive summary (639 pages) of what
behavioral science thinks about how criminals are made (a lot) and how to make
fewer (not as much).

GOOD ENOUGH TO DREAM, by Roger Kahn. (Doubleday, $16.95.)

The author of ''The Boys of Summer'' spent 1983 operating the Utica Blue Sox, a
minor-league baseball team. Did a wonderful narrative full of colorful
characters result? We're telling you!

A CERTAIN PEOPLE: American Jews and Their Lives Today, by

Charles E. Silberman. (Summit, $19.95.) This study, at once objective and
personal, argues from a large body of evidence that Jews suffer no handicaps in
American society, though some of the ways in which Jews are Jewish are under
revision. STRINDBERG, by Michael Meyer. (Random House, $24.95.) Mr. Meyer offers
a large and fully detailed picture of the rotten, racist, untruthful misogynist
who was Sweden's greatest playwright. THE RED FOX, by Anthony Hyde. (Knopf,
$17.95.) Treason most foul for motives most idealistic is the background for
this thriller, which addresses the moral and ideological problems of the spy who
rejects a democratic society in favor of the Soviet Union. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 14 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 3 5 WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's,
$14.95.) Ways to avoid or end addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

* 3 2 45 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.

* 4 4 24 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for dishes
prepared at moderate cost. 5* 5 4 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
Diamond. (Warner, $16.50.) A diet for weight loss and physical fitness. The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WINNING HER FATHER'S WAR

BYLINE: By Joel Conarroe; Joel Conarroe is president of the John Simon
Guggenheim Memorial Foundation and a professor of English at New York
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1741 words


IN COUNTRY By Bobbie Ann Mason. 245 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $15.95.

A SWATCH of western Kentucky near the Illinois border constitutes Bobbie Ann
Mason's private literary terrain. Encountered three years ago in ''Shiloh and
Other Stories'' and now revisited in an impressive first novel, her landscape is
populated by K Mart clerks, gas station attendants, young grandmothers who read
Harlequin novels, and other ''good country people,'' to borrow Flannery
O'Connor's serviceable phrase. Light-years from the young professionals sipping
margaritas on Columbus Avenue, this small corner of the South is a place where
Shrimp Night at the Holiday Inn is an occasion rivaled by a visit to the mall in
Paducah. Here, depicted without condescension, is a quintessential middle
America whose icons are Phil Donahue and Phyllis George, Egg McMuffin and Ed
McMahon.

That collection of stories, by turns troubling and droll, resembles Joyce's
''Dubliners'' in communicating a pervasive sense of paralysis. Characters are
unwilling (or unable) to break out of stultifying routines; some are reluctant
even to leave the house. The men, typically, stay at home working with their
hands, thus gratifying an unfocused creative urge. The divorce rate is high.
Women are more given to self-improvement, as witness the sublime opening of
''Shiloh'': ''Leroy Moffitt's wife, Norma Jean, is working on her pectorals.''
But the women too can be victims of habit, and, as one of them says, ''Some
folks is happy just to stay home.'' In ''Residents and Transients'' the
first-person narrator of the story identifies with an injured rabbit: ''It is
hopping in place, the way runners will run in place. Its forelegs are
frantically working, but its rear end has been smashed and it cannot get out of
the road.'' Those who do break away may find it is too late. In one especially
bleak story an aged couple sell the family home and drive in their new Winnebago
to Florida for a view of the ocean. '' 'Is this what you brought me here to
see?' said Imogene, as they examined the Atlantic from their high perches in the
camper. 'It all looks the same.' ''

Entrapment and mobility are also central to ''In Country,'' whose title is a
veterans' phrase for Vietnam. Emmett Smith, 35, did a tour in the Army and now,
14 years later, suffers from skin rashes and severe head pains, probably caused
by Agent Orange. The novel, at its most polemic, is an indictment of our
Government's casual attitude toward those who survived an unpopular war but are
having difficulty surviving civilian life. More comfortable with an amiable cat
named Moon Pie than with his former sweetheart, Emmett expresses his distress in
words that could be echoed across the country: ''There's something wrong with
me. I'm damaged. It's like something in the center of my heart is gone and I
can't get it back.'' Puttering around the house and watching television reruns,
he has no interest in the world outside his safe haven: ''I saw for myself, Sam.
I saw as much as I wanted to see.''

Emmett shares the house with his sister's daughter, Sam, a feisty teen-ager
reminiscent of the tomboys in Carson McCullers and Harper Lee. Her father was
killed in Vietnam before she was born and Emmett functions as a surrogate
parent, though in fact the roles are usually reversed. In contrast to her
immobilized uncle she is a distance runner, and in a quest for still more
freedom she buys a used car from another of Hopewell's emotionally disabled
veterans, with whom she has an unconsummated affair - the car, fittingly, has a
faulty transmission. The novel's central material is framed by two brilliant
sections describing a trip to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. Sam
and Emmett are joined by her grandmother, a comic figure who makes Sam think of
''that Chevy Chase movie about a family on vacation, with an old woman tagging
along.'' Those at home with books are more likely to be reminded of O'Connor's
story, ''A Good Man Is Hard to Find.''

Sam, though, is no reader, and if the novel finally seems thinner, less
resonant, than the tightly packed stories it is partly because her imagination
has been nourished with such meager fare. Miss Mason took a gamble in deciding
to devote not a short story but a novel to so frugally educated a character. Sam
does, to be sure, refer to an old mariner with an albatross around his neck, but
with the confident literalism of a 17-year-old she decides that the sensible
thing to do with a bird like that is to bury it. Such poetry as exists in her
world is found not in anthologies but in the colorful speech of country people -
''Let the child eat, Donna. . . . She always was touchous.'' - Sam is undeniably
bright but her mind, in the tradition of what I call Shopping Mall Realism, is a
town dump of brand names, horror movie plots, talk show one-liners, and other
detritus of a mass culture. The novel consists entirely of her thoughts, actions
and conversations, and hence the references to ''Alien,'' ''Humanoids From the
Deep,'' and other not altogether distinguished artifacts with which readers who
avoid films churned out for juveniles will be unfamiliar. And since Sam
habitually watches videos of rock idols, it also follows that the novel, like
the recent work of Ann Beattie, should have a built-in sound track, but that
sound will have little reverberation for anyone who prefers Mahler to Madonna.

It is a measure of Miss Mason's skill that despite her protagonist's minimal
exposure to anything that is not banal she succeeds in communicating,
persuasively, a movement toward adulthood and intellectual arousal. Working a
timely variation on the traditionally male-centered Bildungsroman, she
delineates Sam's quest for a father, which is to say for a history that will
validate her identity in a way that Bruce Springsteen's lyrics cannot. By
reading her father's battlefield diary and awakening to her uncle's deep grief,
she gradually - and painfully - comes to recognize that there are things in the
world more authentic than video games and ''M*A*S*H.'' In the course of her
moral education she passes through the phases traditionally associated with such
rites of passage, progressing from separation to isolation (confronting a heart
of darkness) and finally to integration.

If the rudimentary level of allusion revealed during this awakening is geared to
Sam's inner life, so too is the novel's prose, which makes Hemingway sound
almost Jamesian: ''She ate a Granny Cake. Each bite was a loud smack, like a
breaking leaf. The bullfrogs had started bellyaching, like Emmett with a gas
attack. It was amazing how long you could sit out in the wild and still not see
many animals. They know I'm here, she thought. Even the squirrels know I'm here.
Squirrels are always on the other side of the tree. You go around the tree and
they sneak around to the other side. That's why you need a squirrel dog to hunt
squirrels. Granddad Smith had told her. A fice is best, he said.'' S AM lives in
a world of things, not of abstractions, and sentences like these communicate her
forthright responses in language that cats and dogs can understand. This
seemingly artless, brick-by-brick style is deceptive, however, and the novel,
unlike the rock lyrics it quotes, is not intended for mass consumers with short
attention spans - the very audience, ironically, best equipped to respond to its
popular references. As in O'Connor, every detail, however trivial, is put in for
a reason, and patterns of considerable sophistication - the several quest
motifs, for example - eventually do emerge. ''In Country'' is written with
disarming simplicity not because its author lacks linguistic resources but
because she knows intimately the prosaic character of small-town life in her
corner of the South.

She also knows exactly what she wants to say, whether about the difficult
process of growing up, the daily routines of country people or the larger
national dramas that unite all sorts of people. By the end of the meticulously
constructed novel a literal journey has been completed, and in the dramatic
final scene at the Veterans Memorial we watch Sam as she watches her uncle. Her
figurative journey into understanding is in its early stages, and we can only
speculate about how far from the bonds of Hopewell it might take her. As for her
creator (who now lives in Pennsylvania), the book clearly reveals her own
understanding of those mysteries that reside in the human heart. Her first
novel, although it lacks the page-by-page abundance of her best stories, is an
exceptional achievement, at once humane, comic and moving. WIETNAM 'FORCED
ITSELF UPON ME' When Bobbie Ann Mason looks back on 1967, it's not the Vietnam
War that she remembers. ''It seems to me,'' the author of ''In Country'' said in
a telephone interview, ''that the main event was the Beatles' 'Sgt. Pepper'
album.'' But Miss Mason, who was a college student then, does have one clear
recollection of the war's early years. ''It happened to me during the 60's,''
she said. She was on a bus when a group of soldiers boarded at Fort Campbell,
Ky. ''One of them talked to me. They were shipping out to Vietnam the next day.
That struck me harder than anything I had heard kids in college say or anything
I had read. All I could think was here are these kids going over to die. It made
me think later that if that struck me that hard, think of how terrible it was
for people who actually had loved ones involved - or for the soldiers
themselves.'' Although Miss Mason, like her characters, was raised in small-town
Kentucky - her parents still live on the family farm near Mayfield - she said
that brief meeting on a bus two decades ago is the only autobiographical
incident in her novel. As she wrote, the war ''forced itself upon me. I didn't
start out saying to myself, 'I'm going to write a novel about the effects of the
Vietnam War on a family.' I started out with the family and then I probed around
and discovered what their problems were. It was as though the war came out of
someplace where it had been hiding.'' She and her husband, Roger Rawlings, an
editor at Rodale Press, live in rural Pennsylvania. Miss Mason, who is 45 and
holds a Ph.D. in literature from the University of Connecticut, has been writing
full-time for six years. For now, she has no second novel in mind: ''I plan to
be writing stories for a while.'' - Patricia T. O'Conner

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; Photo of Bobbie Ann Mason (Thomas Victor)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CARIBBEAN WAR GAMES: NOT EVERYONE IS DELIGHTED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: VIEUX FORT, St. Lucia, Sept. 15


For the last few days several hundred American soldiers with camouflage
greasepaint on their faces, and policemen from four small Caribbean islands,
dressed up like soldiers, have been struggling through the jungle-covered
mountains north of here.

It is the first time since the invasion of Grenada nearly two years ago that
American combat troops have landed on an independent Caribbean island, the first
time since then that they have been operating with island forces.

This time there is no crisis. The G.I.'s and the policemen, as well as soldiers
from several larger islands, a number of island coast guardsmen and some
American and British sailors, are practicing for some future crisis.

In some ways, however, the exercise, its main participants and an island mutual
defense association that has become active since the Grenada invasion have
become almost as big a subject of controversy as a real war.

Soldiers? Hardly

The roughly 120 policemen in the exercise, for example, present something of a
paradox. Trained by United States Special Forces soldiers and equipped with M-16
rifles, they and about 300 others still at home on their islands, make up one of
the most lethal concentrations of firepower in the modern history of the
English-speaking Caribbean.

Yet their own commanders and the United States military officers who
enthusiastically support them say the specially trained police in their fatigue
uniforms and combat boots are not to be mistaken for soldiers and would be no
match for a determined enemy.

That is also true, they say, of the entire mutual defense organization, made up
of special police units from St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, St.
Christopher-Nevis, Dominica and Grenada and the military forces of two larger
island-nations in the southeastern Caribbean, Antigua and Barbuda and Barbados.
One senior American officer estimated that the organization, known as the
Regional Security System, had so far cost the United States $20 million to $30
million in training and equipment.

A Tripwire and a Terrier

Col. Wayne R. Topp, who flew 204 jet-fighter missions in Vietnam and who is the
deputy commander of United States forces in the Caribbean and the commander of
the current exercise, said he thought the Regional Security System might be able
to handle ''small situations.''

But the greatest value of the defense system, he said, is that it creates a
formal framework for a response from the United States and serves as a
''tripwire'' on what the United States regards as a strategically important
perimeter.

Cuthbert Phillips, the police commissioner of St. Lucia, pictured the small
islands as terriers facing a ferocious German shepherd, which he did not further
identify. ''At least,'' he said, ''you can hear them bark.''

Critics in the region say they worry that political leaders may someday turn the
new firepower against political enemies. They also say they are convinced that
the United States would intervene in the area anytime its interests were
threatened and that the Regional Security System is, at best, an unnecessary
alarm mechanism and a waste of money that could be more wisely spent addressing
the grave economic and social problems of the islands.

Most of those in the group, all former British colonies, have populations of
under 125,000, high unemployment and financially strapped governments.

''The whole idea of holding military maneuvers in these impoverished islands is
farcical,'' said Errol Barrow, a former Prime Minister of Barbados who led the
nearby island to independence in 1966 and now heads the Government's main
opposition. ''They've got their priorities all wrong,'' he said.

Poverty Called the Enemy

James Mitchell, the Prime Minister of St. Vincent, whose gray volcanic mountains
can be seen from the harbor here, refused to send any of his specially trained
policemen to take part in the exercise. He said in a telephone interview that he
had not decided whether to withdraw from the Regional Security System, but that
''it's not a priority with me.''

''I'm not interested in having a fire brigade in the region,'' Mr. Mitchell
said. ''What we've got to do is insure the economic and social development of
the Caribbean.''

Over lunch in St. Vincent, where the average working man earns a daily wage of
$6 to $8, Marcus DeFreitas, the island's Minister of Trade, Industry and
Agriculture, went out of his way to make clear his Government was not
anti-American. ''We share the same goals and objectives of building and
developing democracy in these islands,'' he said, ''But we don't need military
assistance. The enemy here is poverty. We need assistance to fight that war.''

Some American military officers here say the St. Vincentians do not seem to
understand United States aid. ''They wouldn't get more economic aid if they
didn't get the military aid,'' one officer said. ''They just wouldn't get the
military aid.''

Grenada Experience Cited

Harold Hoyte, the editor in chief of The Nation, one of Barbados's two daily
newspapers, said he was concerned about the political risk of the new weapons.

But he said that ''given the Grenada experience,'' in which a handful of
Marxists seized control of the island and developed close ties with Cuba, some
sort of collective defense system seemed warranted. It might not be a potent
force, he said, but perhaps it would slow down troublemakers until help could
arrive.

There seems to be general agreement that there is no immediate military threat
in the region. But many military men and political leaders say they like the
idea of the special police units and the regional alliance because they think,
in the words of Colonel Topp, that these units will make it ''very, very
difficult for a leftist insurgency to get a toehold'' in any of the islands.

It has been raining, with occasional breaks, since the exercise, named Exotic
Palm by the Americans, began. The policemen in fatigues and the others started
with a march of up to 12 miles along the narrow paved roads that climb past
tin-roofed houses and groves of bananas and coconuts then open onto the wilds of
the Edmunds Forest. There, in jungle that blocked the sky, they searched for
about 30 guerrillas who, the exercise scenario said, had tried to mount a coup
but had been driven out of the capital by St. Lucia's special police unit. Most
of the time the policemen were soaked to the skin. A few suffered sprained
ankles and one injured a knee in the tough terrain.

They seemed cheerful and enthusiastic, but the American officers in charge of
the exercise said no one who was not with them in the jungle would ever know
exactly how well or how poorly the trainees had done. Just as in Vietnam, the
American officers said they did not feel right about making a formal evaluation
of allies at arms. There would be no final report on performance here, they
said, no listing of lessons learned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. soldiers (Eric Nurse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR U.N. AT 40, MIXED MESSAGE FROM REAGAN

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1123 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


When President Reagan goes to the United Nations' 40th birthday party next
month, he will be offering stately felicitations but also presenting clear
evidence of harder times for the world body under the Reagan Administration.

The President's anniversary gift will be a level of financial support that
Congress has just ordered to be seriously crimped unless the United Nations
allows its larger contributors a larger voice in its budget.

The President signed the financial restriction last month, even though he
expressed doubts about the practicality of forcing the United Nations to adopt
weighted voting on budget issues by next year.

On a larger policy scale, the stricture clearly reflects the ''measured
disappointment'' that Reagan Administration officials have pronounced the
international body to be after four decades.

For all the disappointment, White House political officials privately conceded
last year that the world forum was a godsend in the President's re-election
drive when he needed to dramatize concern for world peace and journeyed there
for a photo opportunity with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko.
That moment summarized the double political edge reflected in domestic opinion
polls: The public doubts the United Nations' effectiveness, but strongly thinks
it should continue to exist.

''I think the Administration has looked on the U.N. more as a nuisance center, a
sounding board for those who don't like us, rather than as a center for the
resolution of problems,'' said Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat
who was one of the United Nations' earliest supporters and remains one of its
heartiest. ''This gradual drift away from a strong belief in the U.N. began
during the Vietnam era and is not unique with this Administration. It has become
a field for propaganda.''

If so, supporters of the Administration contend that the United States has at
least become a sharper participant in this field.

''I think the posture of the United States has greatly improved,'' said Charles
M. Lichenstein, former deputy United States representative in the United Nations
Security Council, who now is a senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation. ''It
doesn't mean we win very many, but it does mean we state our case with greater
clarity.''

The new budget restriction from Congress would require that, unless weighted
voting is introduced next year, the United States will pay no more than 20
percent of United Nations agency costs. That would be a cut from the present 25
percent limit, under which United States support is expected to reach $196
million this year.

The chief sponsor of the cut, Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of
Kansas, says the motive is budget fat in the United Nations bureaucracy, not the
frustrating nature of global politics at the world body.

But observers of the birthday can note the significant shift from 40 years ago,
when the United States provided more than 40 percent of the United Nations'
budget in the initial postwar glow of world optimism.

The change in attitudes since then was demonstrated most dramatically by the
Reagan Administration when it decided to withdraw last year from the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, one of the
institution's major financing arms.

Last week, the State Department, acting under another Congressional mandate,
ordered tighter traveling restrictions within the New York area on more than 400
workers at the United Nations Secretariat who are citizens of the Soviet Union
or five other nations suspected of clandestine activities.

The 'Dockside' Farewell

The mood shift from the founders' early hope was pungently expressed two years
ago when Mr. Lichenstein, representing the Reagan Administration in the United
Nations, advised members disgruntled at criticism and restrictions in the host
country that they were free to move the organization elsewhere and that they
would find him and other Americans ''down at dockside waving you a fond farewell
as you sail into the sunset.''

President Reagan said that the remark had ''the hearty approval of most people
in America'' and that, ''if they chose to leave, goodbye.''

A week later, however, the President was less offhand and more diplomatic when
he addressed the United Nations and praised its ''proud history of promoting
conciliation and helping keep the peace.''

Such strong United Nations supporters as Representative Jim Leach, Republican of
Iowa, a member of the House Foreign Relations Committee, say they think the
President is failing internationally but capitalizing domestically on a trend
among politicians in both parties to belittle the United Nations.

''He is playing both ends,'' Mr. Leach said in an interview, ''with
statesmanlike speeches on the one hand and feeding the appetite of the political
right on the other, indulging the get-the-U.S.-out-of-the-U.N. syndrome.''

Administration officials say the true problem is within the United Nations body,
not domestic politics, and that moderates among the nations that profess
nonalignment must be encouraged to vote on the merits of issues rather than on
bloc prejudice against the United States.

Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters, who recently replaced Jeane J. Kirkpatrick as
United States delegate to the United Nations, spoke of this in a recent
interview in U.S. News & World Report, describing the Administration's
conclusion that the world body had been a ''measured disappointment.''

''The less naive hoped the U.N. would do more than it has in the way of conflict
resolution,'' he said. Ignoring the U.N.?  Critics, however, contend that the
Administration has ignored the United Nations at such times as when Washington
was condemned by a majority for the invasion of Grenada. They also say the
Administration has avoided the United Nations as well as the World Court in its
policy of undermining the Government of Nicaragua.

''This Administration uses the U.N. for strictly propaganda, and in 40 years
I've never seen more neglect of the U.N.'s principles than these people show,''
said the Rev. Robert F. Drinan, a Democrat who used to be a member of Congress
and is now a professor of interational law at Georgetown University. ''They are
telling the world we really don't believe in international law.''

Administration defenders such as Mr. Lichenstein say Nicaragua is not ''any of
their business.''

''It's within the purview of the Organization of American States, a matter of
self-defense against exported revolution,'' he said, contending that the Reagan
Administration ''actually is one of the best friends the U.N. has.''

''We're telling them to shape up and start acting as if they're 40 years old,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON TOLD TO IMPROVE MEDICAL READINESS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 653 words


WASHINGTON, Sept. 16 -

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger ordered the armed services today to make
wartime medical readiness rather than peacetime health care their first
priority.

''This decision is intended to redirect the decision-making process to fulfill
better our primary responsibility for medical readiness,'' Mr. Weinberger said.
''This policy is clear: Medical readiness will be the primary criterion for
determining the size and composition of our medical corps, medical facilities
and training programs.''

The Defense Secretary, in an address to senior medical officers, said he
expected peacetime health care for military personnel and their dependents to be
improved by relying more on civilian rather than military medical facilities.

At the same time, he said, Army, Navy and Air Force medical officers must learn
to work together and eliminate duplication or see unity imposed from above.

Treatment of Wounded Cited

Since 1973, when the last American troops left Vietnam, combat medical readiness
deteriorated to a point several years ago where only 2 of every 10 men wounded
in battle could be effectively treated. Recently, that ratio has risen to 3 in
10.

The quality of medical care for military personnel and their dependents in
peacetime has increasingly been criticized as inadequate, below civilian medical
standards, costly and subject to fraud.

Moreover, the Army, Navy and Air Force have operated so separately that methods,
instruments and supplies were different. According to senior officials in the
Pentagon, that has exacerbated the lack of combat medical readiness and the
declining quality in peacetime medical care.

The speech by Secretary Weinberger and a supplementary address by Dr. William E.
Mayer, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, marked a new effort to
overcome those defects. They also appeared to set a stage for testimony before
Congress.

The addresses were delivered at the Defense Department's first health
conference, which was held at a hotel in Springfield, Va., a suburb of
Washington. Texts of Mr. Weinberger's and Dr. Mayer's remarks were made
available by the Pentagon.

Shortage of Surgeons Seen

In his address to commanders of military medical facilities, the Secretary said
the armed forces were ''seriously short of surgeons, nurses, psychiatrists and
anesthesiologists who would be needed in wartime,'' while medical personnel and
facilities were ''weighted toward general medical care, including obstetrics and
pediatrics.''

''I do not believe that we can afford such luxuries as fully staffing a military
obstetrics unit for 10 deliveries a month, or maintaining expensive training
programs for medical specialties that are little or no use in war,'' he said.

For peacetime care, he said: ''I am directing Dr. Mayer aggressively to seek
arrangements with community medical resources where they are available and where
they meet our high-quality standards. Medical services can be made more
accessible to our families.''

Referring to the issue of service parochialism, Mr. Weinberger noted that ''a
Defense Health Agency has been proposed as a solution to the problems that occur
in our system.'' The three services have vigorously objected to the proposal.

The Secretary said the plan had been set aside for the moment in favor of
centralizing policy and budgeting authority in Dr. Mayer's office. But he held
out the possibility of a unified agency if the services refused to work
together.

Dr. Mayer reinforced Mr. Weinberger's address with some plain talk of his own.
''I want you as hospital commanders to be absolutely clear about the policies
that we will pursue,'' he said. ''We must recognize that, in spite of our three
service colors, we are ultimately one system, and we must manage ourselves as
one system. Unnecessary duplication and overlap in services and training must
cease.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FINDINGS ON REMIANS OF MISSING IN ACTION DISPUTED

BYLINE: By CARLYLE C. DOUGLAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


Leaders of a Vietnam War veterans' group took issue yesterday with a Pentagon
statement that the remains of some American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia
had been positively identified.

At a news conference at the Penta Hotel in New York, J. Thomas Burch Jr.,
coordinator of the group, the National Vietnam Veterans Coalition, also
presented what he said was evidence that the Reagan Administration had ignored
or covered up evidence that many American prisoners of war remained captive.

Two former Green Berets, Maj. Mark A. Smith, retired, and Sgt. Melvin C.
McIntire, who filed a class action lawsuit two weeks ago in behalf of any
Americans remaining captive in Southeast Asia, also spoke at the news
conference. Major Smith accused the White House national security adviser,
Robert C. McFarlane, of not informing President Reagan of reports that many
American prisoners remained alive in Southeast Asia.

Government to Address Charges

Maj. Larry Icenogle, a spokesman for the Defense Intelligence Agency, which the
two soldiers accused of ignoring or covering up the intelligence reports, said
the charges would be addressed in the Government's response to the suit, which
was filed in Federal District Court in Fayetteville, N.C. But he said the
information of which they spoke ''was determined not to be conclusive enough to
take any action.''

Relatives of two men who were aboard a gunship shot down in Laos in 1972
presented affidavits from independent forensic anthropologists asserting that
remains identified as those of the two men - Lieut. Col. Thomas T. Hart and Sgt.
James R. Fuller - could not positively be identified beyond being those of human
males.

Donald Parker of Oregon, a nephew of Sergeant Fuller, and Anne Hart of
Pensacola, Fla., Colonel Hart's wife, accused the Pentagon of attempting to
avoid embarrassment by disposing of ''M.I.A. questions'' in an expedient manner
without regard to accuracy.

Maj. Jerry McCann, spokesman for the Army Central Identification Laboratory at
Fort Shafter, Hawaii, said that he could ''understand the desire of families to
seek second opinions,'' but that the Army was ''fully confident'' in the
''extraordinarily painstaking process'' used in the identifications.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JULIAN BECK, 60, IS DEAD; FOUNDED LIVING THEATER

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


Julian Beck, whose Living Theater expanded the frontiers of theatrical
innovation for nearly 40 years, died of cancer Saturday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 60 years old and lived in Manhattan, to which he had recently returned
after 20 years of self-exile in Europe.

The Living Theater, which Mr. Beck founded in 1947 with his wife, Judith Malina,
was one of the most influential and long-lasting companies of the avant-garde
movement. Its work -especially ''The Connection,'' ''The Brig'' and ''Antigone''
- brought social issues and audience involvement to the fore. Audiences at a
Living Theater performance could expect to be exhorted as much as entertained.

''I think if we will look at this world as it really is,'' Mr. Beck wrote in
1965, ''we will find that even what is most ugly has within it the sparks of
life. And I think we go to the theater to glimpse those sparks. That's why we
get so excited before we go to the theater. It's because we're looking for light
in a very dark world.''

Political activism characterized Mr. Beck's life outside the theater as well as
in it. By Miss Malina's count, the couple were jailed 12 times on three
continents for various acts of civil disobedience. They spent 30 days in jail in
New York in 1957 for refusing to take part in a civil defense drill. They were
indicted for - and later acquitted of -indecent exposure for a 1969 performance
in New Haven of ''Paradise Now'' by the Living Theater.

'Image for a Changing Society'

''We insisted on experimentation,'' Mr. Beck once said. ''That was an image for
a changing society. If one can experiment in theater one can experiment in
life.''

Mr. Beck was born May 31, 1925, in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan,
the son of an auto parts salesman. By the age of 4, he was putting on an
imitation circus in the family's apartment, and as a teen-ager he acted in
student productions at the Horace Mann School.

Still, after leaving Yale University Mr. Beck first worked as a painter,
creating a body of Abstract Expressionist work in the 1940's. His artistic
direction changed soon after meeting Miss Malina, then 17 years old, in 1943.
Their five-year courtship centered on theatergoing, and shortly before they
married they founded the Living Theater.

Their primary influences were the playwright Paul Goodman, the psychologist
Wilhelm Reich and, most of all, the director and theorist Antonin Artaud. They
adopted from him the idea of a ''Theater of Cruelty'' whose extreme realism
would shock an audience out of complacency. Mr. Beck united such intellectual
theory with a strong populist streak, the part of him that in 1967 predicted the
demise of Broadway, Shakespeare and ''the whole theater of the intellect.''

Studies in Contrasts

''Being amateurish at some particular thing,'' the critic Richard Gilman wrote
in The Atlantic in 1969, ''was not of much concern to the Living Theater, which
combined this quality with professionalism, skill with ineptitude, originality
with cliche and coolness with frenzy in an indivisible act. The Becks were
intent from the beginning on fashioning a public attitude toward what they had
found mattered to them, and to their constituency, as social beings. What
mattered, at least as much as dramatic art, was political reality.''

Such concerns reached their greatest expression for the Living Theater in the
decade from 1959 to 1969. Those years saw the landmark productions of ''The
Connection,'' Jack Gelber's drama about narcotics addicts; ''The Brig,'' Kenneth
H. Brown's play about a brutal Marine Corps prison, and adaptations of
''Antigone'' and ''Frankenstein'' that resonated with criticism of the Vietnam
War.

What distinguished these works was their harrowing realism and their attempt to
break down the so-called ''fourth wall'' separating actor from audience. In
''The Connection,'' for instance, actors playing junkies wandered into the
audience demanding money for a fix. In other plays, Living Theater actors would
implore an audience to storm a jail or re-educate the police or abolish money.

The Living Theater has remained a powerful and highly regarded theatrical force
in Europe. In the United States, however, its fortunes fell. Mr. Beck, Miss
Malina and their troupe left New York for a nomadic existence in Europe after
their theater was closed by the Internal Revenue Service because the couple owed
$23,000 in back taxes. The Living Theater did not perform in New York between
1974 and 1984, and on its last visit Frank Rich wrote in a review in The New
York Times of ''The Archaeology of Sleep'' that ''their gimmicks look tacky
now.''

Documentary on Living Theater

The ground-breaking work of the Living Theater has been preserved in the
documentary ''Signals Through the Flames'' and in film versions of ''The
Connection'' and ''The Brig.'' Mr. Beck won numerous awards for his theater
work, including the Grand Prix of the Theatre des Nations, the Brandeis
University Creative Arts Citation and six Obie awards.

Late in his life, Mr. Beck began to act extensively outside the Living Theater.
He appeared in Francis Coppola's film ''Cotton Club'' and in Pier Paolo
Pasolini's ''Edipo Re,'' and recently finished shooting for Brian Gibson's film
''Poltergeist II'' and for an episode of the television series ''Miami Vice.''

He also leaves behind a body of nonfiction and poetry. His 1972 book ''The Life
of the Theater'' contained essays of theater and politics. He recently finished
the manuscript of ''Theandric,'' a book about the metaphysics of theater.

The Living Theater, which recently returned to New York, will continue under the
direction of Miss Malina and Hanon Reznikov.

In addition to Miss Malina, Mr. Beck is survived by a brother, Franklin; a son,
Garrick, and a daughter, Isha, both of New York, and three grandchildren.

Funeral services will be held tomorrow at 11:30 A.M. at Riverside Memorial
Chapel, Amsterdam Avenue and West 76th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Julian Beck

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES COUNSELED IN URBAN COPING

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words


At first, for some Indochinese refugees on Andrews Avenue in the Bronx, fear was
a daily part of their lives.

''I was afraid to leave the apartment for even an hour because of the bad
people,'' said Ngo Tanh, who came here from Vietnam in 1982 with five children.
Vandals had bored a hole through her ceiling and committed at least a half-dozen
burglaries and robberies in the building.

''We didn't know how to get along in this city and couldn't talk to anybody
except other Vietnamese,'' recalled Tran But Phat, who lives in the building
with her husband and five children. She is now studying English.  The Phats were
among some 20 refugee families that were resettled in the battered apartment
block at 2322 and 2316 Andrews Avenue in the Morris Heights section in 1981 and
1982. Rents were low, but in addition to poor security there were serious heat
and hot-water problems, bursting pipes and a leaking roof and windows.

Tenants Joined Forces

Now, much of what was inhospitable is starting to improve, with the persistence
of the families and the help of resettlement organizations whose goal is to ease
the newcomers' transition from a third world or rural existence to that of a
forbidding urban environment. The changes have helped others on Andrews Avenue
as well.

''The refugees' troubles focused attention on the horrible condition of the
buildings,'' said one of the block's score of American tenants, Debra Mann, an
unemployed dental assistant with three children. ''Before that, our complaints
got hardly any recognition.''

Mrs. Tanh, Mrs. Phat and Mrs. Mann are leaders of a new tenants association that
is determined to save the Andrews Avenue buildings. In scarcely a year, they
have joined forces and begun to work with the new city-appointed apartment
manager, won improvements in all basic services and begun proceedings to remove
squatters.

Behind this resurgence is an organization called the Refugee Urban Skills
Project.

Follow-up Assistance

''Severe crises were erupting because the refugees were settling in areas where,
while there was affordable housing, there were problems of a high incidence of
crime, declining housing stock and lack of adequate community-based services,''
said Arie Bierman, coordinator for the Refugee Urban Skills Project.

Recognizing the new refugees' need for follow-up assistance, the city's largest
resettlement agency, the New York Association for New Americans, approached 11
other leading agencies, and in February 1984 they agreed to set up the
urban-skills project.

Initial financing came from the State Department of Social Services, and the New
York Association supervises the project. Since March the association, which is
now seeking financing from private and public sources, has kept the program
alive.

''We're building communities, not just getting buildings repaired,'' Mr. Bierman
said. ''The refugees and their American neighbors came from different
backgrounds but can get together on common problems like lack of heat and hot
water.''

Solving Their Own Problems

The urban-skills teams have worked directly with 1,400 refugees from Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos, Ethiopia and Afghanistan, helping them resolve problems of
housing, crime, schooling, group relations.

There are nearly 20,000 Indochinese refugees in New York City, according to the
association, including 13,300 from Vietnam, 6,000 from Cambodia, and 350 from
Laos. There are about 400 from Ethiopia and 500 from Afghanistan. Most of the
new refugees are concentrated in the Bronx and Brooklyn.

''We act as counselors, educators, mediators, but our main job is empowerment -
convincing the refugees they can solve their own problems,'' said Mary Ellen
Rhindress, supervising social worker of the urban-skills project.

Not long ago, Miss Rhindress and her Cambodian community aide, Savath Bip,
attended a meeting of the Cambodian Tenants' Association of 564-570 East Second
Street in Brooklyn, just east of Borough Park.

A Tenants' Meeting

The four-story, yellow-brick building had been newly sandblasted; some of the
windows had been repainted and others had new metal frames. But there was no
lock on the front door, the hallway was littered with empty bottles and
cigarette packages and the walls were covered with graffiti.

The meeting was held in a neat airy apartment where No Him, a city public works
employee, lives with his wife and six children. Mr. Him had bought a pizza,
potato chips and soft drinks for the occasion.

The landlord arrived unexpectedly with a mechanic to repair a noisy refrigerator
in another apartment, and asked if there was anything else he could do. The
Cambodians thanked him politely but did not invite him to stay.

First on the agenda was the question of leases. Several tenants had signed new
two-year leases with 9 percent increases, but others had refused to sign, saying
they wanted to consult first with the urban-skills people.

Attack by Youths

Taking each case, Miss Rhindress demonstrated that it was preferable to take a
one-year lease with a 6 percent increase, because the next year the increase
would be only 4 percent.

''Don't be afraid to refuse to sign something you don't understand,'' Miss
Rhindress advised. The landlord was making an effort to be cooperative, she
said, and she would try to persuade him to let them sign one-year leases.

Then Ly Kim told how that afternoon three girls and three boys armed with pieces
of wood had attacked her, her 8-year-old daughter and 8-month-old son. A
neighbor had called the police, but by the time they arrived, the youths had run
away.

''Now my daughter is afraid to go out on the street.'' Mrs. Ly said.

Several other refugees recounted incidents in which their children had been
beaten up or they had been insulted or threatened by neighborhood youths and
drunkards.

Miss Rhindress offered several suggestions. If someone was drunk, she said, it
was better not to argue with the person and to keep at a distance. She also
proposed inviting an officer from the 66th Precinct to come talk to the
Cambodian Tenants Association.

''We've done this in other neighborhoods and it's a good way for them to get to
know you,'' she said.

Then she told them that the landlord had begun the legal procedure to evict some
troublemakers in the building. He had sent them a letter telling them they had
one month to correct the situation or they would be taken to court.

This was where the refugees could support the landlord, she said. It was not
necessary to go to court, but they could all gt together and write a letter,
which would be shown only to the judge, saying why they wanted the family out of
the building.

''These meetings are very important to us because some people take advantage of
us and we don't know American law and our rights,'' Mr. Him said at the close of
the session.

He added that since the meetings have been held, the landlord had satisfied 80
percent of their requests and had put a new lock on the front door several
times. Each time, however, the lock had been tolen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mary Ellen Rhindress and group of Cambodians (NYT/Sara
Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 17, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Lens on Life

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 499 words


CAPA. By Richard Whelan. 342 pages.

Knopf. $19.95. ROBERT CAPA PHOTOGRAPHS. Edited by Cornell Capa and Richard
Whelan. 242 pages. Knopf. $35.

EVERYTHING about Robert

Capa was larger than life, including his death. After covering five wars - the
Spanish Civil War, the Japanese invasion of China, World War II, the 1948
Israeli-Arab war, the French war in Indochina - his luck ran out when he stepped
on a mine near Hanoi while shooting the dying French campaign in 1954. Of
course, pictures were found inside his camera; he had captured the scene on the
battlefield in the last moments of his life. Friends who mourned him as well as
strangers around the world remembered his most famous picture - the falling
Loyalist soldier in Spain, his rifle flying out of his hand at the instant the
bullet struck. Robert Capa had followed his own advice to other photographers
only too well: ''If your pictures aren't good enough, you're not close enough.''

Richard Whelan's biography is first-rate in every way, right down to the
valuable list of Capa's published photo-stories - from his earliest pictures of
Leon Trotsky in 1932 to his last in the Red River Delta in 1954 for Life and
Time magazines. Biographies of photographers, witnesses to the lives of others,
are not usually exciting; one exception is Carl Sandburg's of his
brother-in-law, Edward Steichen. But in Mr. Whelan, who writes on art and
photography, Mr. Capa has a wise and accurate chronicler. As everybody who knew
and admired Mr. Capa can testify - from North Africa and Sicily to the watering
holes of London and Paris - he could be an inventive storyteller, particularly
when describing his own adventures. Mr. Whelan delivers the wonderful stories;
most turn out to be true.

To the men and women whose lives he crossed, Mr. Capa was a most charismatic
personality. Mr. Whelan recounts his various love affairs with, among others,
Ingrid Bergman; their trysts began in postwar Berlin and continued in Irwin
Shaw's beach house in Malibu. The full story of his life is here, from his
Hungarian origins as Endre Friedmann in 1913 - he adopted the more glamorous
name Robert Capa when his credits began to appear - to his sympathies for the
Loyalists and anti-Fascists anywhere, to his friendship with Ernest Hemingway,
John Steinbeck, Herbert L. Matthews, Charles Collingwood and other writers. John
Hersey described Robert Capa as ''the man who invented himself.''

His truth lives on in black and white. A companion volume of 260 pictures,
''Robert Capa Photographs,'' edited by Mr. Whelan and Cornell Capa, the
photographer's brother, shows what a stunning contribution Mr. Capa made to
photojournalism in this warring century. Looking at the pictures, it becomes
apparent that Mr. Capa always saw the human story behind the event. The faces of
soldiers, widows, collaborators and prisoners dominate the front-line action.
His was not impersonal newsreel-style photography; it was the horrible image of
war itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Whelan

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
4 DECADES OF HISTORY IN '45/85'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 922 words


ABC News sweeps up 40 years of history tonight. Where have we been, and where
are we going? We were optimistic after World War II. Then we felt beleaguered.
Old verities crumbled, and somehow we lost our way. For the most part, ''45/85''
suggests, this was because of our preoccupation with the Soviet Union, a nation
we understood imperfectly. Apparently, the last four decades have been a
learning process. ''45/85,'' three hours long, can be seen on Channel 7 starting
at 8 P.M.

Credit ABC News with enormous ambition here. It must connect the events of 40
years, finding what holds them together. Old newsreel and television images
flicker past. We are in Fulton, Mo., listening to Winston Churchill use the
phrase ''Iron Curtain.'' Then we are in the Greek Civil War. Soon there is the
hula hoop, followed by Elvis Presley, Casey Stengel, the U-2 and Francis Gary
Powers. Meanwhile, Peter Jennings and Ted Koppel wander in and out. In a way,
the goal is teleology. What do the images mean?

Some of this is enthralling. ''45/85'' - Av Westin is executive producer -is
like a travelogue through time. Seen this way, old agonies are made palatable.
Assassinations, civil rights demonstrations, Vietnam, Watergate, even Jimmy
Carter's ''crisis of the American spirit,'' are held up for examination, each
getting more or less equal time. The thread, however, is the Soviet Union. Our
troubled foreign relations tie ''45/85'' together.

This viewer saw only an unfinished version of ''45/85.'' In the preview tape Mr.
Jennings and Mr. Koppel had not yet interviewed President Reagan. Certainly,
they will ask him about his November meeting in Geneva with Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the Soviet leader. The answers will make up the final part of the
program.

Therefore, a question: What do we expect Mr. Reagan's answers to be? After all,
''45/85'' has spent a good deal of time discussing United States-Soviet
relations. By the end of the program we should know something about them; we
should have a point of view. In fact, we do not. ''45/85'' is so assiduously
balanced that a point of view is lost. At the same time, the old newsreel and
film images go by too rapidly to leave much residue.

Thus ''45/85'' doesn't linger. In an interview, Dean Rusk says that the decision
to divide North and South Korea along the 38th Parallel was almost a matter of
whim: At the end of World War II, he and another Army colonel simply looked at a
map. Mr. Rusk says this had far-reaching implications, but then the topic is
dropped.

Minutes later, ''45/85'' looks at Project Solarium, a secret study made during
the Eisenhower Administration, and says it guided our foreign policy for a
decade. It also quotes the conclusion of the study: The United States should
pursue ''political, economic, propaganda and covert measures designed to create
and exploit troublesome problems for the U.S.S.R.''

This is fascinating stuff, especially if it guided us for a decade. Then Project
Solarium is dropped, too. It is almost as if the subject is too sensitive.
''45/85'' doesn't want to agitate; it wants to glide by untroubled.

The problem, however, is that foreign policy really is troubled. There are
differences between the United States and the Soviet Union, and sometimes
''45/85'' misses the point. ''The past 40 years have shown an essential and
classic difference between the two forms of government,'' Mr. Jennings says in
the preview tape. ''Democracy is flexible, a fertile environment for change.''

Then we see film of Geraldine Ferraro and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, apparently
campaigning. Hooray for diversity, but this is a pallid distinction between a
dictatorship and a democracy. Actually, one could argue that the Soviet Union is
more ''flexible'' than the United States. Free from any wearisome due process or
the pressure of public opinion, its Government can move unhindered.

''45/85'' is not saying there is a moral equivalency between the Soviet Union
and the United States, but it does wash out real differences and sometimes it
blurs fine, and not so fine, points. It says, for example, that the
''superpowers received lessons in restraint'' from Islamic fundamentalism - the
United States in Iran, the Soviet Union in Afghanistan.

This is stretching the notion of a lesson. Washington, as nearly as we can tell,
has not tried to topple the Ayatollah. Maybe it did receive some kind of lesson,
but what kind of lesson could Moscow have received? Its troops still fight in
Afghanistan. ''45/85'' loses the distinction.

Similarly, ''45/85'' says that President Reagan is ''widely regarded as having
returned American foreign policy to the basic themes of the cold war.'' As
proof, we are reminded of the Grenada invasion and of Mr. Reagan's insistence on
calling the Nicaragua rebels ''freedom fighters.''

Whatever the ''basic themes of the cold war,'' however, it's hard to see how
they apply to Grenada. And what is the cold war, anyway? Is it rhetoric or a
reflection of something real? ''45/85'' is so intent on even-handedness that
we're not quite sure. It's on the one hand this, and on the other hand that. On
the one hand, Mr. Reagan is returning to cold war themes. On the other hand, the
Soviet economy is a mess. ''45/85'' tries to make connections between things
like that when they can't be reasonably made.

Still, ''45/85'' is a monumental piece of television, and ABC is making a brave
effort. The three-hour work is flawed, but it must also be taken seriously. At
the very least, it's a valiant attempt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Berlin airlift

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam to Display in China

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 24 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 18


In November, Vietnam will display goods in a Chinese exhibition for the first
time since the late 1970's, a Vietnamese diplomat said today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Old War, New Query on Missing Troops

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 343 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


''Dear Mr. Secretary,'' began the letter from veterans seeking an accounting of
comrades listed as missing in action or taken as prisoners of war.

No, it was not another complaint from Vietnam War veterans, who have been loudly
vocal in recent years. This one came from veterans of an earlier war. The Korean
War, of the early 1950's.

The letter sent recently to Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger came from
The Chosin Few, a group of about 1,400 men who survived the bloody 1950 battle
of Chosin Reservoir in the Korean mountains near Manchuria. The group was formed
just last year and has been seeking information from the Pentagon on their
fallen comrades.

The battle they fought involved 15,000 allied ground troops, most from the First
Marine Division and the Army's Seventh Infantry Division, who had found
themselves surrounded by 120,000 Chinese. They suffered 12,000 casualties,
including 3,000 deaths, before survivors fought their way out over 78 miles of a
one-lane dirt road in a driving blizzard.

It was in that battle that Maj. Gen. Oliver P. Smith, commanding general of the
First Marine Division, when asked if his men were retreating, sounded the battle
cry: ''Retreat, hell! We're just attacking in a different direction.''

In its letter to Mr. Weinberger, The Chosin Few said 389 Americans who fought in
the war might still be held as prisoners and 8,177 others were listed as missing
in action. The group urged the Pentagon to ''provide us with an accounting of
its actions to date to recover remains of the M.I.A.'s and to resolve the limbo
status of those American P.O.W.'s reportedly alive but never returned after the
armistice.''

''We are especially haunted by the possibility that any might still be alive,''
the letter said.

It closed by stating: ''We have been termed the silent veterans of the forgotten
war, but we will not stand silent so long as those 8,177 Americans missing in
action and the 389 presumed alive remain forgotten.''

Officials of group said they had not received a reply from the Pentagon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS & CO.;
PLOT THICKENS AT ARBOR HOUSE

BYLINE: By SANDRA SALMANS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words


IT has the ingredients of a potboiler: A young woman from the Middle West, with
no formal training, moves to New York and joins a publishing house founded by a
brilliant but temperamental editor. He sells the house to a larger company, and
is dismissed when his contract expires. The young woman takes his place, and the
house seems to thrive. But employees start abandoning the company, and even the
woman has sought a job elsewhere. Industry gossips wonder: Was she jumping or
being pushed?

Two years have passed since Eden Collinsworth, now 33 years old, became
publisher of Arbor House, a small concern that the Hearst Corporation acquired
from its owner, Donald I. Fine, in 1978. Miss Collinsworth, people who otherwise
dispute her merits agree, is bright, savvy and ambitious. Up to that point,
however, she had only publicized and marketed books; she had never signed up an
author, edited a book or managed the finances of a company of any size.

''They took a flier on me, no doubt about it,'' she said in an interview this
week. ''And it's worked out.''

So it seems. Arbor House is having its best year ever. It hit the best-seller
list with ''Glitz,'' the first Elmore Leonard book to ''break out'' of its
customary 15,000-copy sales. This year its authors include Anthony Burgess
(''The Kingdom of the Wicked''), Richard M. Nixon (''No More Vietnams''), Rex
Reed (''Personal Effects'') and Mr. Leonard (''Dutch Treat: 3 Novels'').

And Miss Collinsworth herself has made it in publishing, one of those businesses
in New York - like advertising or communications - where one individual can
leave his or her mark. Publishing may not be as lucrative as investment banking
- Miss Collinsworth says her income gets into six figures with the help of a
bonus - but it is no less demanding for all that.

Gordon Jones, vice president of the Hearst Books/ Business Publishing
Corporation, describes her as ''toughminded, determined.'' Agents praise her
decisiveness and business sense. People who have worked for her say she is
imperious, a fault that some attribute to insecurity about her youth and
inexperience. Miss Collinsworth says her youth and her Pre-Raphaelite looks have
proved to be an advantage in negotiations. ''People tend to underestimate me, to
assume a certain naivete,'' she said, ''but only for the first time.'' BUT her
critics in the publishing industry also say that Arbor House may look less
prosperous next year.

Apart from a few big names, the potential best sellers on its upcoming lists
appear few - Arbor House publishes between 80 and 100 titles a year - and Miss
Collinsworth has paid dearly for some.

Inside Bookselling, an industry newsletter, charges that she overpaid wildly
recently for the memoirs of Cheryl Crane, the daughter of Lana Turner who
fatally stabbed one of her mother's lovers. Arbor House and Avon Books -
Hearst's paperback house - together paid a reported $350,000; the losing bid was
said to be $100,000.

Furthermore, Arbor House, which has a staff of 27, has lost some talented
editors recently. Last month George Coleman, an associate publisher and director
of subsidiary rights who is credited with acquiring several of Arbor's most
recent big books, left the company. There was a basic personality conflict with
Miss Collinsworth, he said. ''We got along like oil and water,'' he added. Miss
Collinsworth declined to comment, other than to say that he was terminated for
unprofessional behavior.

Meanwhile speculation continues that Hearst will fold Arbor House into William
Morrow & Company, a larger hardcover house that it acquired in 1981. ''I know
the Hearst people consider two hardcover houses redundant,'' said Scott
Meredith, a leading agent.

Hearst and Miss Collinsworth deny the rumor. ''Our plan right now is to have it
as a separate imprint,'' Mr. Jones said. But he notes that data processing,
warehousing and sales are all areas where Morrow might eventually take over from
Arbor.

Miss Collinsworth, a graduate of Bennington College, found her way into
publishing when she took a secretarial job at Doubleday to support her painting
career. She switched into Doubleday's publicity department, booking authors'
tours. Then, she said, ''I decided, 'if one has to have a job, why not make
large sums of money'?'' She applied to the Harvard Business School and was
accepted, but ''my heart just wasn't in it.'' Instead, she joined Arbor House in
1977 as a publicist. She chose a small house, she said, ''to avoid the pecking
order in large publishing houses.'' AT Arbor House, she proved an apt student.
Through her father, a former chief executive of Bliss & Laughlin, a steel
manufacturer in Chicago, Miss Collinsworth had friends at investment banks. She
introduced one of them to Mr. Fine, a relationship that soon led to the sale to
Hearst. But Mr. Fine, who industry sources describe as short-tempered, proved
unsuited to corporate life. In 1983, when his contract expired, Hearst let him
go. Miss Collinsworth got his job.  The first few months were horrendous, she
recalls. ''Because Arbor was closely identified with Donald Fine, the assumption
was that it would fall apart,'' she said. ''All the people who wished me luck
made a bee-line for our most profitable authors. There was no grace to the
transition period. I spent a great deal of time crying and throwing up.''

But success came quickly, in the form of ''Glitz.'' Arbor had published five
other books by Mr. Leonard, all with rave reviews and modest sales. Miss
Collinsworth said she was determined to make this one a best seller. She cut $1
off the cover price, to $14.95 - a price that brought the book below $10 at
discount bookstores - and printed it on larger pages and extra-heavy stock. That
was expensive, but the real gamble came on advertising: $150,000 for full-page
advertisements in which ''Glitz'' was promoted more as a product than a book.
''Tough readers love 'Glitz,' '' the copy proclaimed. THE marketing of ''Glitz''
was ''like a military exercise,'' Miss Collinsworth said. The advertising
campaign was timed to break at the same time that the reviews - all of them
raves - appeared. Arbor House had 125,000 copies in print before the official
publication date, and ''Glitz'' vaulted onto the best-seller list after only
four weeks of distribution. So far Arbor has printed 200,000 copies.

A sense of the theatrical seems to underlie not only the marketing of books at
Arbor, but also their selection. Arbor has bought the memoirs of the ''Mayflower
Madam,'' Sydney Biddle Barrows, to be published this summer. It generated the
idea for another summer release, ''Washington Wives'' - ''a sizzling novel about
the behind-the-scenes power plays in Washington,'' according to Arbor's own
publicity - and got Maureen Dean to write it.

Behind-the-scenes at Arbor, meanwhile, things are scarcely less lively. About
two months ago, Miss Collinsworth was approached about the job of chief
executive of Weidenfeld & Nicholson America, a branch of the British publishing
house. ''I decided that the opportunity at Hearst was something I didn't want to
forfeit,'' she said. What that opportunity is remains to be seen. ''I don't know
whether she has time at Arbor,'' Mr. Meredith, the agent, said of Miss
Collinsworth. ''On the other hand, I'd say her future in publishing is secure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Eden Collinsworth (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

GOLDWATER, SOFTER BUT STILL SPICY, REFLECTS ON A FADING ODYSSEY

BYLINE: By PAT MURPHY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Sept. 21


The celebrated chin that critics thought conveyed arrogance but admirers thought
symbolized conviction no longer juts upward and outward to make a point.

Time has softened not only the bony jaw of Barry Morris Goldwater, the senior
United States Senator from Arizona, but also the voice that once rose to
growling, stentorian indignation.

Once called ''the fastest lip in the West,'' the Senator now admits to ''being
more tolerant,'' and adds, ''I even sit down and ask whether it just would be
better to keep my mouth shut.''

He is not quite mellow, however, still spicing conversations with words that
reporters instinctively omit in the retelling.

Preparing for Retirement

The political odyssey that began more than 30 years ago on the City Council here
is in its twilight months now. The Senator will not seek re-election next year.

Sitting on the patio of his home, Mr. Goldwater reflected on three decades in
political life and judged himself a man of simple goals, mediocre talents and
ample failings.

''I wasn't a good student,'' he said. ''I was lazy. I wanted to go to West
Point. I could have been a better husband and father. I'm short-tempered and I
know I use too much profanity. I did my best. What the hell else can a guy
ask?'' In recent years, Mr. Goldwater has undergone triple bypass heart surgery
and has had artificial joints implanted in both hips. He walks with difficulty.
But he did climb the 2,200-foot Squaw Peak near his home in the desert suburb of
Paradise Valley on his 76th birthday on New Year's Day and he spends hours on
his roof tinkering with a forest of television and ham radio antennas.

In retirement, he plans to catalogue and print 15,000 photographic negatives,
mostly outdoor scenes he has taken over the years; to teach at Arizona State
University in the 1987-88 academic year; perhaps to write another book, and to
spend more time traveling the state with Jerry Foster, a longtime friend who is
a television helicopter reporter.

Although the Senator carried only six states, including Arizona, in his bid for
the Presidency in 1964, he takes satisfaction in having paved the way for
another conservative, Ronald Reagan.

His nine books are standards in conservative reading. And he is regarded as the
career model, if not always an ideological one, for a succession of political
and Government figures to come out of Arizona: Associate Justices Sandra Day
O'Connor and William H. Rehnquist of the Supreme Court; Representative Morris K.
Udall, and Representative John J. Rhodes, the former House minority leader. It
was Mr. Rhodes who, with Mr. Goldwater and Senator Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania,
now dead, would tell Richard M. Nixon he was finished as President.

Plan to Travel With Kennedy

One thing the Senator wanted but did not get was the chance to run against his
devoted friend, John F. Kennedy, in 1964. ''We talked about using the same
campaign plane and debating on the same platform,'' he recalled. ''It would have
changed the face of American politics for the Republican and Democratic
Presidential candidates to go from town to town debating.''

The Senator said he lost his fire for the 1964 campaign after Kennedy was
assassinated. ''I was sick,'' he said.

''I wouldn't have trusted Lyndon Johnson as far as that wall out there,'' he
added, pointing.

Another liberal Democrat who was a good friend of the Senator was Hubert H.
Humphrey, the Minnesota Senator who became Johnson's Vice President. Mr.
Goldwater once chided Mr. Humphrey that he ''sounded as though he had been
vaccinated by a phonograph needle.''

Mr. Humphrey told Mr. Goldwater he would have been a ''great success in movies
working for 18th-century Fox.''

Both Kennedy and Johnson sought the Senator's advice. He told Kennedy to order
air strikes at the Bay of Pigs and that if there were political repercussions,
''tell the Admiral to say his radio to the White House wasn't working.''

When asked by Johnson what to do in Vietnam, Mr. Goldwater said he advised
dropping leaflets on North Vietnam demanding an end to the war. If the
Vietnamese refused, Mr. Goldwater said he told the President ''to bomb North
Vietnam into a swamp. Then they would have quit.''

'Never Liked' Nixon

As for Mr. Nixon, Mr. Goldwater said: ''I never liked him. I don't like him now.
And I never will like him. Had Nixon been tried, I don't think there is any
question he would have gone to jail. He did the only decent thing. He quit.''

Recently, the Senator has railed against the New Right as trying to dictate
moral absolutes, even suggesting that the Rev. Jerry Falwell ought to be kicked
in the seat.

He has also taken to bedeviling the military about systems costs and is still
urging the White House to ''clean out'' the State Department. ''The Secretary of
State is on the eighth floor,'' he said. ''I'd fire every S.O.B. on the first
seven floors, then start hiring again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 23, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A dispatch from Phoenix yesterday on Senator Barry Goldwater incorrectly
described former Senator Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania. He is alive.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Barry Goldwater (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Draft Resister Is Paroled

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 27, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 51 words

DATELINE: LOMPOC, Calif., Sept. 21


Benjamin H. Sasway, the first person jailed since the Vietnam War for refusing
to register for the draft, was paroled from Federal prison Friday after serving
six months of a 30-month sentence. His lawyer, Charles T. Bumer, said Mr.
Sasway, 24 years old, would resume his interrupted college studies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
HE BROUGHT HIS EYE AND HIS DARING TO SPAIN'S CIVIL WAR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


How lucky to be Robert Capa, or so it must have seemed during the heyday of
photojournalism, when Life magazine was flourishing, when photography was still
the principal form of visual communication, when photographers could achieve a
celebrity undreamed of by today's television news cameramen, when journalistic
celebrity was not incompatible with a kind of free-wheeling maverick life that
is scarcely imaginable in today's gigantic communications corporations, and when
the principal subject for photojournalists was a vast international conflict in
which, it was generally agreed, America was on the right side.

Though Capa was not an American - he was born Endre Erno Friedmann in Budapest
and did not obtain American citizenship till after World War II - he gave
himself his new name early in his career in a conscious attempt to pass off his
work as that of a rich, successful, glamorous American newspaper photographer.
And though he did not consider himself primarily a photographer - ''I'm not a
photographer, I'm a journalist,'' he often said, and at one time or other he
also tried out for various jobs in movies and television - it was as a
photographer that he became famous enough to be celebrated today by two new
books (a biography by Richard Whelan, Knopf, $19.95, and an album of photographs
edited by Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan, Knopf, $35) as well as a
retrospective exhibition at the International Center of Photography, Fifth
Avenue at 94th Street, through Nov. 10.

Lucky, and yet not so lucky. For in 1954, when he was 40, Capa stepped on a land
mine in Vietnam and was killed.

The 160 photographs on exhibition at I.C.P. cover Capa's career from start to
finish. The famous pictures are there: the Spanish Civil War soldier at the
moment of being shot, the French girl with a shaven head and a baby in her arms
being jeered at by the townspeople of Chartres, the aging Picasso parading on a
beach holding an umbrella over the head of his lovely young mistress, and so on.
Capa began his career as a photographer in Berlin during the last days of the
Weimar Republic. When Hitler came to power he moved his base of operations first
to Paris, then to London, and finally, in 1938, to New York. All the while,
however, he was on the move: to Spain, to China, and then, during World War II,
to North Africa, Italy and Normandy with the Allied troops. His photographs of
conflict and combat form a fascinating record of an era.

The most striking pictures - dare one say the most original? - are probably
those of the Spanish Civil War. Here it was possible to pioneer several genres
of war photography that have since become depressingly familiar. For instance,
the action shot in the city street of frightened civilians looking anxiously up
into the sky or running for shelter, sometimes so fast that the photographer had
to blur the background in order to keep the runner in focus. For instance, the
picture of civilian refugees trudging along a road burdened down with bundles -
the lucky ones have a cart and a mule. For instance, the shot of soldiers
charging through smoke and fire across a blasted landscape, the picture
sometimes blurred by an explosion at the moment of exposure. For instance, the
action shot of soldiers desperately trying to get a wounded comrade out of the
line of fire.

No doubt such things have occurred since warfare began, but it was not till the
1930's that war photographers were equipped with cameras small and fast enough
to capture them as they happened. It was also not until the 1930's that
magazines existed that could, within a week, bring such pictures into our living
rooms.

Just as the Vietnam War was the first war to be covered by television, so the
Spanish Civil War was the first to be covered by modern photography. And if some
of the pictures in Capa's exhibition sseem depressingly familiar now, they did
not seem so when they were first seen.

As a war photographer Capa was lucky to be living when modern war photography
was new. But it is not enough to be lucky; it is also necessary to know how to
use your luck, and by all accounts Capa did know. ''If the photograph isn't good
enough, you're not close enough,'' is his best-known remark about war
photography. According to his biographer, he made up stories about himself which
he himself came to believe were true, and he did not hesitate to mislabel
pictures when it would ''improve'' a story or make the pictures more useful as
propaganda for a cause he had espoused, none of which enhances his credibility
as an impartial witness. But there is a lot of testimony to his willingness to
get close enough to the action. He seems to have been one of those restless
adventurers who do not form close attachments to other people, who have a great
appetite for life, but who would rather risk dying the way Capa died than settle
down to a safe existence photographing parties for Life. And so, on the
battlefield, or in the beleaguered city, he did get close enough.

He also photographed parties for Life, but not willingly, and not for long. For
his work in the Spanish Civil War he was hailed as ''the greatest war
photographer in the world,'' but during World War II other great war
photographers emerged, for instance Margaret Bourke-White and W. Eugene Smith,
and after the war Capa was restless and bored. In 1947 he was one of the
founding members of the photo agency Magnum, and in 1948 he went to Israel for
the founding of the new state, which turned into a war. But he missed the Korean
war, during which David Douglas Duncan threatened his reputation as the world's
greatest war photographer, and indeed, he does not seem to have been the kind of
photographer who thrives on war, any war.

''In a war you must hate somebody or love somebody,'' he once said to his friend
and colleague Martha Gellhorn. ''You must have a position or you cannot stand
what goes on.'' His biographer suggests that after World War II he did not have
a position except in relation to Israel. Though he was never a Communist -
though he was, indeed, in the words of his biographer, ''always something of a
cynic'' - his allegiances were conspicuously with the left, and he seems to have
been somewhat adrift during the Cold War period.

In any case there is very little in his show between the photographs of Israel
in 1948 and his arrival in Vietnam in 1954. His best work was done during the
era when, for the men and women of his generation, hopes were high, allegiances
were clear, and the world was young.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Capa's 1943 photograph of mourners for partisans who
fought the Germans

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FILM FESTIVAL AT 23 - MORE HITS THAN MISSES

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2221 words


Whenever someone - most often, someone from Hollywood - asks me whether the
annual New York Film Festival is really necessary, I usually answer as quick as
a flash, with wit unflagging, ''Well, it depends . . . .'' That is, it depends
on the movies that are shown. The 23d New York Film Festival opens Friday night
at Lincoln Center with two showings of Akira Kurosawa's newest film, ''Ran,''
described in the special syntax of the festival's program as ''a samurization of
'King Lear,' '' with, ''for melodramatic spice . . . a Lady Macbeth figure.''

Because Kurosawa, at 75, is one of the greatest film makers working today, in
company with Ingmar Bergman, Federico Fellini, Jean-Luc Godard and maybe two or
three others, it would be difficult to believe that this festival will not be
necessary, at least for its first night. After that, with the exception of the
days when Mr. Godard's ''Hail, Mary'' will be screened, and possibly the Taviani
Brothers' ''Chaos,'' the closing night attraction, this festival is anybody's
guess.

Film festivals are like bookstores. Unless they have a comprehensive stock of
contemporary work, plus a first-rate back list, they are nothing more than real
estate. They can be no better than the films they present, though, over the
years, they do acquire a certain extremely ephemeral character, which reflects
the quality of the films they've been able to show as well as the particular
likes and dislikes of the people who select their programs.

Now, 22 years after the festival was started, originally with Amos Vogel (since
resigned) as festival coordinator and Richard Roud (now its director) as
organizer, it's possible to discern a character for the New York event that
separates it from all others. Among other things, the New York festival is
noncompetitive. Cinema, rather than the business of films, is the focus. It's
also set in the one American city where it's generally understood that any
foreign film has to succeed if it's to have any chance at all in the rest of the
country. This, as well as the fact that there's no distracting beach at hand,
contributes to the New York festival's reputation as being ''serious,'' which
may simply mean ''sunless.''

The two most prestigious European festivals, at Cannes and Venice, both of which
are competitive and both of which are beach resorts, are especially important as
showcases for American films entering the European market. The only other major
American festival, Los Angeles's annual Filmex, has close economic and emotional
ties to the Hollywood community and, in recent years, has become a rival to
Cannes as a place to buy and sell films and to make production deals. New York
is something else.  It seems to thrive on its own eccentricities and a
continuing capacity to outrage its loyal following. I will always cherish the
night in 1972 when members of an angry Lincoln Center audience, hissing and
booing, threatened to tear up the seats during a breathtakingly mean-spirited,
45-minute short, which seemed much longer for the great stretches when the
screen remained totally black and its two unseen narrators harrangued us on the
soundtrack.

This was ''A Letter to Jane,'' in which Godard and his associate, Jean-Pierre
Gorin, whose feature, ''Tout Va Bien'' starring the unsuspecting Jane Fonda, was
the evening's main attraction, attacked Miss Fonda for her bourgeois facial
expression in a newspaper photograph from North Vietnam.

The New York festival has helped shape the careers of a number of directors who
were completely unknown until their work was chosen to be presented at Lincoln
Center. One of the hits of the first festival in 1963 was ''Knife in the
Water,'' Roman Polanski's small, bitterly funny, black-and-white first-feature
that went on to receive an Oscar nomination. The 1964 festival introduced New
York audiences to Bernardo Bertolucci and his ''Before the Revolution,'' still
one of his most exuberant, fascinating films.

Milos Forman, now a two-time Oscar winner (''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest''
and ''Amadeus''), was a comparatively shy tourist from Czechoslovakia when his
''Black Peter'' was presented in 1965, but then his career took off when ''Loves
of a Blonde,'' which became an Oscar nominee, was shown a year later.

Jan Kadar and Elmar Klos's ''Shop on Main Street'' may have struck a lot of us
at the 1965 festival as sentimental, but it found a hugely responsive audience
outside the festival and won its own Oscar. Equally sentimental and equally
popular, though far prettier, was Bo Widerberg's Swedish ''Elvira Madigan''
(1967), which was Mozart's chief claim to fame with the American public until
the arrival of ''Amadeus.''

Other festival discoveries include Gillo Pontecorvo (''Battle of Algiers,''
1967), Eric Rohmer (''My Night at Maud's,'' 1969), Robert Benton (''Bad
Company,'' 1972), Terrence Malick (''Badlands,'' 1973), Martin Scorsese (''Mean
Streets,'' 1973), Barbara Kopple (''Harlan County, U.S.A.,'' 1976), Paolo and
Vittorio Taviani (''Padre Padrone,'' 1977), Jonathan Demme (''Handle With
Care,'' 1977), Bertrand Blier (''Get Out Your Handkerchiefs,'' 1978), Carroll
Ballard (''The Black Stallion,'' 1979), Istvan Szabo (whose ''The Father'' was
shown in 1967 and ''Confidence'' in 1980 but who didn't hit the jackpot until
''Mephisto'' was shown in 1981), Diane Kurys (''Entre Nous,'' 1983) and Joel
Coen (''Blood Simple,'' 1984).

That the New York festival may be a tiny bit biased seems apparent when one
makes a quick inventory of the films shown in its first 22 years. Of the close
to 500 films presented in that time, the festival's program committee has chosen
appproximately 120 French films, compared to 68 American (most of them
independently produced), 45 Italian and 32 German. Only a handful have come from
the Soviet Union, though there have been a couple of dozen from Eastern Bloc
countries, principally the work of Andrzej Wajda and Krzysztof Zanussi (Poland),
and Mikos Jancso, who's Hungarian but who has lately been making films in
Western Europe.

Bias may not actually be the right word, however. In the 1960's and 1970's,
French film makers were responsible for some of the most exciting, most original
and most personal movies being made anywhere in the world. When everyone else
was snickering at the sloppy ambiguities of the films that Godard was turning
out by what seemed to be the yard, the New York festival stuck by him until the
rest of us caught up.

Godard was not exactly discovered by the festival -his first feature,
''Breathess,'' was a critical hit in this country in 1960 - but the festival
stood resolutely behind him in his succeeding and much farther out explorations
in cinema narrative. Since presenting Godard for the first time in 1964 (''Bande
a Part'' and ''Une Femme Est Une Femme''), the festival has shown 14 Godard
features, including this year's ''Hail, Mary.''

Godard is not only the most innovative and influential film maker of his
generation - he also has the distinction of having had more of his work shown at
the New York festival than any other contemporary film maker. Only the masterly
Jean Renoir tops that figure, having had 28 features, virtually his entire
oeuvre, presented during the festival's 1977 Renoir retrospective.

Godard's runner-up is the late Rainer Werner Fassbinder, both in numbers of
films shown at the festival and in the influence he's had on other film makers.
Beginning with ''Recruits in Ingolstadt'' (1971), just two years after
Fassbinder made his first feature, the festival went on to show 10 more
Fassbinder films, including such quintessential work as ''The Merchant of Four
Seasons,'' ''The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant,'' ''In a Year of 13 Moons'' and
''The Marriage of Maria Braun.''

The New York festival is not a Miss Universe contest. The selection committee
isn't obliged to pick one, two or three films from every film-making country
each year in the cause of fairness. The selection committee can afford to be
biased in the cause of what it sees to be art. Of the 32 German films shown at
the New York festival since 1965 (none were chosen in 1963 and 1964),
three-quarters, or 24, were supplied by Fassbinder, Wim Wenders (five) and
Werner Herzog (eight), including his still wondrously enigmatic ''Fata Morgana''
and ''Heart of Glass,'' whose actors performed under hypnosis (but without
starting a trend).

The festival took a long time to recognize the genius of the late Francois
Truffaut, none of whose great early films, including ''Jules and Jim'' and
''Stolen Kisses,'' found their way to Lincoln Center. The first Truffaut work to
turn up at the festival was ''The Wild Child'' (1970) but, after that, the
festival became a regular outlet for his best work, including ''Day for Night,''
''The Story of Adele H.,'' ''Small Change'' and ''The Woman Next Door.''

One of the New York festival's most convincing reasons for being has been its
continuing loyalty to individual film makers. Some, like India's Satyajit Ray,
who's not exactly controversial, and France's Jacques Rivette, who is, simply
would not have been seen in this country in any regular way without the annual
Lincoln Center event. The magic of Rivette's films still eludes me, but Ray's
films, which I admire, now have a small but steady following in this counntry.

As much as anything else, I suspect that the New York festival's support of
Robert Bresson, in spite of the general lack of interest at the box office, has
allowed this great French director, now 78, to continue to make his austere,
beautiful morality tales, including ''Lancelot of the Lake'' (1974) and his most
recent ''L'Argent'' (1983).

For controversy, though, no festival film maker can match Jean-Marie Straub,
whose minimalist features have been prompting catcalls and boos at Lincoln
Center since 1965, when the festival introduced him to New York with his
''Unreconciled.'' Some Straub films, including ''Othon'' (1970) and ''History
Lessons'' (1973), are more oppressive than others, and his ''Chronicle of Anna
Magdalena Bach'' (1968) and ''Moses and Aaron'' (1975), a magnificent screen
version of the Arnold Schoenberg opera made with Daniele Huillet, remain among
the highlights of the last 22 years.

The festival has been criticized with some frequency over the years for not
paying enough attention to American avant-garde film makers, which may be true.
However, it has also been extremely hospitable to American independents, from
Jonas and Adolfas Mekas, whose screen recording of the Living Theater's
production of ''The Brig'' was one of the most riveting films of the 1964
festival, to Jim Jarmusch, whose ''Stranger Than Paradise'' was among last
year's biggest hits.

Most major Hollywood film makers continue to regard the New York festival with
suspicion mixed with feelings that, after all, they don't need it. The two
festival showings for any one film represent money taken from their pockets -
film distributors do not get paid for festival showings - and they reason that
if they're going to get bad reviews, they might as well get them in conventional
theater engagements.

Some fine American films have been shown by the festival, but I can only think
of two - John Huston's ''Wise Blood'' and Jonathan Demme's ''Handle with Care''
- that stood to gain anything in the way of helpful publicity, though they
finally did no better at the box office with the help of the festival than they
probably would have done without.

For Paul Mazursky's ''Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice,'' which opened the 1969
festival, and Lawrence Kasdan's ''Big Chill,'' which opened the 1983 festival,
the showings probably were more helpful to the festival than to the films, which
would have been hits anyway.

Among the festival's retrospective programs, the three most rewarding were
1969's, devoted to Renoir, the 1974 show devoted to the incomparable Luis Bunuel
and the 1967 show devoted to Abel Gance. In addition to giving Gance his own
retrospective, the festival also honored him by showing - over the years -three
distinctly different versions of his epic ''Napoleon Vu par Abel Gance'' (1927).
The first was a four-hour version presented in 1967, followed by a spellbinding
''new'' version supervised by Gance himself, with sound, music and even new
scenes, called ''Bonaparte and the Revolution,'' which was shown in 1971.
Finally, in 1981, there was a more or less definitive, five-hour version,
restored by Kevin Brownlow, and shown with live orchestral accompaniment,
conducted by Carmine Coppola, the father of the film's distributor, Francis Ford
Coppola.

Is the New York Film Festival really necessary? To the extent that any film
festival is necessary, yes. It isn't perfect, however. In its 22 years, the New
York festival has managed to present only one film by Ingmar Bergman, and that a
comparatively minor work, ''The Ritual'' (1969), and not one of any description
by Federico Fellini.

No festival can ever be an accurate reflection of what's actually happening in
the film world in any one year. It can only do so to the extent that the film
makers cooperate. If one's knowledge of film making during the last 22 years
came only from perusing the New York festival's programs, one would never know
that Federico Fellini had ever existed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from movies from 1963 to 1984; Photo of scenes from
''Ran'' and ''Chaos''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
PLAYWRIGHTS REDISCOVER THE USES OF POLITICS

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


In the lineup of possible productions for the new theater season there are at
least eight plays that address political questions; five of them are written by
Americans and half are scheduled for Broadway houses. How much comfort this
development will give people who complain that the theater needs more political
themes is uncertain. The political spectrum of these plays is not very wide and
a couple of them - Howard Fast's ''Citizen Tom Paine'' and William Luce's
''Lillian,'' based on Lillian Hellman's three autobiographical books - could not
possibly avoid being political, given their subjects.

But the list this year suggests the theater may be turning to politics for its
themes more than it has in many seasons, even if the stories being told are
familiar or predictable - such as Emily Mann's treatment of the murder of San
Francisco Mayor George Moscone and the homosexual city Supervisor Harvey Milk in
''Execution of Justice,'' James Ryan's story of the murder of Congressman Allard
Lowenstein in ''Dennis'' or John Pielmeier's look at Vietnam veterans in ''The
Boys of Winter.'' Miss Mann and Mr. Ryan have seized on crimes and trials
involving not only public officials, but clear-cut ideological conflicts and
troubling questions about tolerance and what is tolerable in times of political
and sexual revolution and, possibly, counterrevolution. And in a time when the
popular image of the Vietnam veteran is a mixture of television's Magnum and
Hollywood's Rambo, there is an urgent need for the kind of thoughtful
interpretation the theater can give.

In addition to the American dramas, there will be a play by Athol Fugard about
apartheid in South Africa and two British works - Stephen MacDonald's ''Not
About Heroes,'' mirroring in the lives and work of the war poets Siegfried
Sassoon and Wilfred Owen the collapse of the old imperial social order during
World War I, and David Hare's ''Map of the World,'' a theme of which is the
poverty of most of the world and the wealth of a little of it. One might even
argue that the Royal Shakespeare Company's ''Poppy,'' an irreverent musical look
back at the time when Great Britain controlled the opium trade, is a political
play rather than a satire on the historical pretensions of empire.

That kind of roster hardly heralds a return to some seasons of the 1930's or the
early 50's when the theater took up political issues seriously or ridiculed
politicians hilariously with asssurance and authority. But it is more than we
have been given in recent years except in very small Off Off Broadway houses.
There is a tendency to think there were more political themes on the stage
during the Vietnam war and the social protests of the late 60's, but that is
illusory. That kind of ''theater'' was mostly in the streets and then as in
recent years, except for a few conscience-probing works about racial injustice,
the most biting political plays were imported. The fashion is to abuse Hollywood
for being superficial or juvenile, but in recent years films have dealt with
serious political questions more often and more effectively on the whole than
the theater has - and the willingness to confront such issues is a sign of
maturity.

The 60's did leave us with a notion that in the theater politics ought to be as
strident as it is in the street. A writer as usually graceful and witty as Gore
Vidal turned intolerably heavy in ''An Evening With Richard Nixon And . . .'' in
the early 70's and Larry Kramer's ''Normal Heart,'' which continues at the
Public Theater, does not invite one into a discussion of an agonizing issue; it
assaults and pummels the audience with a great puritanical sermon parceled out
among a dozen or so voices.

American playwrights used to be as sophisticated as any in these matters: Arthur
Miller did not rattle on about McCarthyism in ''The Crucible,'' but people
understood. In the past it was even possible to make some telling points about
politics and the shenanigans of politicians in musicals. If ''Of Thee I Sing''
exposed the shallowness of all of them, a few aimed at particular targets and
hit them - as George S. Kaufman, Moss Hart, Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart did
in ''I'd Rather Be Right,'' which still left people feeling affectionate about
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt at the beginning of his second term, but
with the kind of affection one has for somone who has been rudely diminished.
Even Kaufman's staging of John Steinbeck's novel ''Of Mice and Men'' has a
worldly sophistication that makes one want to understand the political ideas it
deals with. There is a lot to be said for worldliness.

One does not need the drama of a President's resignation in 1974 or the
tumultuous upheavals in the streets in 1968 to inspire good theater. There is no
lack of issues, or of targets, today, material for everything from tragedy to
satire. Some of the material seems irresistible - Government agents trapping
politicians in Abscam and all the imitative scams following, Representatives and
Senators going to jail, Federal judges standing trial, governors with
girlfriends in the fast lane. The people on Capitol Hill or in the cabinet now
are hardly less amusing than those in the 30's and President Reagan and his
entourage can rival the Roosevelts themselves as subjects of interest. The
opportunity for playwrights would seem especially ripe now when some media
managers and even columnists seem to be making heroic suspensions of disbelief
about politicians and their motives.

And some of the current issues cry out for dramatization - the first open
conflict of basic political ideologies seen in decades, the arms race (''Dr.
Strangelove'' was a good word, but was it the last?), the abortion debate,
Lebanon, Pakistan, the invasion of Grenada, the turmoil in Central America, the
spy game in industry as well as Government, the growth and operations of
international business empires. Other than during the Civil War or World War II
it would be hard to think of a time when there are so many political issues that
can be readily grasped by everyone in an audience and that allow such scope for
disagreement or for dramatic treatment.

The dramatic imagination of most recent American playwrights appears not to
penetrate political philosophy or history at all and to have become not only
exclusively personal but in many cases private. That is an odd situation for
theater. The best playwrights in the most vibrant ages have all been involved in
the political debates of their times, from Aeschylus and Sophocles to
Shakespeare to Racine and Moliere to Shaw. And in recent years it is hard to
imagine any nation in which one could go to so many plays as one can here
without meeting some discussion of political issues - certainly not Italy,
Germany, France or most Latin American nations. It has been possible in the 70's
and 80's to get the impression that there has been a loss of political
conscience or even awareness in the American theater, and the danger of that
perception is that theater could be seen to be moving to the periphery of life.

So, while the evidence of renewed political interest in the current season may
be more glimmer than beacon, it is a welcome sign. If that interest continues,
we might even find we all have more to say to one another about the life we
share than politicians have led us to believe. In the end that kind of result is
what theater is about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCANDINAVIA'S MINISTERS LACK MANDATES

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM


Scandinavian voters - like the Americans who sent Ronald Reagan to the White
House, the Britons who moved Margaret Thatcher into 10 Downing Street and the
Germans who elected Helmut Kohl Chancellor - have been edging to the right
during the last decade. But if elections over the last two weeks in Sweden and
Norway are any indication, they are having second thoughts about where their
conservative parties would lead them.

Sweden's Moderates lost votes to the more centrist Liberal Party, and the
nonsocialists as a group were unable to unseat the Social Democrats led by Prime
Minister Olof Palme. In Norway, the nonsocialist coalition of Kaare Willoch's
Conservative Party held onto the Government with a one-vote margin, but lost the
popular vote and a chunk of support to the Labor Party and its Socialist Left
Party allies.

In both countries, the voting left socialists and nonsocialists in almost
perfect balance, creating a quagmire for policy-makers. ''Sentenced to govern''
was the way a Norwegian newspaper summed up Mr. Willoch's prospects for the next
four years. The same headline could have applied to Mr. Palme, who won a new
three-year term by a narrow margin that left hanging in the balance his control
of the Riksdag, Sweden's Parliament.

Both leaders can take heart from the example of Denmark's Prime Minister Poul
Schlueter, a Conservative. Mr. Schlueter has been running Denmark with a
minority government since 1982, thanks to support on key economic votes from the
centrist Radical Party and the tolerance of the opposition Social Democratic
Party. Then there is the curious case of Finland, where the Social Democrats are
firmly in control of a broad coalition Government even though nonsocialist
parties have more members than the socialists.

The recent voting at least temporarily halts a conservative trend that has
broken the longtime hold of the region's socialist parties over Sweden, Norway
and Denmark. The trend was fueled in large measure by fears about the cost of
maintaining, much less extending, Scandanavia's welfare states.

As the intensity of the election campaign indicated, the dilemma is most deeply
etched in Sweden, the region's largest nation with 8.3 million inhabitants and
the most polarized on domestic issues. Some 70 percent of Sweden's gross
national product passes through the public sector, and the electorate is the
first in Europe in which a majority derives most of its financial support from
the public sector. Unlike Norway, Sweden cannot rely on oil to blunt the impact
of misguided policies or international recessions on its export-dependent
economy.

The 58-year-old Mr. Palme, who took the leadership of the Social Democrats in
1969 and infuriated the United States with outspoken opposition to the Vietnam
War, offered Swedes the reassuring message that they could have low unemployment
(the official rate is below 3 percent) and a continuation of policies that have,
over the years, used high taxes to create a society generous with medical,
recreational and educational benefits. ''Are we to have a society of sharp
elbows and egoism or a society where we care about each other?'' asked Mr. Palme
during a debate in which he scornfully cited Liverpool and riot-stricken
Birmingham in Britain as the alternative to the Swedish model.

''The Social Democrats increase taxes and increase handouts, and call it
prosperity,'' said Mr. Palme's chief opponent, Ulf Adelsohn, the 44-year-old
leader of the Moderates. The facts, according to the Moderates, are that Sweden
has steadily dug itself into an economic hole of huge debts, hidden unemployment
(an estimated 4 to 7 percent of the working population has been removed from the
statistics through training programs, subsidies and early retirement) and
inflation persistently higher than that of its trading partners.

The Moderates argue that Sweden needs deep tax cuts (the average worker has a 50
percent marginal tax rate) and new limits on public spending. Perhaps most of
all, they want private enterprise freed to compete with the public sector in
such areas as day care and health to increase the efficiency of the welfare
state and end its encroachment on the individual's freedom to decide where to go
for treatment and services.

The Moderates' program is largely supported by the other major nonsocialist
parties. The socialists, however, see it as a prescription for damaging
divisions.

The same debate echoes in Copenhagen, Oslo and, occasionally, Helsinki.
Scandanavian voters, however, seem less inclined than ever to give either side a
clear enough edge to show that it is right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The U.N., Still an Infant at 40

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


In fairness, it should be said of the United Nations on its 40th anniversary
that the world has got the global parliament it wants. Like the League of
Nations before it, the U.N. is a feeble keeper of the peace because its
sovereign members won't trust it even with a nightstick.

The condition that has enfeebled the organization from the start is best
described by Brian Urquhart, the plain-speaking Under Secretary who has
struggled to manage its ''peacekeeping'' operations: ''We are still in the
Middle Ages. The feudal barons are much more heavily armed and more powerful
than the central authority and do more or less as they wish. There has yet to
emerge, on the international scene, a great combined popular constituency to
insist on the necessity of a respected central order and an orderly process of
law and the keeping of the peace.''

In that bright dawn 40 years ago, the U.N.'s founders tried to take account of
sovereignty by giving permanent seats - and a Security Council veto - to the
five biggest barons. The plan was badly flawed, but not entirely futile. At
critical moments, the Council has in fact contained some violence, or at least
been useful to combatants who wanted to be contained - as, repeatedly, the Arabs
and Israelis, and even the superpowers in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.

But these have been modest contributions to the dream of ''collective
security.'' What hobbles the U.N. system is a central contradiction: Nations
unwilling to be restrained are asked nonetheless to join in periodic restraint
of others. So a blue-capped peacekeeping force is on call, but seldom called.
Its main function has been that of an arbitration service for antagonists
willing to avert more violence. The blue caps have kept the peace in divided
Cyprus and between Syria and Israel on the Golan Heights. In chaotic Lebanon,
they have thanklessly limited the bloodletting wherever the combatants
momentarily allowed it.

Always deferential to the barons that cause the trouble in the first place, the
peacekeeping ''soldiers'' are forbidden to use arms save in narrow self-defense.
Their main mission is to monitor cease-fires. Even this limited function is
widely distrusted; assessments for peacekeeping have been selectively withheld
by the Soviet bloc nations, France, China and Arab states. The Soviet Union's
resentment has been the most vehement, risking even its U.N. membership when it
refused to contribute to a Congo peace mission that claimed the life of former
Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold.

Nationalism and the attendant curse of absolute sovereignty have flourished in
the decades since the U.N.'s creation. Yet ''peacekeeping'' degenerated into
arbitration management still offers a practical way of containing some
conflicts. And that is an institution worth strengthening. President Reagan
remarked last week that he hoped that even Soviet and American soldiers might
one day cooperate in peacekeeping.

It would make sense to assess the parties in a dispute for increasing shares of
peacekeeping costs, as proposed in a thoughtful study for the U.N. Association
of the United States. That might even add to the pressures for settlement, as in
the case of Cyprus. The permanent members of the Security Council, who enjoy the
veto's protection against unwanted peacekeepers in Vietnam or Afghanistan, might
at least earmark equipment for peacekeeping operations elsewhere. Such realistic
but still meaningful steps might begin to give meaning to the U.N.'s
anniversary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


Sept. 22, 1985 Fiction

* 1 1 4 LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $17.95.) Recollections
of a small town.

* 2 2 5 LUCKY, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of a
crime lord takes on the heiress of a shipping tycoon.

* 3 6 27 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States.

* 4 3 14 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
contemporary horror.

* 5 5 6 THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $14.95.) Romance,
scandal and murder in New York's high society.

* 6 4 10 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 7 7 13 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West larger than life.

* 8 9 18 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 9 16 2 A MAGGOT, by John Fowles. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Five travelers in
18th-century England have mysterious, wonderful and eerie adventures.

* 10 1 THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $16.95.) His family and
female friends impose order of a kind on the errant life of a travel writer.

* 11 11 35 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 12 13 2 LESS THAN ZERO, by Bret Easton Ellis. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
hedonistic lives of Los Angeles's rich kids.

* 13 8 5 TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $17.95.) Three
sisters find their destinies bound by an obsession with the same man.

* 14* 1 AFTER THE REUNION, by Rona Jaffe. (Delacorte, $17.95.) The surprises and
betrayals four Radcliffe women encountered in the five years after their 25th
reunion.

* 15 10 18 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) A restless
explorer scouts the 17th-century American wilderness.

* 16* 12 19 HOLD THE DREAM, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
Continuing the family saga begun in ''A Woman of Substance.'' Nonfiction

* 1 1 11 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) From West Virginia hillbilly to World War II fighter pilot to the first
man to fly faster than sound.

* 2 2 47 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 3 1 ELVIS AND ME, by Priscilla Beaulieu Presley with Sandra Harmon. (Putnam,
$16.95.) The rock legend as friend, mentor, lover, husband and father of a
daughter, by his former wife.

* 4 3 20 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 5 4 25 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze the successes
and failures of modern women in looking for acceptable men.

* 6 5 55 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.) Suggestions
for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the fullest.''

* 7* 10 19 CONFESSIONS OF A HOOKER, by Bob Hope with Dwayne Netland. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Memories of more than 50 years of golfing, by the comedian.

* 8 8 7 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 9 7 6 THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men
seek the 1984 Olympic gold medal for single sculling.

* 10 6 9 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the Oklahoma farm boy who became a New York Yankee baseball
star.

* 11 9 3 FINAL CUT, by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) How the making of the film
''Heaven's Gate'' proved the unmaking of United Artists.

* 12 7 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding the
1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 13* 14 10 MARTINA, by Martina Navratilova with George Vecsey. (Knopf, $16.95.)
The autobiography of the Czechoslovak-born tennis champion.

* 14* 1 RE-INVENTING THE CORPORATION, by John Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene.
(Warner, $17.50.) A description of ''the new information society'' and its
opportunities for employees and employers.

* 15 15 6 THE GRASSHOPPER TRAP, by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $13.95.) Amusing
pieces about pursuing pleasures in the great outdoors. Advice and Self-Help

* 1 1 15 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 2 5 5 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond. (Warner, $16.50.) A
diet for weight loss and physical fitness.

* 3 3 46 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard reference work updated in 1983.

* 4 2 6 WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's,
$14.95.) Ways to avoid or end addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

* 5* 11 WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The Second
College Edition of a standard reference, updated in 1982. The listings above are
based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region
of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all
bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that
point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a longer
list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that
its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above. And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices
of other recent books of particular interest) AND BEAR IN MIND (Editors' choices
of other recent books of particular interest) COMMON GROUND: A Turbulent Decade
In THe Lives Of Three American Families, by J. Anthony Lukas (Knopf, $19.95.)
The families in question, differently involved in Boston's school busing
convulsion, are reference points for a prfound evocation of the social,
political and spiritual workings and heavings of their city.

IN COUNTRY, by Bobbie Ann Mason (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Questing -- to exorcise
the Vietnam War, to grow up, to become free -- is the heart of this short,
sharp, brilliant novel.

OUR THREE SELVES: The Life of Radclyffe Hall, by Michael Baker (Morrow, $17.95.)
A fine biography of the popular novelist whose courage possibly exceeded her
literary skills but whose frankly lesbian 'Well of Loneliness'' shocked England
in 1928 by its articulate claim for a place in society for people like herself.

CRIME AND HUMAN NATURE, by James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Hernstein, (Simon &
Shuster, $22.95.) A massive summary (639 pages) of what behavioral science
thinks about how criminals are made (a lot) and how to make fewer (not as much).

GOOD ENOUGH TO DREAM, by Roger Kahn. (Doubleday, $16.95.) The author of ''The
Boys of Summer'' spent 1983 operating the Utica Blue Sox, a minor-league
baseball team. Did a wonderful narrative full of colorful characters result?
We're telling you!

A CERTAIN PEOPLE: American Jews and Their Lives Today, by Charles E. Silberman.
(Summit, $19.95.) This personal but objective study argues that Jews suffer no
handicaps in American society, though the ways in which Jews are Jewish are
changing.

THE RED FOX, by Anthony Hyde. (Knopf, $17.95.) Treason most foul for motives
most idealistic is the background for this thriller, which addresses the moral
and ideological problems of the spy who rejects a democratic society in favor of
the Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY OPINION;
DEVELOPING THE PRIVATE SELF IN A WORLD THAT IS NO LONGER INSULAR

BYLINE: By JULIA TO-DUTKA; Julia To-Dutka, Ed.D., is an assistant professor of
education at Montclair State College.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 24, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1748 words


One of the noblest objectives in higher education is to enable students to
develop an understanding of themselves, a sense of responsibility toward their
fellow man and a respect for the world in which they live.

From a classical view, this search for meaning can be translated into the
development of the private self and of the civic self in the context of one's
country. However, in the contemporary world of nation-states, where individual
countries no longer can insulate themselves from the affairs of other countries,
young people today face a reality in which the traditional values of selfhood
and national identity take on a different meaning.

If we are committed to our responsibility of educating a generation of world
citizens, we must equip students with the knowledge and perspectives needed to
understand the world in which they live, to participate in its many activities
and to take charge in shaping its future.

The challenge to the higher-education community is not strictly on the abstract
theoretical plane; it is directed rather specifically to our ability to
conceptualize an imaginative scheme to transform this ideal into reality.

Perhaps a good place to start thinking about educating for world citizenry is to
look at the world in which we live.

Instead of a world of sovereignties, in which countries interact only to the
extent that they see fit or to the extent that they are compelled, we find
ourselves in an interdependent world governed by independent states. The concept
of interdependence works in several ways.

In a political sense, we live in a world in which domestic affairs no longer can
be insulated by foreign policy. The wars in Korea and Vietnam, and the situation
in the Middle East and Central and South America, are just a few of the many
examples.

In a military sense, the ability of the superpowers to defend themselves depends
on their diplomacy in negotiating for arms control and their technological
sophistication to render the threat of a first strike or a counterattack in
nuclear weaponry feasible, rather than theoretical.

In an economic sense, we are fast becoming aware that we live in a world with
limited resources and that we face numerous transnational problems in food,
energy, transportation and the like that no nation can resolve completely on its
own.

In a human sense, we live in a world severed from its ties to the future, as
well as to the past. It is a world beset with fear: of nuclear destruction, of
the survival of the human species, of successive changes thrust upon us by
technology and, above all, of not being in control of our own destiny, our own
emotions and our own actions.

This is the world that today's young people have inherited.

On the knowledge level, young people must come to an understanding of the
emergent interdependent system of nation-states. This is necessary to comprehend
the happenings in the world.

In terms of personal happiness, they need to be in touch with their own feelings
and emotions and reinterpret them in the wider context of universal human
experiences.

In terms of civic responsibilities, they need to figure out ways through which
they can contribute their knowledge and skills to make the world better for all.

None of these goals can be attained without the development of global
perspectives to provide the basis for the search for meaning in the new world
order.

The traditional route for college students to gain global experiences is by
taking courses or programs with an international focus. This structure has
served us well in a time when world citizenry is not a condition for meaningful
participation. With the intricacies of the interdependent system of independent
nations, the acquisition of world knowledge and the development of global
perspectives become obligatory rather than optional.

Staying within the traditional framework presents at least two problems.

The first has to do with accessibility. By relying on programs in area studies,
anthropology, language studies and international studies to convey global
knowledge, only a handful of students who elect to take these courses would be
exposed to these experiences. Most students may complete four years of college
without having had any contact with the world outside their own.

The second problem - and perhaps the more complicated one - has to do with our
objective in globalizing college education.

If our objective is to prepare individuals to function within the emergent
interdependent system of independent nations, the world view that they need
would have to go beyond the accumulation of knowledge of different countries and
cultures of the world. It must extend to a more-sophisticated understanding of
the interrelations between all human endeavors.

Taking a course with an international focus may cultivate certain global
awareness, but it does not necessarily guarantee the development of global
perspectives.

How can we impose a structure on college curriculums to provide global
experiences to students who, in many ways, are very much confined by their
immediate environment? There are several options to consider.

A curriculum for college students is generally organized around three underlying
concepts: general-education requirement, major in a subject discipline and free
electives.

While acknowledging differences in program design, this is the basic framework
through which global education can be structured.

One way to provide for global experiences is to design courses with a global
focus within the general-education requirement.

At Montclair State College, there is the course ''World Literature: The Coming
of Age Theme.'' At Tufts University, ''World History'' is required of all
undergraduates. At Hobart and William Smith Colleges, a two-year course on
''World Cultures'' is in place.

These courses integrate Western and non-Western elements into themes that
challenge students to explore vital questions about human behavior, values,
thoughts and history.

At Columbia University, there are two yearlong multicivilization,
multidisciplinary humanities courses on Asia to complement the core courses on
the Western tradition commonly required at colleges across the country. This
complementary approach provides students with two divergent, yet parallel,
experiences.

This general-education approach insures that all students will be introduced to
the essential perspective of ''the other'' on questions of common human
concerns. This basic framework for global inquiry is particularly helpful when
many of our students have never really traveled beyond their immediate
experiences.

The other option is to provide for global experiences through the major
disciplines.

Within a given major, students can be required to take a general core course
(such as international business or comparative political systems) or be asked to
choose a course with an international focus from an approved list within their
major.

Global knowledge can be infused into these courses by using either the ''block''
or the ''spread'' approach.

The block approach is most suitable for introducing non-Western modules into a
Western course. For example, a module on how health care is delivered in China
can be incorporated into a course on the study of health-care-delivery systems
in the United States.

The ''spread'' approach lends itself much more to courses that can be
internationalized in their entirety. Courses such as comparative linguistics or
educational thoughts or literacy allow for the interweaving of ideas from
diverse cultures. This invites students to think about their subject knowledge
in global terms.

Since students' chosen majors generally have some connection with either current
interest or future professional aspiration, this approach can be substantively
engaging in preparing for world citizenry.

The third option is to provide for global experiences through free electives.

Courses such as women in literature, revolutions and revolutionaries, Old World
and New World, humor or gerontology would make interesting topics for
semester-long or even yearlong studies. The possibility for developing
cross-cultural understanding, tolerance and respect for other nations through
highly interesting topics is almost limitless.

To have a world view is no longer a luxury to be entertained by a handful of
people; it is a basic necessity for human survival in the emergent new world
order.

It is time that everything be done to harness support at every level of
operation within higher education to globalize college education.

The three approaches presented require different commitments by the institution.
Given the costs involved, each institution would have to evaluate its resources
and priorities to chart its own course in transforming existing offerings or
creating new ones.

Of the three options, both the general-education approach and the major
discipline approach assure some kind of global awareness for all students. The
elective approach does not.

The combination of all three provides the best global education, both in depth
and in scope. It also eliminates ''one-shot deal'' treatment in cultivating
global literacy. But it is, of course, the most costly.

No matter which route, or which combination of routes, that an institution
elects to pursue, let us not forget that adding a course, a module or a program
to academic offerings should be viewed only as a means to an end. It does not
necessarily guarantee the development of global perspectives among the students.

Globalizing a curriculum requires nothing less than a fundamental transformation
of our perspective in terms of the ultimate objective of a global education. It
is only when we can see beyond cultural diversity that we can then begin to
inspire our students to think, feel and act as citizens of an interdependent
world.

The future of the world depends on our willingness to suspend our own judgment
of thoughts that we do not as yet understand, feelings with which we are not as
yet able to identify and actions that we do not as yet approve.

The future of our country depends on its ability to understand and cooperate
with other nations, despite drastic differences in customs, cultures and
beliefs.

The future of higher education depends on its commitment to educate for world
citizenry. It is up to us to rise to the challenge.

Julia To-Dutka, Ed.D., is an assistant professor of education at Montclair State
College.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PARIS SPIES: SHADY PAST OF AGENCY

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Sept. 22


The Greenpeace scandal is only the latest of many that have shaken the French
secret service since the end of World War II, embarrassing governments and
leading to mass ousters of personnel and other attempts to tighten political
control over the agency.

The General Directorate for External Security, as the French secret intelligence
service is called, is an organization traditionally dominated by the military.
Many French officials concede it has earned a reputation for strong-arm tactics.

The Prime Minister's acknowledgement today that the secret sevice had indeed
been involved in the attack means the Greenpeace scandal could eclipse in
gravity the well-known Ben Barka affair of 1965-66.

Then, suspicion that its agents had helped kidnap and kill the Moroccan
opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka while he was in Paris brought the full wrath
of President Charles de Gaulle down on the troubled service. Denouncing it as
''vulgar and subaltern'' he dismissed its director, Gen. Paul Jacquier,
dissolved the covert operations division and put the whole organization under
direct control of the Defense Ministry.

Government Seeking Change

The Greenpeace scandal has erupted at a time when President Francois
Mitterrand's Government has been making vigorous efforts to change the secret
service and establish tighter political control over it.

The Socialists, who have traditionally been suspicious of the agency as being a
rightist organization with a taste for meddling in domestic politics, moved
quickly to purge and overhaul the Service for External Documentation and
Counterespionage, as it was then called, when they came to power in 1981.

Count Alexandre de Marenches, who had run the service for a decade and had some
success at taking it in hand, was replaced by Pierre Marion, a friend of Defense
Minister Charles Hernu and a fellow Freemason who had no intelligence
experience.

Mr. Marion immediately embarked on a purge of top officers suspected of being
unsympathetic to the left, removing at least 50, according to a new study of the
service by Roger Faligot and Pascal Krop titled ''La Piscine,'' the nickname
given to the secret service's barracks-like Paris headquarters on Boulevard
Mortier close to a public swimming pool.

'Whole Spy Rings Collapsed'

At the same time, he reorganized the service along more centralized lines,
limiting the independence of its divisions.

The shake-up alienated many staff members, and French reports assert that as
many as 500 of the service's 3,000 employees at its headquarters left, as well
as many of the foreign agents, who are traditionally called ''honorable
correspondents.'' According to a recent survey of the service by L'Express
magazine, ''whole spy rings collapsed.''

Agency morale suffered and efficiency declined. The Faligot-Krop book reports
that Mr. Mitterrand was infuriated in October 1981 when the agency could not
assess a wire service report saying Libya had invaded Chad because its agents
were out of contact. In 1982, agency officers were reportedly involved, against
orders, in a failed coup in the Central African Republic.

Official discontent with the service's work increased. In 1982 the Socialists
changed its name to the current one and gave it a new charter. Like the Central
Intelligence Agency, it was banned from operating on domestic soil and its top
priorities were defined as penetrating Soviet targets, gathering economic
intelligence and fighting terrorism.

Later that year Gen. Jeannou Lacaze, then the French Chief of Staff, again
complained about the agency's poor performance, forcing Defense Minister Hernu
to replace Mr. Marion with Adm. Pierre Lacoste. At his swearing-in ceremony,
according to the Faligot-Krop study, Mr. Hernu stressed that as a military man
Admiral Lacoste was expected to take orders only from him.

''The hierarchy must and will be respected,'' Mr. Hernu said. ''To obey and be
accountable, those are the pillars of your service.''

Accusations on Changes

Despite this strengthening of political control, some French intelligence
experts are attributing the Greenpeace fiasco to the Socialists' changes, which
they say weakened the agency.

In a recent interview, Jean Rochet, head of the Directorate for Territorial
Surveillance, France's counterespionage organization, said: ''I know the
departure of de Marenches was followed by a purge because of fears of
infiltration by the extreme right. But I wonder if the purge simply got rid of
people who knew how to do their job.''

The French secret service appears to owe its reputation for roughness and its
taste for political intrigue to close links with the military, a lack of funds
and deep involvement in the domestic struggles over colonial wars in Vietnam and
Algeria.

Although neither agency's budget has been published, the French secret service
is certainly much smaller than the C.I.A. and is less well equipped. Mr. Marion
says it had no computers until he arrived. The Faligot-Krop book says a major
handicap is the agency's difficulty in recruiting good civilian staffs, which
forces it to rely on military personnel.

Not Like 'the Anglo-Saxons'

''The chronic problem of the French secret service,'' they say, ''is that,
unlike the Anglo-Saxons, it has been unable to recruit scientists, economists
and linguists on campuses.''

The list of strong-arm operations widely attributed to the French secret service
since then includes these:

* The sinking of at least 14 ships carrying arms to the Algerian rebels by an
organization calling itself the ''Main Rouge'' or ''Red Hand'' - as well as the
slayings of two prominent German arms dealers, George Puchert in Frankfurt in
1952 and Marcel Leopold in Geneva in 1959.

* The poisoning of Felix Moumie, a Cameroonian opposition leader, in Geneva in
1960.

* The capture of Ahmed Ben Bella and other Algerian revolutionary leaders after
the plane they were on, which belonged to Sultan Mohammed V of Morocco, was
forced down while in flight in 1956. The episode led to the resignation of Prime
Minister Guy Mollet.

* The sabotage of the motor of the Trident, an ecological group's ship, in 1966
when it was trying to disrupt a French weapons test in the atmosphere above the
Pacific, and the detention of the same vessel the next year on health grounds by
the Cook Island authorities after a crew member suddenly developed a contagious
disease.

* A failed army coup against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, in
August 1980, which was followed by the resignation of several top French secret
service officers.

The service was built up after World War II by veterans of the struggle against
the Nazi occupation, which had known few rules. In 1946 its first director,
Andre Dewavrin, a Resistance hero, was removed after being accused of stealing
secret funds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paris headquarters for the General Directorate for External
Security (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MERCENARY MAGAZINE WIDENS APPEAL

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev., Sept. 21


Ten years ago, a men's adventure magazine rejected Robert K. Brown's proposal to
write a piece about a mercenary in the Rhodesian Army.

''They said they were getting away from the hairy-chested stuff,'' Mr. Brown
recalled.

But Mr. Brown thought hairy-chested adventure was a salable item with Amerian
men, so he launched Soldier of Fortune: The Journal of the Professional
Adventurer. From a 40-page black-and-white quarterly, Soldier of Fortune has
grown into a glossy magazine with a 180,000 circulation.

''A 10-year trek to respectability,'' was how a Soldier of Fortune brochure
describes those intervening years at its seventh annual convention here this
weekend. The magazine's profits underwrite a number of Mr. Brown's efforts to
aid anti-leftist fighters in Central America and Afghanistan, and its reports
including details of Soviet-bloc involvement in the Government that ran Grenada
before the United States-led invasion two years ago, have gained a growing
public following.

New Type of Following

The magazine has begun to draw interest from men not a part of its usual Vietnam
veteran following - men too young to have known the war, and others nervous with
the magazine's aggressive themes but no longer certain that accommodation is the
answer.

This weekend's gathering drew 800 men, twice the number that came last year,
mostly in camouflage uniforms, but many in civilian clothes.

''Basically we started out as a Vietnam veteran's magazine, and we still have a
lot of them as readers, but we're also getting a lot of younger people now,''
said Peter Kokalis, a staff member. ''I'd say that's a reflection of the
unpleasant memories of Vietnam receding. It's more respectable now to be
associated with the military mentality.''

Several men here said they either missed or avoided the Vietnam War, and regret
it.

''I missed Vietnam by the skin of my teeth, and so I've been going around
feeling a little guilty,'' said Ron Kennemer, an electrician from Santa Rosa,
Calif., who came dressed in full jungle camouflage. ''So I'm going going around
doing what I can to help.''

Aid to Nicaraguan Rebels

Mr. Kennemar, who belongs to a gun club back home, devotes part of his time to
raising money and materiel for anti-Government rebels in Nicaragua, a task many
Soldier of Fortune followers are engaged in.

The Reagan Administration has privately encouraged unofficial aid programs like
the one conducted by the Omega Group, the magazine's parent company, based in
Boulder, Colo., and it has declined to take a position on the occasional
fighting some of the men associated with Soldier of Fortune have engaged in.

In reply to criticism of such forays into combat, Soldier of Fortune defenders
point to a long history of Americans fighting overseas, without Government
sanction, for causes they believed in, including the Lafayette Escadrille in
World War I and the anti-Fascist Lincoln Brigade that fought Franco in the
Spanish Civil War.

''We prefer they don't fight,'' Mr. Brown said of the small Omega Group teams
that have gone to Central America. ''Our time and effort is better spent
instructing them rather than getting in firefights for them.''

Move Away From Survivalism

The first convention seven years ago, held in Columbia, Mo., was overlaid with
the survivalist theme, with the scant dozen of exhibitors attending the
convention stressing homemade weapons and tricks of staying alive after the
collapse of civilization.

That apocalyptic vision seems to have faded from the Soldier of Fortune outlook
over the years as the magazine has increasingly stressed the adventures of
anti-Communist mercenaries, or ''mercs,'' as Mr. Brown puts it. The magazine
features frequent reports from men who have enlisted in anti-leftist causes,
particularly the Nicaraguan rebel forces.

This stress on convential warfare instead of on the survivalist fringe has
brought to the convention mainstream arms exhibitors like Ruger Arms and
Beretta, which was selected by the Pentagon to manufacture a 9-millimeter
sidearm. A booth for Israeli-made Uzi light machine pistols come complete with a
video featuring Israeli troops demonstrating the weapon, which, with a few
exceptions, is available in the United States only as a semiautomatic weapon.

The Israeli military is one of the enduring heroes of the Soldier of Fortune
conventions. Israeli officers in the United States for training have
occasionally lectured at the conventions, and an armed assault demonstration by
a squad of Israeli soldiers was scheduled for this weekend's convention.

Not Used to Guns

Some attended the convention with only unformed ideas of weapons and war,
however. Alan M. Zeichner, for example, grew up in a Bronx household ''where the
whole idea of guns was verboten.''

Now a podiatrist in Vallejo, Calif., Dr. Zeichner has become worried about
anti-Semitism in that state. Soldier of Fortune's philosophy of making the best
defense out of a good offense attracted him here, where he was impressed with
the convention's professionalism, but worried about the war-loving aspect of
some of his fellow conventioneers.

''There's something about it that's right, and some parts that scare the hell
out of me,'' Dr. Zeichner said. ''I think they should have a separate convention
for guys like me, where they have guns that shoot flowers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Brown (NYT/Randy Tunnell); photo of Peter Kokalis
(NYT/Randy Tunnell)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A MEMOIR: WHEN THE U.N. WAS YOUNG

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2322 words


They were strange, those first years of the United Nations, so far back in the
mid-40's and 50's, and sometimes quite wonderful.

Everybody knew that one pillar of the United Nations concept had collapsed
before the first speech was made, the first resolution passed.

The way it was supposed to work was that the great Allies of World War II, the
Big Five - the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain, France - were to
continue great and allied forever.

They were to guide the United Nations with strength and wisdom. So unthinkable
was it that they would ever be anything but strong and wise, that anything could
be done against their will, that each of them was ennobled with veto power in
the United Nations Security Council, where resolutions were supposed to be
transformed into action.

It never worked that way. Britain and France lost their colonies to freedom
movements and quickly were world powers no longer.

A Shattering Into Blocs

Within a pitifully short time, the China that sat on the Council and was
supposed to represent a billion people represented nothing but a steamy Pacific
island. And, most devastating and fatal to the United Nations concept, the
Soviet Union and the United States became enemies instead of friends.

Politically the United Nations was shattered into blocs. Veto replaced action,
and vituperation became the language of the United Nations debate. Hatred and
struggle, bitterness, were pumped through the loudspeakers.

And yet - strange and wonderful -despite the collapse of the political ideal,
despite all the nasty words, there was zest at the United Nations, and hope in
large measure - that and a great deal of fun.

Nobody quite understood that as time passed, the really important issues would
be kept away from the United Nations - nuclear life or death, the United States
and Vietnam, Soviet expansionism, Lebanon, negotiations in the Middle East,
inflation, depression, trade wars.

The Whole World Listened

But in the early years, the issues that were brought before the United Nations
were riveting to the whole world - India and Pakistan fighting over Kashmir, the
partition of Palestine and the creation of Israel, Korea and the stupendous
error of the Soviet Union in boycotting a meeting that allowed the United States
to fight in the name of the United Nations.

And before nuclear destiny was taken from the United Nations by the Soviet Union
and the United States, and transferred from open discussion at what was supposed
to be the diplomatic center of the world to guarded chambers in Geneva, Bernard
Baruch sat as the United States delegate to the United Nations Atomic Energy
Commission in a chamber in the Bronx that had once been a college women's gym.

Early one day in 1946 he read a speech that said the world faced a choice
between the quick and the dead. We all nodded and truly felt that there was not
much more to be said, but of course there was, four decades worth, and the
choice still not made.

But the sense of exhilaration came from the freshness of it all, the sharing in
an adventure that - who could say - might just possibly work out somehow,
somewhat, someday.

And there was a youngness about the organization then - of course people
themselves were always very young in those days - that gave it zest.

In those days, pre-jet, there was still a sense of wonderment about foreign
places and foreign ways and people and here was New York, the very center of the
whole foreign world, imagine.

In the Cafeteria

You sat down in the cafeteria and next to you was a Pakistani lawyer, a Peruvian
judge, a Chinese economist. You had to be an ice cube not to be excited.

It was small - just 51 countries in the beginning - and everybody knew everybody
and there wasn't much protocol, and nobody really thought about security.

So important people just wandered around like the rest of us. Oh, the memory of
standing in the snack bar line, turning around and seeing Eleanor Roosevelt
behind you, seeing and feeling her great wonderful smile and handing her the pat
of butter she wanted, and then sitting with her, at a rickety table, and
talking.

That was lovely and so was having the home phone number of Trygve Lie, the
robust and fiery first Secretary General of the United Nations, and being able
to call him up at all hours of the morning for comment on this or that.

''Goddamn it, is that you again?'' he would say, and there would be some words
in Norwegian, presumably uncomplimentary. But he always had something to say and
he never hung up or changed his number.

Remembering Vyshinsky's Fury

It was not so lovely being stopped and denounced in a corridor by Andrei
Vyshinsky, who had sent platoons of Russians to their death during Stalin's
purge trial and who had the sharpest tongue at the United Nations, no mean
achievement. He was furious about a story saying he was ill, and would return to
Moscow. He convinced everybody it was a dirty American lie, but he did die
shortly afterward, which we all said was rather graceful.

Best of all there was a casual, make-do atmosphere surrounding the early days of
the United Nations that made for a kind of camaraderie.

Even Soviet and American diplomats meeting in a pizzeria in a Bronx Little Italy
near the first United Nations home couldn't glare too fiercely while wiping
tomato and cheese off the mouth with a soggy napkin.

The U.N. - everybody called it by its initials - didn't have a permanent home
for years. While a site committee toured American cities, we used to talk about
how great it would be if the Security Council had to meet out in the park, under
the trees.

We would daydream about taking the boys of the Security Council out in a bus to
Van Cortlandt Park, picking a nice grassy spot for them, and then seeing how
fierce Pakistani versus Indian or American versus Russian could sound while
swatting flies and smacking ants, while Bolivia over there dozed sweetly, face
to the sun.

The Hunter College Era

It never quite came to that but the United Nations did have a pretty difficult
time getting a roof over its head while the search went on. For a few months it
met in a couple of borrowed board rooms at Rockefeller Center, and then it
settled down for a while at what was then the Bronx campus of Hunter College,
women only. It is now Lehman College.

Hunter College was in the Bedford section of the North Bronx, known worldwide,
according to the mothers of the area in those days, for the freshness of the
air, a hundred, a thousand times better than downtown.

The college women, presumably gasping for air, were moved out, but their spirit
remained and gave a deliciously incongruous atmosphere to the new diplomatic
center of the universe.

There was a document center in the locker room, the Balkan experts met in the
French I and II rooms, the press center was a boarded-over swimming pool, and
the office of The New York Times was a hairdrying room. There are still
surviving Times reporters, a few, with vivid memories of smacking their heads
against a dryer as they stood to stretch legs and mind.

And where Hunter women had once leaped nimbly over leather horses, the United
Nations Security Council met to discuss Franco Spain.

Marines Were Relaxed

The only protection was provided by a few relaxed United States Marine guards.
They would sigh and say they would exchange the diplomats for the college women,
any day.

The next resting place was the old Henry Hudson Hotel on West 57th Street. A
Brazilian admiral, declaiming in a room once used for weddings and bar mitzvahs,
ripped open his shirt one day to show his war wounds. Nobody knew exactly where
he got them or why he showed them. But all agreed it was indeed a fine gesture.

Then, a village near Great Neck in Nassau County, Long Island. The United
Nations headquarters there was part of a shrinking defense plant, and everybody
loved the symbolism - ''war factory'' turned to the uses of peace.

And the name of the split level village next door, which would become the United
Nations' address and dateline - Lake Success, what good luck!

It was near enough to New York to draw stimulation from it and yet you had to
travel, make an effort to get to it. So the United Nations was in a place of its
very own, not lost in a great metropolis.

The Egalitarian Cafeteria

There was no fancy furniture, no swank offices, and there was only the cafeteria
for everybody, no special delegates' dining room. The whole place had the
staunch atmosphere of Army surplus. But some of the stuffing did ooze from a
sofa here and there.

Since it was mostly one level, people had to do a lot of walking, which meant
they had to meet each other and talk, which was just fine.

It was too small for the General Assembly sessions that all member nations
attended, so they were held in a converted indoor ice rink in Queens, a dank and
drafty place. Everybody was always glad to get back to the shabby warmth of Lake
Success.

It was not until 1951 that the United Nations moved into glass skyscrapers on
the East River, on a site made possible by the Rockefeller family.

People don't see each other much in elevators, which is a pity. Skyscrapers may
make great headquarters for some organizations but nothing ever seems quite as
appropriate for the United Nations as a one-level old factory with rundown
sofas, a cafeteria line and lots of walk and talk.

The Flashes of Memory

Over the years, thousands of issues, tens of thousands of newspaper stories.
Most of them ring dimly in the mind, but some of the people of those days sound
clear and warm.

A Pakistani called Ahmed Bohkhari, a learned, funny rapier of a man talking
brilliantly about Macbeth. Sir Bengal Rau of India dreaming aloud about what he
loved most, the law and his country, filling a young reporter with desire to
leave the United Nations and go live in India, experience it, taste it.

Raphael Lemkin, a Polish-born international lawyer with no real official
standing, always wandering about the corridors, pleading, cajoling, courting,
scolding for an international convention against genocide. He lived to see the
day.  There was Trygve Lie who loved the United Nations, too much, until he
could not distinguish between it and him, and spent his last years there in hurt
anger. His successor, Dag Hammarskjold, liked to call himself an unashamed
intellectual, and he was both man of learning and wit - the quintessential
Western diplomat.

Vision of Hammarskjold

This elegant Scandinavian was done in finally by a situation from another world,
and which he never seemed totally to grasp - tribal warfare in the Congo. He
died in an airplane crash over Africa on one of his many wearing Congo missions.

When he had arrived at the United Nations, he had said he hoped the day would
come when the people of the world saw the United Nations not as a strange
painting by Picasso, but as a drawing by themselves. He did not live to see the
day.

Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit of India, Nehru's sister, touching her tears with her sari
when she spoke of the black man in South Africa; and a listening Pakistani
delegate in the back row, clenched with anger about India's caste system. And
then one day, Sir Bengal Rau and his Pakistani counterpart, Sir Mohammed
Zafrulla Khan, meeting in the delegates' lounge on the day of Mahatma Gandhi's
assassination, standing close, for a long time, saying nothing, just standing
silent and together.

It was not very successful, the United Nations, but despite all the harshness,
quite friendly. Jew and Arab made up entire parties in New York and nobody even
questioned it.

The Convivial Days

Dutch diplomats and Indonesians fighting for independence from them would talk
warmly about friends in each other's countries. Politicians from nations not
officially born would walk about, buttonholing, endlessly, eagerly. And at the
bar, a martini would on occasion loosen a Russian or American tongue equally.

Andrei Gromyko made his name at the United Nations and although he was not the
jolliest of men nor the warmest at all times, he was usually ready to chat a
bit.

One morning, a reporter chasing Gromyko about during his first of many walkouts
from the United Nations decided the best way to find him was the simplest. So he
marched over to the Plaza, asked for the number of the Gromyko suite, took the
elevator up and knocked on the door.

There stood Mrs. Gromyko, in a housecoat. She seemed a bit surprised when she
saw the reporter, but she invited him right in and poured coffee for the
visitor, her husband and herself. Then the reporter and the Ambassador strolled
over to the Soviet consulate together.

It's an altogether different United Nations now, which is hardly startling; most
things change in 40 years. It has 159 members instead of 51.  The Big and the
Little Lands Many of the new members are large and important, old countries like
Spain or newer ones like Nigeria and Indonesia. Some have populations that would
hardly fill a department store on sale day.

Real political action is almost unknown, but all over the world doctors,
geologists, nurses and agronomists work in the name of the United Nations.

It has become something of a headache for the United States, regularly outvoted
by combinations of the Soviet and ''nonaligned'' blocs. Nastiness of spech has
been raised to stunning levels.

But it does give all kinds of countries a voice they would not have otherwise.
And if their delegates' words do not ring around the world, at least they are
heard in their own hometowns.

Surprisingly, many people still look quite young at the United Nations. They may
even find the whole thing just as exhilarating and zestful as the old-timers
did.

But they do live behind barriers of stone, and bodyguards imposed by the terror
of terrorism, which is a pity.

Mrs. Gromyko's coffee was very good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of early leaders of the United Nations (NYT, AP and Pix) (page
A10)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


GALAPAGOS. By Kurt Vonnegut. 295 pages. Delacorte Press/Seymour Lawrence.
$16.95. WITH ''Galapagos,'' the author's 11th novel, we're back in familiar
Vonnegut territory: the subject is the end of the world (or at least the end of
the world as we know it); the objects of lamentation are man's cruelty to man,
contemporary society, modern technology and, of course, the horrors of war -
World War II and Vietnam, as well as the more generic variety. Although there
are no singsong refrains like ''hippity hop,'' ''hi ho'' or ''so it goes,'' the
narrative voice still has the quality of a verbal shrug - flip, careless and
willfully casual (''the people would eat up all the food, gobble, gobble, yum,
yum, and it would become nothing but excrement and memories''), and the
characters still bear more of a resemblance to cartoon figures than regular
human beings. The narrator is a Vietnam veteran named Leon who happens to be the
son of the erstwhile Kilgore Trout, the hero of ''God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater''
and ''Breakfast of Champions.''

Leon also happens to be a ghost, who is telling this story from a vantage point
in the future - one million years from now, to be exact. This gives him the same
sort of historical perspective that Billy Pilgrim had from the planet
Tralfamadore in ''Slaughterhouse Five'' - and it enables him and Kurt Vonnegut
to jump back and forth in time, comment on a lot of 20th-century atrocities,
make some sci-fi-like speculations about the future and, in general, ignore the
day-to-day complexities of life in favor of the Big Picture. The result is a
novel that has the satisfactions of a well-crafted comic strip: though it often
settles for easy jokes instead of real humor, though it tries to amuse us rather
than move our emotions, ''Galapagos'' does have plenty of whimsical charm. It's
fun to read, often clever and almost always entertaining.

According to Leon, humanity was in pretty bad shape a million years ago: the
world was on the verge of financial disaster; wars were killing off the better
part of the population; technology had progressed to the point where robots were
playing golf and tennis for their owners, and people everywhere were being mean
to their dogs and even meaner to one another. These problems, Leon argues, all
shared a single source: man's oversized and overactive brain.

Leon, of course, speaks with the hindsight of history: following the apocalypse
- which has occurred sometime around 1986 - evolution will take a sharp swerve
down the genetic ladder. In accordance with Darwin's theories of survival,
mankind will develop an increasingly small and inept brain and will develop
flippers in the place of hands. This will eliminate war, starvation and nuclear
terror - that is, many of the things Mr. Vonnegut likes to complain about in his
novels - but it will also eliminate all that makes the human species special.
People will no longer be able to thread a needle, play the piano or pick their
noses. There will be no more left-handed individuals; in fact, no one will have
''a name anymore - or a profession, or a life story to tell.''

How has all this come to pass? Well, as Mr. Vonnegut notes, ''Galapagos'' might
well be subtitled ''A Second Noah's Ark,'' though as related by Leon Trout, it
more often sounds like a surreal episode of ''Gilligan's Island'' or ''Love
Boat.'' It seems that Leon was killed while working on a luxury cruise liner
named the Bahia de Darwin and his ghost now haunts the ship, which is scheduled
to embark on ''the Nature Cruise of the Century.'' While the likes of Jacqueline
Onassis, Mick Jagger and Henry Kissinger had originally signed up for this trip
to the Galapagos Islands, the sudden economic collapse of the Western world has
left the Bahia de Darwin with a handful of anonymous passengers: Mary Hepburn, a
schoolteacher widow given to suicidal despair; James Wait, a con man in search
of a rich woman to make his 18th wife; Zenji Hiroguchi, a Japanese computer
genius, and his disaffected wife, Hisako; Andrew MacIntosh, a boisterous
American entrepreneur, and his blind daughter, Selena.

Along with the ship's captain, Adolf von Kleist, and several Kanka-bono Indian
girls, these passengers - or rather, those passengers who actually survive
assorted accidents and medical disorders - will form the gene pool from which
all future generations of mankind will develop. Shipwrecked on Santa Rosalia,
the outermost of the Galapagos Islands, these people will somehow survive the
coming apocalypse, and their little colony will become the new ''cradle of
civilization.''

Mr. Vonnegut spins out this fantastical story with admirable, if somewhat
disorganized, inventiveness, decorating the main plot with touching meditations
about the animals who live on the Galapagos Islands and lots of shaggy-dog
digressions about individual characters. We learn about Mary's husband, Roy, who
died of a brain tumor that he blamed on nuclear testing; we learn about James
Wait's seamy, disreputable past, and we learn about Zenji Hiroguchi's invention
of Mandarax - an amazing computer capable of doing everything from flower
arranging to diagnosing mental illness.

Unfortunately, many of Mr. Vonnegut's conceits - like having Mandarax
continually quote famous people at appropriately ironic moments, and putting
asterisks by the names of people who have died - grow tiresome as the novel
progresses; we come to expect them, like the irritating nervous tics of an old
friend. Even more disturbing is the author's tendency to repeatedly italicize
the moral of his story: as in most of Mr. Vonnegut's fiction, deciphering the
message is never the reader's problem, and ''Galapagos'' is obvious enough
without our having to be told, point-blank, that Mandarax stands for ''the Apple
of Knowledge'' or that Captain von Kleist represents the ''new Adam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kurt Vonnegut (Jill Krementz)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

I.M.F. Posts Net Deficit

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 267 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


The International Monetary Fund today reported its first net deficit from
operations in nearly a decade, reflecting the delinquency in repayments by four
countries.

The 148-nation agency, which lends to financially pressed countries to help them
pay their international bills, said it had a deficit of 30 million special
drawing rights in the year ended last April 30. That compared with 73 million
special drawing rights the previous fiscal year.

The I.M.F. keeps its accounts in the drawing rights, which are an international
form of money created in the late 1960's. One right equals about one dollar.

The I.M.F.'s annual report said that four countries were more than six months
overdue in payments when its fiscal year closed.

Three of the countries were identified because their delinquency has formally
barred them from receiving new I.M.F. credits. They are Cambodia, Vietnam and
Guyana. The fourth, an African country, was not identified. The I.M.F. faces
mounting arrears of African countries, which have suffered financial reverses
caused by drought and famine. The I.M.F. has been reluctant, however, to cut off
access of the African countries to its credit.

The way to deal with this problem is one of the issues to be taken up at the
annual meeting of the I.M.F. in Seoul, Korea in early October.

The 193-page report sounded a strong warning against import curbs to protect
jobs in troubled industries. It said that such protectionism ''could pose a
serious threat to the whole fabric of the multilateral trading system that has
served the world so well over the past 40 years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Unit on Missing Travels to Hanoi

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 25


A four-member United States military delegation traveled to Hanoi today to
discuss the recovery of remains of American servicemen still listed as missing
in action in Vietnam.

There are still 1,369 Americans listed as missing in action in Vietnam and a
total of 2,464 in all of Indochina.

The technical team, led by Col. Joe Harvey, head of the military's Joint
Casualty Resolution Center in Hawaii, is to hold two days of talks with
Vietnamese officials, a spokesman for the American group said.

The meeting is the fourth technical-level session this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STATE'S AIR GUARDSMEN REMAIN SET FOR ACTION

BYLINE: By PETER KERR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words

DATELINE: SYRACUSE


The jet fighter tears through the clouds, dips a wing earthward and unleashes a
blaze of cannon fire at a column of target tanks below.

At the controls of the A-10 attack plane is Lieut. Col. William D. Walsh, a
criminal lawyer and justice of the peace.

The 41-year-old Mr. Walsh is one of the 73 fighter pilots in the New York Air
National Guard, flying members of the state militia who form a sort of a
volunteer fire department trained to wage war at up to twice the speed of sound.

''After a day in the courtroom, there's nothing I want to do more than get out
and bomb and strafe and rat race around,'' Mr. Walsh said. ''Sometimes I imagine
a judge's face superimposed over a target. Amazing how it improves my score.''

Every week Mr. Walsh puts his Syracuse legal practice aside for several hours,
dons an Air Force flight suit, and from the sky blasts a row of target tanks.

Practicing Interceptions

Other Guard pilots and operators of electronic weaponry fly two-seat F-4 Phantom
jets from a base in Niagara Falls and practice interceptions of Russian bombers
over the forests of Canada.

Like the Army National Guard, the Air National Guard is made up mostly of
civilians who are required to serve in uniform for at least two weeks a year and
one weekend a month. But among guardsmen, the state's fighter pilots are unusual
in their time commitment.

Many of them lead civilian lives as lawyers, businessmen, engineers, academics,
airline pilots, doctors or farmers, and then dedicate 10 hours a week or more to
military activities, including at least 3 hours in the air, far more time on
duty than most other members of the National Guard, officials said. On occasion,
they are flown to bases around the world to fill in for full-time Air Force
units.

Becoming 'A Different Person'

''The clock strikes 3 on Thursdays and I am a different person, I am a fighter
pilot,'' said Charles S. Musso Jr., 33, of Hammondsport, who is a captain at the
Niagara Falls base and a marketing executive with a company that manufactures
salt-spreading equipment. ''An hour and a half after I arrive at the base, I am
rolling down the runway with 230,000 pounds of thrust behind me and away I go.''

He said he had never fully described to business associates what is involved in
his life as an aviator. The contrast between the two worlds is difficult for him
to explain, he said.

One-third of the state's fighter pilots are full-time guardsmen who are on duty
at their bases 40 hours a week and are employed as state Civil Service
employees. Almost all of the fighter pilots were originally trained to fly as
regular Air Force officers.

By law, the New York Air Guard, which also includes transport planes and air-sea
rescue aircraft, is part of the state militia and can be called to active duty
in emergencies by the President or the Governor. On some occasions, like the
1980 Olympics in Lake Placid, the Governor has used Air Guard personnel. But it
is unlikely, officials acknowledge, that Governor Cuomo would ever call up
airplanes designed to engage in aerial dogfights or blow up columns of heavy
tanks.

Presidents have called up New York's fighter pilots several times, including
service in Germany during the Berlin crisis in 1961 and combat duty during the
Vietnam War in 1968 and 1969.

Mr. Walsh's group, the 174th Tactical Fighter Wing, is one of two fighter units
in the New York Air Guard. The other, the 107th Interceptor Group in Niagara
Falls, is assigned to the air defense of the continental United States along
with full-time Air Force units. At all times two of its fighters, as well as air
crews and support personnel - a mix of full-time guardsmen and part-timers from
the Buffalo area - are on alert in a high-security station by the edge of a
runway.

If a radar blip appears anywhere over a large sector of Canada and could
possibly be a Soviet bomber, the 107th receives orders from the North American
Air Defense Command at Griffiths Air Force Base in Rome, N.Y. Sirens sound, the
crews dash into their planes and in minutes they take off to meet the
unidentified aircraft.

'A Secret Life'

''It's sort of a secret life for me,'' said Jim Hoefler, 30, a graduate student
in political science who flies in the back seat of a Phantom on Tuesday and
Thursday nights as a weapons systems coordinator. The schedule of his classes
permits him time to fly only at night, so he is known in the group as Casper.

Mr. Hoefler said he tries to avoid disclosing his role as an aviator to other
graduate students since some of his colleagues, upon learning what he did
evenings, peppered him with questions like ''Who are you going to bomb
tonight?''

When the 107th was temporarily deployed to replace a fighter unit in Iceland
last year, the planes scrambled to intercept Soviet TU-95 bombers over the sea,
according to Maj. Steven Kaplan, 46, a former charter-airline pilot who now
works full time as a F-4 weapons support officer. He operates radar and
air-to-air missile systems from the aircraft's rear seat.

Cold War Etiquette

Throughout their confrontations, a cold war etiquette prevailed, he said. Airmen
on both sides immediately started snapping photographs and on one occasion, Mr.
Kaplan said, a Soviet co-pilot waved the Phantom to move forward and higher so
he could get a better picture.

The Soviet airmen frequently wave hello to the Americans, Mr. Kaplan said, and
according to much repeated tales, possibly apocryphal, Soviet fliers have been
known to hold up pineapples they brought from Cuba.

''People think we are in a back eddy,'' Mr. Kaplan said. ''They don't understand
how close the threat is.''

The 20-year-old F-4's are capable of speeds over 1,200 miles an hour, and often
loop, roll or pull into sharp turns that create centrifugal forces six times the
pull of gravity, or ''six G's,'' making a 200-pound flier weigh 1,200 pounds.

At such moments, it feels as if a lead blanket has descended upon the cockpit. A
raised arm quakes and quivers as if it were lifting a barbell. A pencil feels as
heavy as a half-quart milk container. And the horizon becomes a thin line
running overhead in the dome of the Plexiglas canopy.

All the while, a pressurized ''G-suit,'' squeezes the flier's legs and punches
his belly to force blood back up towards his brain. Without it, color would
start to bleed from his vision and eventually he would lose consciousness.

Images of Europe

Near Syracuse, meanwhile, the pilots of the 174th Tactical Fighter Wing practice
flying as low as 100 feet to destroy enemy tanks on the ground. Before takeoff
they consult a map of New York State overlaid with a map of Central Europe, so
they can imagine themselves taking off from the runway just outside of Syracuse
as the Lechfeld base in West Germany. To a pilot taking off on a weekday
afternoon, the Czechoslovak border runs across Lake Placid and Lake George, and
East Germany lies on the far side of the St. Lawrence River.

The 174th wing's A-10 attack planes look something like fat birds with cigars
stuck in their mouths. They are equipped with 30-millimeter Gatling-type guns
that spit clouds of shells - each shell capable of destroying a tank - at a rate
of 4,200 rounds a minute.

''It's great for ducks,'' Mr. Walsh said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of F-4 Phantom fighter of New York Air National Guard's 107th
Interceptor Group flying over Niagara Falls (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
Balanced Accounts; Injudicious Label

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 176 words


When Edward Tamm, then a protege of J. Edgar Hoover, was nominated for a Federal
judgeship in 1948, liberals bridled. They said Mr. Hoover's personal assistant
could not be relied on to protect individual rights against the Government. They
questioned his law degree.

Judge Tamm, who died the other day at 79, conquered his critics in 37 admirable
years on the bench, 20 of them on the Court of Appeals in Washington. Though one
of the court's conservatives, he made up his own mind. He held it
unconstitutional to suspend Social Security benefits to a retired alien who had
been deported for Communist Party membership. He upheld claims by Vietnam war
protesters using shareholder ballots to challenge Dow Chemical Company's napalm
manufacturing policies. He struck down rules against the use of certain words on
radio as carrying the Federal Communications Commission into ''the forbidden
realm of censorship.''

All these decisions were set aside by the Supreme Court - labels don't always
work. The label Judge Tamm richly earned is: judicious.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
PROPHET OF DOOM

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


THE NUCLEAR AGE. By Tim O'Brien. 312 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95. Tim
O'Brien's most recent novel, ''Going After Cacciato,'' published in 1978, was
one of the finest books to emerge from the Vietnam War. Picaresque, mythic in
dimension, ''Cacciato'' found, in the hallucinatory dreams of a renegade
soldier, the perfect metaphor - and narrative strategy - for dealing with that
most surreal and anomalous of wars. It made the reader both apprehend the
ugliness of death and combat, and also viscerally experience the hero's panic
and soft, eager longings for safety and escape.

In ''The Nuclear Age,'' Mr. O'Brien is addressing similar issues of war, death
and existential terror - but he has turned from the battlefront in Southeast
Asia to the battlefront at home. His hero, William Cowling, is a veteran of
1960's radicalism - ''ten years on the lam, hideout to hideout, dodging bombs
and drafts and feds and all the atrocities of our machine-tooled age'' - who has
more recently made a fortune in uranium speculation, and who now counts among
his ''assets,'' ''a blond wife and a blond daughter, and expensive Persian rugs,
and a lovely redwood ranch house in the Sweetheart Mountains.''

William, however, is not your average Yuppie; rather, he's a self-styled
survivalist who, like Cacciato, spends most of his time in a dream world of his
own making. By 1995, his fantasies about nuclear war - he dreams about
radioactive pigeons, tilting continents, burning flesh - have reached such a
pitch that he's building his own bomb shelter. When his wife and daughter
threaten to leave him, he takes them captive, drugs them with Seconal and then
drags them into this hole he's assiduously dug in the backyard. ''The world is
in danger,'' William explains. ''Bad things can happen. We need options, a
safety valve.''

William is constantly asking himself whether he's crazy; and while the reader is
quickly convinced that he's seriously unbalanced, Mr. O'Brien seems to want us
to question what it means to be sane in an insane world. Maybe, he suggests,
William is just ''a normal guy in an abnormal world.'' This issue, of course,
has already been addressed with considerable eloquence and humor by Joseph
Heller in ''Catch-22'' and by Mr. O'Brien himself in ''Cacciato''; and this time
around, it has begun to feel a little shopworn.

That, in itself, would hardly be a problem, but in ''The Nuclear Age,'' the
theme's presented as a didactic pastiche of R. D. Laing and Jonathan Schell,
bereft of originality or persuasive passion. People do not normally spend every
waking hour obsessing about abstractions like nuclear war or worldwide
devastation, and Mr. O'Brien never makes William's hysteria real or convincing.
He never captures his fear, his craziness or even his point of view; and since
we cannot sympathize with William the way we did with the hero of ''Cacciato,''
he strikes us as little more than an aberration - a kook, and a pretty boring
kook at that.

Although his childhood reminiscences about growing up in the bomb-scared 50's,
as the anxious child of well-intentioned parents, possess a pleasing
specificity, William's account of his later experiences as a high-school
oddball, a campus radical and an underground man grow increasingly vague and
full of cliches. History and the consequences of the 60's are telescoped into
little newsreel-like paragraphs, full of names (Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon) and
events (the assassinations, the moratoriums, the sit-ins) and freeze-dried
statistics; and William's own life story becomes a monotonous montage of
paranoia attacks, bad dreams and worse rhetoric. By the end of the book, he's
turned into one of those tiresome prophets, fond of shouting ''Doom!'' at the
top of his lungs; or issuing such portentous statements as ''I'm a man of my
age, and it's an age of extraordinary jeopardy'' or ''as a father, as a man of
the times, I was more determined than ever to hold the line against
dissolution.''

As for William's friends and lovers, they are painted as pasteboard caricatures
of misfits playing at revolution swimming and trying to get a suntan during an
interlude at guerrilla camp in Castro's Cuba; buying mink coats and motels as
soon as they realize that the 60's have ended. The women, especially, seem
ridiculous in the extreme: William's first love, Sarah, is a voluptuous
cheerleader turned radical, who actually utters lines like ''I'm bad news. Too
hot to handle''; and his wife-to-be Bobbi is stewardess who's constantly harping
about her need for ''space.''

Perhaps we're supposed to find these characters amusing, their leaden dialogue
funny in a perverse sort of way; but if that's the case, Mr. O'Brien never
manages to pull it off. The jokes about three-legged dogs, morticians, dead
ponies and cancer belong to the category of sick adolescent humor; and the
cracks about student radicals are often so lame that the reader doesn't know if
Mr. O'Brien is satirizing the excesses of those revolutionaries or the dimness
of their critics.

No doubt Mr. O'Brien intended in ''The Nuclear Age'' to address not merely the
anxieties produced by the shadow of the bomb, but also the more general
precariousness of modern life, the frailty of our family bonds, our
susceptibility to loss and death and sorrow, our craving for safety and a home.
In that, his ambition in undertaking such a venture is to be admired;
unfortunately, there is little else in ''The Nuclear Age'' to celebrate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tim O'Brien (Kelly Wise)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FAST-RISING ECONOMIST FOR A TOP KREMLIN POST

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 27


Nikolai I. Ryzhkov, who was appointed Soviet Prime Minister today, is an
engineer and industrial manager by training, not a Communist Party official.

In his new job as head of the Soviet Government, or chairman of the Council of
Ministers, he will have the main responsibility for instituting the economic
changes outlined by the man thought to be his mentor, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the
Soviet leader.

Mr. Ryzhkov, who will turn 56 on Saturday, represents the new generation of
well-educated, professionally trained managers who began to climb when Yuri V.
Andropov was Soviet leader, and have been promoted to top positions by Mr.
Gorbachev.

Like Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Ryzhkov rose rapidly to the top of the Soviet system.
Until his appointment as the Communist Party's senior economic specialist in
1982, Mr. Ryzhkov did not hold a full-time party position.

Invigorating the Economy

He is closely identified with Mr. Gorbachev's efforts to invigorate the sluggish
Soviet economy through a programs including a drive against drinking, appeals
for increased worker productivity, and a campaign to increase the use of
computers and other advanced technology.

Like Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Ryzhkov has not made clear in recent speeches how much,
if any, fundamental restructuring he favors in the Soviet economic system, which
heavily emphasizes central planning, Western diplomats said today.

''We know he has stood squarely behind Gorbachev in the development of the
economic programs, but we don't know much about Ryzhkov's economic philosophy
beyond a heavy stress on discipline and effective management,'' one Western
economic expert said.

Nikolai Ivanovich Ryzhkov, according to a biographical sketch published by the
Soviet press agency Tass, is a Russian by birth, although other biographies have
said he is Ukrainian. Official and unofficial biographies list no place of
birth.

Received Engineering Degree

Mr. Ryzhkov graduated from the Urals Polytechnical Institute in Sverdlovsk in
1959 with an engineering degree. From 1950-59 he worked in mining, starting as a
miner and working his way up to mine director, according to a biography
published by Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty.

According to Tass, which made no reference to mine work in its biography, Mr.
Ryzhkov joined the party in 1956, and began his career at the huge Uralmash
heavy machinery plant in Sverdlovsk. He was said to have risen from smelting
foreman to chief engineer and eventually plant director.

He moved to Moscow in 1975 as the First Deputy Minister of Heavy Machinery. Four
years later he was named First Deputy Chairman of Gosplan, the state planning
commission, which sets investment, production and other levels for scores of
Soviet ministries and industrial enterprises.

Promoted by Andropov

Mr. Andropov moved Mr. Ryzhkov to the Secretariat of the Communist Party Central
Committee in 1982 as secretary for economic issues.

Mr. Gorbachev, who became General Secretary of the party in March, promoted Mr.
Ryzhkov to full membership in the Politburo in April, advancing him over more
senior party officials and skipping the customary step of candidate, or
nonvoting, membership in the Politburo, the policy-making body.

Mr. Ryzhkov has traveled to Austria, Vietnam, Bulgaria, Poland, East Germany and
Hungary, but he is not well known in the West, diplomats here said.

They said that he does not attend Western diplomatic functions and that little
is known about his personal life. The Tass biographical sketch did not say
whether he is married.

Western diplomats reported that Mr. Ryzhkov is said to be a demanding
administrator who places great weight in the power of more efficient management
to streamline and strengthen the Soviet economy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nikolai A. Tikhonov (Camera Press)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV NOTES;
GLORIA COVERAGE, IN EYE OF THE STORM

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words


''People oughtn't to think of this as an unreal television drama,'' Governor
Cuomo told Jack Cafferty, a WNBC anchorman, yesterday afternoon. ''It is real.''

The reality of Hurricane Gloria seemed not to be lost on the three
network-affiliated New York City television stations. Through the day, they were
the area's fastest source of weather news and emergency information.

From the moment the hurricane watch began, the stations were aware that New
Yorkers would move toward their television sets.

''Our weatherman, Al Roker, begged us not to become Chicken Little,'' said Jerry
Nachman, the news director of WNBC-TV. ''And we decided to put out as much
information as we were able to without creating undue apprehension.

''They were calling by the hundreds,'' Mr. Nachman said of the viewers. ''They
wanted to know everything: Is the sky falling? Will I die? It's funny how a kind
of gestalt emerges during a disaster, we became a clearing house for
everything.''

The three stations each sent out more than 10 live remote camera crews to cover
the storm. And even after it turned out that it was not exactly ''the hurricane
of the century'' that television weathermen had been predicting since Wednesday
night, the news directors at the stations said their presentations had been
worth the effort.

''Unquestionably, it was worth it,'' said James Zarchin, the news director for
WCBS. ''When you have a hurricane that magnitude coming into New York, you can't
cover it too much.''

Certainly the public centered upon the television stations as though they were
weather services: WCBS had so many telephone calls coming in that it had to
bring in employees from its financial department to answer the telephones. Mr.
Nachman said WNBC logged telephone calls ''by the hundreds.''

WNBC was on the air with hurricane coverage at 6:30 yesterday morning. Its
determination to cover the crisis fully prompted it to pre-empt the NBC
network's ''Today'' show and the Phil Donahue show. It did not return to normal
programming until 2 P.M.

WCBS broke into its ''Morning News'' program at 8:25 A.M. and stayed on the air
until 1:47 P.M. WABC did not come on until ''Good Morning America'' had ended at
9 A.M. The independent stations in the New York area went on the air
sporadically with special reports throughout the day.

''WNBC did a hell of a job,'' said Bill Applegate, the news director of its
competitor, WABC-TV. ''They had a good day, a very good day. They were well
prepared.''

WNBC was seemingly ubiquitous from Atlantic City all the way up to Staten
Island, where editors had sent the veteran reporter Gabe Pressman. Mr. Pressman
lost his camera hook-up and sat on one local resident's porch in the rain,
putting him on the telephone to explain to the audience why he would not
evacuate his house.

The other two stations had certain problems.

''Our cameras fell out,'' said Mr. Applegate of WABC, who explained that the
rain had got into his remote cameras and ruined most of his live hook-ups. The
rain fought microwave transmissions all day and the wind flapped reporters'
ponchos in front of their faces often as they were trying to report, sometimes
prompting spontaneous and uncontrolled laughter from the anchor people watching
them.

When the rain began to subside some of the reporters, having been prepared to
cover the ''hurricane of the century,'' expressed disappointment.

''Gloria came in roaring and snarling and clawing like a tiger,'' said one WCBS
reporter with some consternation on his face. ''But she ended up like a pussy
cat.''

Mayor Koch walked on and off camera for all the stations. His voice was often
heard in the background on one station as he prepared to be interviewed on
another.

''We gave out lot of important information,'' said Mr. Zarchin of WCBS. ''You
can't overcover something like this.''

As the day steered into the sunny, nearly placid afternoon, however, some of the
news directors expressed disappointment at the diminished ferocity of the storm
compared to what they had expected.

''Down South near the Gulf they have something we don't have here,'' said Mr.
Applegate of WABC. ''It's a very important ingredient for any hurricane
coverage. It's called the palm tree.''

Benjamin to Leave CBS

Burton Benjamin, a senior executive producer of CBS News and a 29-year veteran
of the network, said yesterday that he would retire at the end of November, five
months before his contract is scheduled to expire. Next March he will become a
senior fellow at the Gannett Center for Media Studies at Columbia University.

Mr. Benjamin produced many documentaries for CBS, worked for the last few years
with Walter Cronkite on a half-dozen hourlong programs and served as executive
producer for ''The CBS Evening News'' from 1975 to 1978. But in recent years, he
became best known as the author of ''The Benjamin Report,'' an internal
investigation of the procedures used in a controversial CBS documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Mr. Benjamin concluded that the documentary was unbalanced and had violated a
number of CBS's guidelines for fairness. Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who had
been interviewed for the program and who was accused on it of having deceived
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1968 concerning the size of
Communist forces in Vietnam, later filed a $120 million libel suit against CBS,
which the general ultimately abandoned after a protracted jury trial.

During his fellowship at the center, Mr. Benjamin will research and write a book
to be called ''To Be or Not to Be - Fair,'' about standards of fairness in print
and broadcast journalism. He was asked to join the Gannett center, said Jane
Coleman, associate director, because ''he has become the conscience of the
industry.''

Mr. Benjamin, who is 67 years old, said he was leaving sooner than he had
planned because of a special early retirement plan CBS has offered to 2,000
eligible employees.

''I think the timing was right,'' he said. ''I bear no animus and have a sense
of some achievement.''

He said he hoped he would be remembered more for his documentary work than for
his much-publicized investigation. ''That was something I never applied for,''
he said. ''I never had any second thoughts about it. I gave it my best shot and
tried to be as fair as I could. It was an internal report to the president of
CBS News. Someone had to do it, and I guess I figured I was too old to lie.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Burton Benjamin of CBS News

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Settle Cambodians In Camp Near the Border

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 28


The Thai Government announced this week that it had finished moving about 55,000
displaced Cambodians to a new site on the Cambodian border.

The Cambodians, civilian followers of the non-Communist Khmer People's National
Liberation Front were driven from Rithisen, a base inside Cambodia, last Dec. 25
in a Vietnamese offensive against guerrilla camps.

When their first refuge inside Thailand, known as Red Hill, also came under fire
early this year, they were moved to Site 7, near the Khao I Dang refugee center,
deeper inside Thailand near the town of Aranyprathet.

The move to Site 2, which now has a population of more than 120,000, returns
them to a remote area within a mile of the border.

Officials of international aid organizations and the Liberation Front's leaders
have criticized the move, saying that it concentrates vulnerable people close to
Vietnamese artillery. There are also fears that Vietnamese troops might force
the refugees back into Cambodian territory.

Thai military authorities say guerrilla fighting has now moved deeper inside
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE USES OF POWER BY MARRIAGE

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 60, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


For a while, the Senator expressed puzzlement as to why the committee was
meeting, why there were so many well-known witnesses and why so many onlookers
were crowded into the hearing room.

Was there a bill under consideration? asked the Senator, J. James Exon, a
Democrat from Nebraska.

No, replied the chairman of the Commerce, Science and Transportaion Committee,
Senator John C. Danforth, a Republican from Missouri.

Then what was the reason for the hearings? Mr. Exon asked.

''The be-all and end-all of everything is not legislation,'' Mr. Danforth
replied.

What Senator Danforth left unsaid was that some of Washington's most powerful,
most influential people had provoked such interest that the hearing had,
perhaps, become inevitable.

The issue was whether anything could be done about lyrics to rock music that
many people considered offensive, and the people who had brought it to the
foreground were the wives of many leading men in the Government, in this case
wives of six House members, a member of the Cabinet and 10 Senators, some of
them on the Commerce Committee.

Parents Music Resource Center

The wives had organized a group, the Parents Music Resource Center, to rally
support for their contentions that some rock-and-roll lyrics are sexually
explicit, violent, disrespectful of parents and glorifying of drugs and alcohol,
and therefore potentially harmful to children.

When they wrote to Stanley M. Gortikov, the president of the Recording Industry
Association of America, they left nothing to chance, signing their own names
over the typed names of their husbands. For example, the handwriting said Sally
D. Danforth; the typescript said Mrs. John C. Danforth.

They got a speedy reply from Mr. Gortikov, who later agreed to ask record makers
to put an advisory label on records and tapes with potentially offensive lyrics.
But the group says that the use of their husbands' names only got them in the
association's door, that after that the issue was decided purely on its merits,
including the scheduling of the Congressional hearing.

''Access,'' said Tipper Gore, wife of Senator Albert Gore Jr., a Tennessee
Democrat. ''I think that's all we have - access. I think that anyone who would
imply more might be wrong.''

Mrs. Gore noted that the wives group had been able to draw attention to a
problem where others had failed. ''The P.T.A., which has 5.6 million members,
tried for a year and a half to get people to pay attention and got nowhere,''
she said. ''Because Susan Baker and I were involved, we were able to get doors
opened. The record industry answered our phone calls.'' Susan Baker is the wife
of the Treasury Secretary, James A. Baker 3d.

Senator Danforth, in remarks supported by other members of the com-mittee,
agreed that the hearing had drawn attention to the issue, but he said he did not
immediately see how Congress could pass any law regarding lyrics.

Among the lyrics that the wives group considers offensive are those of ''Darling
Nikki,'' sung by Prince on his ''Purple Rain'' album, and those of ''Like a
Virgin,'' sung by Madonna.

The membership of the group is not limited to wives of Congressmen, but it did
not recruit any women who serve in Congress. A consultant to the group, the Rev.
Jeff Ling, said it was not intended to be a Congressional group but rather a
''parents'' group. ''It is not meant to be exclusive of them,'' he added. ''If
women in Congress wanted to join, the doors would be open.''

At the Senate hearing, Mrs. Gore and Mrs. Baker answered questions from, among
others, Mrs. Gore's husband. In fact, of the 17 Senators on the committee, five
were husbands of signers of the letter to Mr. Gortikov.

''All these people have kids or grandkids,'' Mrs. Gore said of the women's
motivation.

She said she and Mrs. Baker had had a lot of luck in winning supporters by
participating in radio call-in shows around the country, which they can do by
telephone without leaving their homes here. ''Don't miss the point because of
our access,'' Mrs. Gore said. ''The interest is there.'' She said the wives had
received many small contributions as a result, and a few large ones, including
$5,000 from Mike Love of the Beach Boys, a group that Mrs. Gore says does not
sing obscene lyrics despite suggestions by the former Secretary of the Interior,
James G. Watt, that the group was not family oriented. (Mr. Watt even tried to
have the group barred from the Fourth of July celebration on the Mall.) When it
was suggested that a Congressional supplicant might find it advantageous to
donate money to the wife of a Senator, Mrs. Gore said none of the wives had used
their husbands' fund-raising machinery.

And what of ambition? The Senate has been a fertile field for raising
Presidential aspirations in recent years, and Mrs. Gore's husband is among those
who have been mentioned as a possible contender.

''We haven't even considered that question,'' Mrs. Gore said when asked whether
the wives were concerned about helping or possibly hindering their husbands'
careers. ''I see this as my thing, not my husband's. I don't see this affecting
my husband one way or another.''

Asked whether Mr. Gore had asked her to get involved in the issue or to avoid
it, she said, ''Neither, but as it has evolved, he has been sympathetic - as a
parent. It is irrelevant to the issue that he is a Senator.''

'An Activist Before I Married'

''I was an activist before I married my husband,'' she said. ''I protested the
Vietnam War and I worked for civil rights. This is not the wife of a Senator who
has suddenly gone nuts.''

In addition to Mrs. Baker, Mrs. Danforth and Mrs. Gore, those who signed the
letter to the Recording Industry Association of America were:

Georgia Packwood, wife of Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon; Nancy
Thurmond, wife of Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina; B. A.
Bensten, wife of Senator Lloyd Bensten, Democrat of Texas; Peatsy Hollings, wife
of Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina; Rosemary D. Trible,
wife of Senator Paul S. Trible Jr., Republican of Virginia; Teresa Heinz, wife
of Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania; Penny Durenberger, wife of
Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota; Jeanne H. Simon, wife of
Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois.

In addition, Sharon Sawyer Archer, wife of Representative Bill Archer,
Republican of Texas; Carol Vander Jagt, wife of Representative Guy Vander Jagt,
Republican of Michigan; Nancy Schulze, wife of Representative Richard T.
Schulze, Republican of Pennsylvania; Chris Downey, wife of Representative Thomas
J. Downey, Democrat of Long Island; Ruth Frenzel, wife of Representative Bill
Frenzel, Republican of Minnesota, and Olivia Barclay Jones, wife of
Representative James R. Jones, Democrat of Oklahoma.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tipper Gore with Susan Baker, Sally Nevis and Pam Howar
(NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
IS ACTION OR POLITICS THE REAL ATTRACTION?

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1263 words


It's about a week before Christmas. Mikal and Nikko, two Soviet agents, are
drinking beer, relaxing and trading Commie-type small talk in an open-air,
seaside bar near Miami. ''Look at them,'' sneers Mikal, indicating the carefree,
bikini-clad capitalists around them. ''Soft, decadent - they don't even
understand the nature of their own freedom.''

No, but they soon will, mostly because Mikal and Nikko are, in Mikal's words,
about ''to make history'' by masterminding the first successful invasion of the
United States since the British came over to attend the War of 1812.

In the new film, ''Invasion U.S.A.,'' the job actually doesn't look too
difficult. With the help of Mikal and Nikko, a couple of hundred fully armed and
equipped enemy troops, including Cubans and Arabs, land one night on a Florida
beach not far from the Hotel Fontainbleau and then infiltrate the rest of the
nation to carry out a series of terrorist acts.

These fellows are a vile lot. Their idea of honor is to shoot women and children
first. Their invasion would, in fact, stand a good chance of bringing America to
its big, fat knees, except for some remarkable footwork by Matt Hunter, a former
United States intelligence agent played by Chuck Norris, the karate champ turned
movie star.

Mr. Norris's ''Invasion U.S.A.'' is not to be confused with Albert Zugsmith's
1953 ''Invasion U.S.A.,'' an unashamed B-picture with no stars to speak of, in
which America is atom-bombed into surrender. What is significant, however, is
that both films, separated in time by 32 years, are prompted by the same
nightmare and carry the same warning: a weak America is a dead America - it's
time to beat those plowshares into guns!

The Zugsmith film was not one of the super-smashes of 1953. The times, however,
are now different, and I suspect that Mr. Norris's comically awful new film may
find a responsive audience. It comes out on the heels of the Sylvester Stallone
blockbuster, ''Rambo'' and three earlier Norris hits, ''Missing in Action,''
''Missing in Action 2'' and ''Code of Silence.'' Each of the Vietnam-oriented
films - ''Rambo'' and the two ''Missing in Actions'' - refight the war to the
victory that, according to these movies, liberals in the United States
Government would not let us win. The message: We can attain peace only through
strength, even if we have to blow away half the population to prove it.

Though Mr. Stallone and Mr. Norris have denied any political intent, analysts
have pointed to the box-office successes of their films as further corraborating
evidence of this country's swing to populist conservatism, the sort that seeks
to protect the status quo by invoking God, flag and family.

They may be right, though they ignore the fact that these are primarily action
films, and audiences for action films are not known for their political
commitment.

What is unmistakably true is that there are fewer and fewer films being made
that speak out for anything that might be interpreted as a liberal line. The
ones that are available - I can think of only two currently, ''Plenty,'' a
big-budget fiction film, and ''A Matter of Struggle,'' a modest documentary -
are, in their own way, just as foolish and unconvincingly pious as these hawkish
films.

You have to go back almost two years to find an intelligent, first-rate movie
that, without apology, dramatizes a liberal position. This is Mike Nichols's
''Silkwood,'' which, with sympathy, tells the true story of the radicalization
of Karen Silkwood. She is the young woman who died under mysterious
circumstances while fighting both management and unions to win improved safety
conditions at Kerr-McGee's Cimarron Plutonium Recycling Facility in Crescent,
Okla.

''Silkwood'' belongs to a long - now possibly vanishing - tradition of
politically- and socially-conscious Hollywood films that includes ''They Won't
Forget,'' ''The Great McGinty,'' ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,'' ''The Grapes
of Wrath,'' ''All the King's Men,'' ''Lost Boundaries'' and ''Gentlemen's
Agreement,'' among others. These are all movies in which some sort of
contemporary political or social phenomenon is critically examined and
dramatized, usually by having some ubiquitous ''little guy'' take on whatever or
whoever represents the Establishment at that moment.

I think that ''Plenty,'' Fred Schepisi's film version of David Hare's play,
adapted by Mr. Hare, belongs in this liberal category, although its real
concerns are so muddled I can't be positive. ''Plenty'' seems to be taking a dim
view of post-World War II British life, which it examines through the eyes of
Susan Traherne (Meryl Streep).

However, Susan has a couple of problems that so drastically distort her vision
of things that it's not possible to be sure what ''Plenty'' means to be about.
Having served in France with the Resistance during the Nazi occupation, Susan
simply cannot adjust to the complacencies and hypocrisies of life in postwar
England - she doesn't find it easy being down on the farm after having seen
Paree. A further complication is that she appears to be a certifiable paranoid
schizophrenic.

The result is a moody, irritable, self-important character who, always dressed
to the nines in the best, corniest, Joan Crawford manner, is presented as the
conscience of British liberalism, saying sarcastic things about the ''new
materialism'' of postwar Britain and reacting so personally to the 1956 Suez
fiasco that she suffers a nervous breakdown.

Watching ''Plenty'' you might think that Susan Traherne was the only person in
England who thought that Prime Minister Anthony Eden made a mistake in his Suez
adventure though, in fact, Suez marked the end of his political career. Without
intending to, Mr. Hare and Mr. Schepisi have trivialized political commitment.
''Plenty'' is less about history than hemlines, which fall and rise dramatically
during the nearly 20 years covered by the film.

There's never any doubt where Joan Harvey's ''Matter of Struggle'' stands
politically, which is to the far left. However, as well-meaning as it is, it's
so monotonously smug and simple-minded that it makes one worry about the fate of
the earth for all the wrong reasons. It's not economic exploitation of the
underprivileged, bigotry or even nuclear arms that will do us in, but the sort
of sentimentality that holds that all the world's problems can be reduced to the
maxim: ''People hating people keep people apart.''

In the course of ''A Matter of Struggle,'' Richie Havens, the folk singer and
composer, and two politically precocious little girls, Meagan, 10, and Toni, 8,
travel across America talking to and asking questions of all sorts of people who
are fighting what they see to be this country's political, social and economic
inequities. They meet farmers, laborers, students, Latin American refugees,
activist nuns and clergymen, Congressmen and William Kunstler, the attorney, who
addresses himself to little Meagan's spontaneous question, ''What is 'the red
scare?' ''

The film's highpoint, though, is a sequence in which Miss Harvey appears on
screen to ask a politely mannered activist why he has participated in robberies,
which are not otherwise explained. ''We don't rob,'' he says reasonably, ''We're
expropriating some of our money back.''

It's all very depressing, mostly because I know that if I had to choose between
seeing a piece of nonsense like ''Invasion U.S.A.'' again or either ''Plenty''
or ''A Matter of Struggle,'' I'd probably choose ''Invasion U.S.A.'' It doesn't
mean to be, but, at least, it's funny.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CHANGING WORLD OF NEW YORK INTELLECTUALS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 96 words


Whatever the truth of Hilton Kramer's view of the effect of the radical movement
of the 1960's, the large body of Vietnam protesters were not extremists. Does
Mr. Kramer really mean to suggest that the legitimate protest against the more
invidious aspects of that war represented a ''subversion of civilized values''?
At age 59, my view is that the generation of the 1960's, apart from its radical
counterpart, was the first to see war for what it is - a total breakdown of
civilized values, and the ultimate threat to art in all forms. BARBARA S.
ROBBINS Nantucket, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BEING AUSTRALIA

BYLINE: By Seymour Topping; Seymour Topping is the managing editor of The New
York Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7769 words


AUSTRALIA ALWAYS SEEMED SO FAR away and perhaps not so important. Suddenly,
there was Secretary of State George P. Shultz flying off to Canberra, the
Australian capital, to listen more carefully to what the folks down under had to
say about global defense strategy. At parties in Manhattan, the learned were
talking about great Australian films and applauding the Aussies' delightful
bravado in snatching the America's Cup from the stuffy New York Yacht Club.
Business executives were going off eagerly to vibrant Sydney following the Labor
Government's unexpected decision to open the Australian economy to foreign
banks. At home, my kids were rattling around to Men at Work and other Australian
rock groups.

The urge to find whence all this came was irre-sistible. So ensued the tedious
daylong flight across the Pacific. I found it was small price for the joys of
rambling through pleasant cities blessed with glorious beaches, visiting sheep
and cattle stations in the bush, watching kangaroos and flocks of pink galah
cockatoos and spectacular sunsets in the awesome emptiness of the Outback. More
important, I became aware of how little we Americans know about Australia; of
the wrenching changes in the society, and of how much the security of the United
States depends on ties to that distant southwest Pacific nation.

In the three weeks I took to make a 7,400-mile circuit of Australia, which is
almost as large as the continental United States, there were surprises aplenty.
Obscured by secrecy, attributable more to Washington bureaucracy than to
security imperatives, is the crucial importance of American bases, hidden in the
Outback, to the defense of American cities. (Box, page 22.) Behind the
characteristic Australian swagger, I sensed a faltering of national confidence.
According to one economist, living standards have declined over the last century
from first rank in tralia's Minister for Defense, who is visiting his
parliamentary constituency. In the informal, friendly style of Australians, the
heavyset man of 36 receives me in jogging clothes at his modest, wood-frame row
house. He talks about his new regional approach to defense strategy, regarded
with some uneasiness by American officials who are accustomed to the more
dependent attitude of previous governments.

Under Beazley's direction, Australia has scrapped the last of its two aircraft
carriers, which were symbols of a ''forward defense posture.'' Engraved in
bronze on the walls of the national memorial are the names of 122,224 Australian
war dead. Most died on distant battlefields - Europe, the Middle East, Africa,
some in Southeast Asia. Now, with a strategy of regional defense, a century-old
global commitment of the Australian fighting man is ending.

In the broad strategic framework, Beazley sees the United States as the defender
against the Soviet Union and as the source of vital intelligence information and
modern weaponry. But he regards the Anzus treaty as less of a security blanket
than is generally perceived by the Australian public. The treaty binds the
signatories - Australia, New Zealand and the United States - to recognize an
armed attack in the Pacific area on any one as a common danger, and commits them
to meet such an attack in accordance with their constitutional processes.
However, Australian officials recall private warnings from Washington in past
confrontations with Indonesia that they were on their own, and Beazley says
there is some doubt as to whether Australia could count on the United States
Seventh Fleet to meet any threat to Australia. When I ask Beazley who might
threaten Australia, he smiles slightly. ''I've got a budget of $6.3 billion -
over $4 billion U.S. - in search of a threat.''

Beazley has assigned Paul Dibb, a civilian specialist, to develop the rationale
and priorities of the new defense strategy. Dibb, receiving me in his office in
the Strategic and Defense Studies Center at the Australian National University
in Canberra, dismisses Washington's suggestions that the plan is solely for
continental defense. ''We are the superpower of the southwest Pacific,'' Dibb
says, citing Australian responsibilities for the surrounding island states.
Offshore, Australia will depend on a strike force that eventually will include
75 F-18's, 24 F-111's -equipped with harpoon missiles - as well as six
conventional attack submarines and Lockheed Orion antisubmarine aircraft.

Privately, Australians in and out of Government talk of a possible threat from
Indonesia, to the north. Australian relations with the Suharto Government are,
for the most part, cordial, but some worry that expansionistic impulses may
develop as Indonesia's population grows to 200 million by the end of the
century. Many say such worries are paranoid, and dismiss the idea of a seaborne
military invasion, not only because of the vast terrain of desert and mountains
in northern Australia which are an effective barrier to invasion, but also
because of the technical sophistication such an invasion would require.

There are, however, other troublesome signs. The Indonesian Government is moving
millions of people from the populous islands of Java and Bali to other parts of
the archipelago. This transmigration has provoked some resistance, particularly
in the eastern province of Irian Jaya, where Government troops have been
clashing with members of an independence movement. For years, refugees have been
crossing into neighboring Papua New Guinea, a former Australian mandate, and now
11,000 are in camps on the Papuan side of the frontier. Pressure is building on
the borders, and although Indonesia claims the problem is an internal one,
Australians worry they might be compelled to go to the aid of Papua New Guinea
if it is seriously menaced by Indonesia.

Beazley promises a ring of air bases around Australia and an electronic network
to monitor against clandestine landings on the coast. This the world to 16th.
The leisure-loving Australians still enjoy a very comfortable life but their
leaders question whether such style can endure unless the nation becomes more
competitive in the scramble for world markets. While they concede the urgency of
expanding trade with Asia, most Australians still suffer from an overweening
fear - described by some high Government officials as paranoia - of being
swamped by the brown and yellow peoples to the north. In the remote, vast
continent, the 15 million Australians are assuming a new identity: Asian
immigration is transforming a white Australia into a multiracial society and, as
the Commonwealth ties to Britain wither, there is a growing affinity with the
United States. A unique society of the Pacific basin is emerging.

AMERICAN INTERESTS DOWN UNDER

IF AN AMERICAN WANTS TO LEARN HOW Australians are serving him, one of the best
places to start is Alice Springs in the center of the continent. In appearance,
Alice Springs could be a town in Wyoming: There is the cluster of neat,
ranch-style houses, the inevitable supermarkets and those ubiquitous honky-tonk
signs inviting you to cafes and, of course, the movie, all on a main street that
meanders out to the bush where cattle graze. At the Gap Motor Hotel bar,
conversation over beers is about how much tougher it is nowadays to earn a
dollar; the latest television sequence of ''Dallas'' or maybe ''Dynasty''; the
doings of local ball clubs. Once in a while, there is a shrug about Pine Gap,
the United States military installation 15 miles down the road, on the other
side of the Macdonnell Range, and a remark revealing that it is one of Russia's
priority nuclear missile targets.

Yes, it's just like southeastern Wyoming where there are intercontinental
ballistic missile launch sites. But there is an essential difference.
Australians know that Russians would have little interest in their country if it
were not for the Pine Gap installation and at least two other American
facilities. Because of their location in relation to the Eurasian land mass,
these bases are indispensable to the United States. Not only do they provide
early warning against Soviet missile attacks, but they gather vital military
intelligence and are communication links for American naval forces in the
Pacific and Indian Oceans. Standing by secret agreements negotiated by previous
governments, the Labor Government accepts the presence of the bases and the
subsequent nuclear risk, but not without dissent from its left wing and a strong
grass-roots antinuclear movement.

Sitting in the hot sun on a bench opposite the little John Flynn Church, named
after the founder of the Flying Doctor Service that treats isolated communities,
Lew Lambert talks about what it is like living near Pine Gap. ''We don't know
much about the base, but everyone tells us it is a target and the local people
worry about a Russian nuclear attack,'' he says. ''If the base were hit by a
nuclear missile, some of them think Alice Springs would be protected from the
blast because the base is on the other side of the mountain, and the prevailing
wind might also take the cloud away. But most of us know it will be all over if
there is nuclear war. We know the United States will never press the button. It
would be the Russians.''

Nonetheless, Lambert is willing to live with Pine Gap. ''We know the United
States is a good ally,'' he says. A mild-mannered man of 53, Lambert is typical
of many of the 22,000 inhabitants of Alice Springs. He came to Australia because
there was more opportunity than he could hope for in his native England. He and
his wife own a sandwich shop and a car-hire service.

Lambert says that the several hundred Amer-icans who work at Pine Gap mix well
with the locals. They live with their families in air-conditioned houses
provided by the Australian Government. The Americans even captured a trophy last
year in the annual Henley-on-Todd Regatta, run by crews in bottomless boats
through a dry river bed. But these are discreet Americans who do not speak about
the nature of their work amid the huge white bulbous communications radomes of
Pine Gap. At the police post on the road to the carefully guarded base, there is
a deceptive white sign that reads: ''Joint Defense Space Research Facility.'' In
fact, the facility is a ground station controlling spy satellites that gather
vital intelligence data from the Soviet Union. The other key facilities are
Nurrungar, in the state of South Australia, and North West Cape, on the Indian
Ocean.

The need to retain these bases is not the Reagan Administration's sole
motivation for the solicitious attention it is giving Australia. Washington is
adjusting to New Zealand's decision to deny its ports to all nuclear-armed and
nuclear-propelled ships. The action effectively bars all American naval vessels,
since the United States, for security reasons, will not declare which of its
vessels are nuclear.

The New Zealand shock comes at a time when Washington is worried about the
viability of American bases in the Philippines, in the face of the political
instability of the Marcos Government and the Communist insurgency in the rural
areas. Adding to the concern is the increased Soviet activity in the Pacific,
where Russia has the largest of its four fleets. Its submarines prowl from the
Vladivostok base south to Australian waters. Soviet bombers and reconnaissance
aircraft range out of Cam Ranh Bay, a former American base in Vietnam. In time
of war, the Russians could block the passage of shipping to the Indian Ocean by
way of the Indonesian archipelago straits and the Strait of Malacca. Alternate
routes would be through the South Pacific, making access to Australian ports
even more essential.

The United States' withdrawal from joint military exercises with New Zealand has
increased its dependence on Australian ports to host American naval forces.
American officials in Australia have anxiously watched antinuclear
demonstrations for signs of any trend toward the New Zealand option. They can
even be worried by the occasional automobile bumper sticker: ''I support the NZ
stand.''

THE AUSTRALIAN DEFENSE

SO THIS IS PERTH, THE SPARKLING CITY that is the capital of the state of Western
Australia, and some of its one million inhabitants are awaiting the arrival of a
United States carrier battle group. Antinuclear activists are planning a
demonstration. In the past, as many as 10,000 demonstrators have confronted
sailors with a sea of hostile placards. Here comes the giant aircraft carrier
U.S.S. Constellation, with thousands of its crew members on deck in serpentine
formation spelling out ''Connie Loves Perth.'' The carrier is accompanied by the
guided-missile cruisers California and Worden; escort destroyers stand off
Perth's Fremantle port. Eight thousand liberty-hungry sailors with bulging
wallets start coming ashore. Behold, there are only some 150 demonstrators and
they are lost among the welcomers, most prominently women and merchants.

I am in Perth to interview Kim Beazley, Aus-does not dispel a nightmare commonly
shared by the Australians of massive influxes of boat people seeking refuge if
an ecological disaster should strike Indonesia or another Southeast Asian
nation.

Leaving Beazley's home, I soon find that the people of Perth are obsessed with
another kind of defense. On the Fremantle waterfront, an Australian flag flaps
defiantly over a building with a sign identifying it as America's Cup Defense
Headquarters. And 12 miles away, the Royal Perth Yacht Club proudly displays the
America's Cup, carried off after victory in Newport in 1983 by Alan Bond's
wing-keeled Australia II.

In 1986, the New York Yacht Club and some 16 syndicates from six other countries
plan to put 12-meter yachts into the waters off Fremantle, braving the stiff
prevailing winds called ''Fremantle's Doctor,'' to determine who will eventually
face Australia for the cup.

Eliminations begin in early October and the America's Cup final series does not
start until Jan. 31, 1987, but Australian enthusiasm already has generated
business. In anticipation of a half-million visitors, 11,000 new service jobs
are projected for Perth and Fremantle. Since the Australian victory in Newport,
six hotels have been built; four more are under construction, along with a
casino, golf course and another airport. Spoils to the victor, Bond has profited
handsomely from his triumph: advertising revenues of his television station are
up, Australia II decorates Swan beer cans, produced by his brewery, and the
value of his large real-estate holdings in the area have soared. Also, he is
chairman of the committee that is raising $7 million for Australia's defense.

Fremantle's old picturesque sandstone houses, which together with the sturdy
pubs testify to the town's English heritage, are being restored. Older residents
grumble that at least all this will endure even if that mug, beg pardon, mates,
should be snatched away.

IN THE BUSH: OLD THOUGHTS, NEW TECHNOLOGY

FROM PERTH, MY WIFE, Audrey, and daughter, Joanna, fly south with me to the
Oceanview sheep farm near Esperance, a pretty seaside resort town on the
southern coast. Esperance was in the world news several years ago when the
American Skylab burned through the atmosphere, showering bits over the town.
Since then, excitement has focused on a woman who was fatally attacked by a
great white shark (''he came back for a second bite'') and the lusty doings of
vacationing gold miners from Kalgoorlie, 200 miles to the north.

About 140 million sheep graze in Australia and 22,000 are on this 13,000-acre
farm, which is owned by two New Yorkers, Benno Schmidt and David Rockefeller,
and Jim Elkins, a Houston banker. It is managed by Tony Moore, a lean, blue-eyed
man of 46 with powerful leathery hands who wrested the farm from the arid bush.
Many would say he is the quintessential Australian farmer, born of British
stock, industrious, innovative, conservative and troubled by what is happening
to ''his'' white Australia.

We spend the afternoon with Moore in his Land Cruiser, jouncing through sheep
paddocks and skidding down gullies to glimpse kangaroos. So many ''roos'' roam
the Australian bush, devouring grazing grasses, that farmers hire hunters to
thin the herds. Moore raises merino sheep for export to the Middle East. They
are transported live in air-conditioned ships so that they can be slaughtered,
in accordance with religious tradition, by a Moslem uttering ''Allah'' as he
slashes their throats. We watch as two of Moore's dogs, responding to his shouts
and whistles, herd the sheep with astonishing skill. With the dogs' help, Moore
can run the farm with only two stockmen, plus contractors for shearing.

In his tastefully furnished home after dinner and a bottle of excellent
Australian wine, Moore discusses his vision of Australia's future: ''I would say
that, almost to a man, rural Australia favors bases like Pine Gap because we
believe very firmly that we need to be doing our share, so America will look out
after us. Our defense capacity is very limited. We live in a sea of Asians and
our huge country is potentially their breadbasket. Without the United States
defending us, I think we would be in very bad shape.''

It is not only military invasion that worries Moore and others like him. The
Australian policy that encouraged the immigration of Europeans and restricted
the entry of Asians has been changing since the early 1970's. In the last few
years, Australia has admitted 88,000 Indochinese refugees and some of their
families are now following. Asians now account for 12 percent of the population.
Moore says his children may have a different view, but he is concerned about
Australia's being ''led away from a European base.'' Unlike Europeans, Asian
communities, he complains, are disinclined to assimilate. Moore's wife, Phyllis,
speaks regretfully of the way the Asians keep themselves apart in her daughter's
school.

Phyllis is a sturdy woman. She cares for the immaculate house and does all the
office work for the farm. At times, she confesses, she is a bit lonely in the
isolation of the bush.

Like other Australian women, she lives in a society heavily influenced by the
frontier machismo of the Outback. The feminist movement is perhaps a decade
behind that in the United States, and advancement of women lags in the senior
ranks of most professions, industry and government. It is true that writers such
as Thea Astley, Elizabeth Jolley, Barbara Hanrahan, Judith Wright and Shirley
Hazzard have made their marks in contemporary Australian literature, and
performers such as the opera singer Joan Sutherland have received acclaim at
home and abroad. But, for the most part, Australian women - whether in the
Outback or in the cities - have not yet been accorded the same share of
opportunity as have women in Western Europe and the United States.

T HE NEWCASTLE Waters cattle station in the Northern Territory looks mighty big
as we fly over it in a Learjet. But my Australian friends assure me that this is
not the biggest ranch in the country; it is a mere 4,000 square miles, roughly
the size of Jamaica. Only one-third of Australia is habitable, another one-third
is fit only for sheep and cattle stations that require extensive acreage to
sustain profitable herds.

When we bump to a landing on a dusty airstrip, Ken Warriner is waiting. He is
the ranch general manager, a powerfully built man of some 45 years, friendly but
not given to much small talk. To my disappointment, he is wearing a white
American cowboy hat. I had envisioned him in one of those felt slouch hats or a
broad-brimmed leather job of the kind Australian ranchers and gold miners are
supposed to wear. The cowboy hat, he explains, came from a previous job on the
King Ranch, the Australian property of the Texas King Ranch.

The next morning, Warriner takes us in a Toyota Land Cruiser to inspect herds of
Brahmans, Herefords and Santa Gertrudis, a breed developed on the King Ranch.
Warriner switches on his two-way radio, which has a range of 1,200 miles and
lets him keep in touch with ranch central and the stock camps spot-ted
throughout the station. Warriner's 18-year-old son, Jeffrey, works in one of the
roving stock camps, tending cattle and sleeping in his swag (bedroll). The
herds, which are being upgraded with French breeding bulls, look in surprisingly
good condition despite an 18-month drought.

Every year, Warriner loses about 5 percent of the herd to drought, disease and
wild dingo dogs. Warriner complains bitterly about a bloated government
bureaucracy and heavy taxes that cut into the ranch's hard-earned profits.
Nevertheless, the operation is profitable. Warriner and two partners bought
Newcastle Waters five years ago for $4.2 million and sold it two and a half
years later for a profit to Kerry Packer, a Sydney entrepreneur whose
Consolidated Press Ltd. holdings include cattle stations, a television network,
Australia's leading news magazine, coal mines and ski resorts. Packer has since
invested heavily in the ranch that is probably now worth more than $10 million.

My second disappointment: No old-style cowboys. Even in the busy season,
Warriner employs only 26 people to operate the huge station, including a
bookkeeper, a truck driver and a mechanic. Rather than using good old cowboys to
round up the herd, the cattle are enticed into fenced-in water holes. They enter
the area through horizontal bars that close behind them and exit through open
gates. At roundup time, the gates are locked and the thirsty cattle are trapped
at the water hole and those to be shipped are prodded into holding corrals.
(When the fields outside of the fenced area are wet, Warriner musters his cattle
by frightening them into corrals with a hedge-hopping Cessna plane, one of two
on the ranch. Other stations use helicopters.) The cattle are then shipped for
fattening to grasslands in the east via trucks, called trains, that pull as many
as five double-decker trailers. So much for the Australian wild west.

IN THE CAPITAL: POLITICS OF CHANGE

IT IS A CRISP JULY WINTER morning in Canberra. The temperature hovers just under
60 degrees. Bright sunlight filters through the eucalyptuses, where flocks of
white cockatoos roost, casting feathery shadows across the quiet streets and
roundabouts. There is none of the frenzied hustle of other capitals in this
small garden city, laid out with geometric contrivance 72 years ago by the
Chicago urban planner Walter Burley Griffin. From the green-domed war memorial
at the foot of Mount Ainslie, the morning sun streams southwest along the Anzac
Parade to the aluminum American eagle atop a 258-foot column. An inscription at
its base reads: ''In grateful remembrance of the vital help given by the United
States of America during the war in the Pacific 1941-1945.'' Australians have
not forgotten the battle of the Coral Sea, when the United States Navy shielded
their nation from Japanese invasion.

At the base of Capital Hill is Parliament House, a modest white building; at the
top, lift cranes are busily constructing a grander hall of Government. There is
already debate about the new building, scheduled for completion in time for the
1988 Bicentennial of the British settlement of Australia. What flag should fly
above the new Parliament House? Does the new surging nationalism demand one more
distinctly Australian? Or should the old one, with the British Union Jack in the
corner, be retained?

In his spacious wood-paneled office in Parliament, Prime Minister Bob Hawke
settles into an easy chair, lights a cigar and reflects on the future of his
country. He is a trim, silver-haired man, 55 years of age, with the rugged
features Australians admire. He has an easy, compassionate manner, loves sports
and jokes about how he overcame a drinking problem. Most of his countrymen seem
to agree that he is the most charismatic politician to emerge in Australia in
the last decade.

Hawke is a staunch supporter of alliance with the United States and he welcomes
the closer bilateral relationship since New Zealand's rebuff. ''The majority of
the Australian community,'' he says, now accepts American bases and naval
access. But still he must contend with a strong antinuclear movement led by the
left wing of his own Labor Party. In the national elections last year, he lost
more than half a million votes out of an electorate of nine and a half million
to the Nuclear Disarmament Party. Many intellectuals - led by Patrick White, the
Nobel Prize-winning novelist - abandoned Labor for the N.D.P., headed by Peter
Garrett, lead singer of the rock group Midnight Oil. On Palm Sunday last year,
the antinuclear peace movement brought out a quarter million marchers. Among
them were members of the powerful lobby against the mining of uranium.
(Australia is thought to possess from one-fourth to one-third of the uranium in
the Western world.) This environment, Hawke says, led him to break an earlier
commitment granting facilities to the United States for monitoring MX missile
tests. Hawke says he hoped to head off a move against the presence of the
American bases. He also questions the ''Star Wars'' program for its technical
practicality and political consequences: ''It might lead to an escalation of the
arms race rather than a diminution.''

A number of specialists agree with Hawke that the movement against the American
military presence has peaked, due to the main-street conservatism of many
Australians who believe the American connection is vital to their defense. The
Nuclear Disarmament Party is in disarray because of internal dissension and many
activists seem to have been placated by the more positive approach of the Reagan
Administration to arms-control negotiations.

Hawke is now more concerned with Australia's economic problems. ''We have been a
lucky country. It's all come very easily to us, but now there is a growing
realization that times have changed. We are now living in a tough, new
competitive world in which we have got to make it on merits. The world does not
owe us a living. Gradually, there is coming about a change in attitude of
Australians, that 'She'll be right, mate,' which characterized much of our
approach in the past. We have moved away from an easy automatic relationship
with our mother country.''

When Hawke speaks of merits, he is alluding to a need for an end to the
complacency of Australia's business sector and work force. Traditionally,
business has relied heavily for profits on the export of primary products -wool,
meat, wheat and minerals. It has failed to move swiftly into technology and
manufactures and services that are in demand in Asia. (There is a wry joke
making the rounds in Sydney that Australia is the only underdeveloped country in
which you can drink water from the taps.) Australia's competitiveness as an
exporter has also been impaired by the powerful trade unions' insistence on
expensive contracts and indexation of wages to inflation, which exceeds 6
percent and is rising. Frequent strikes have hurt the economy.

Competitiveness has not been enhanced by the cradle-to-grave welfare system
(about 40 percent of the gross domestic product is absorbed in government
expenditure). Many urban Australians seem wedded to middle-class complacency,
disdaining those who push above their station - ''Lop off the tall poppies.''

To correct the unfavorable trade balance, Hawke hopes to expand export markets
in the Pacific basin and particularly in China. Britain's entry into the Common
Market cut into an important market for Australia. Japan now buys a quarter of
Australia's exports; other major trading partners, in order of importance, are
the United States, New Zealand, Britain and South Korea.

Since his re-election in 1984, Hawke has devalued the Australian dollar (worth
about 67 United States cents), allowed the exchange rate to float and admitted
foreign banks into the heavily protectionist Australian economy - all in hopes
of making Australia more competitive and spurring economic growth. But he is now
in serious political trouble. His Labor Party, which must retain the trade
unions' support to stay in power, is fragmented. The left wing has joined with
the unions in blocking his efforts to reform the income-tax system, which Hawke
claims is archaic and confiscatory. Many political observers question whether
Hawke's popularity will be enough to give him victory against the resurgent
Liberal Party in the 1987 election. THE STRUGGLE FOR NEW MARKETS I AM CALLING ON
THE CHAIR-man of the giant C.R.A. Ltd. international mining conglomerate, Sir
Roderick Carnegie, who is said by many to be Australia's most visionary and
enterprising businessman. He is in his shirt sleeves, an intense, articulate man
of 52 - fourth generation Australian, graduate of Melbourne University, Oxford
and Harvard Business School. We sit near a picture window in his skyscraper
office, overlooking the business district of Melbourne. It is city of 2.9
million, a manufacturing center and the country's busiest port; but it has
yielded much of its pre-eminence in finance to Sydney. It retains a graceful
Victorian charm and its rather snobbish old-line families disdain Sydney as a
brash, vulgar competitor.

Carnegie sits on the edge of his chair and gestures as he talks about the
future: ''A thousand million people will enter the world's work force in Asia in
the next 20 years. It's the biggest change ahead in the world's productive
capacity. Australia is 5.2 percent of the world's land mass. We have 5.5 percent
of the resources. We are 0.32 percent of the world's population. There is no
time in which such a small number has had such a basic share of the world's
resources. That creates a great responsibility. Either we trade peacefully with
the emerging power in Asia or we don't.

''To trade peacefully requires that we use our space and turn the things
produced out of our soil into products which contribute to the rise in the Asian
standard of living. That means where we have been exporting unprocessed
products, we must increasingly convert them into metal for the manufacturing
centers of Asia. At the present time, 80 percent of our exports are commodities,
one half of them agricultural, one half mineral. . . . Our future is intimately
connected with Japan, China, Korea and the emerging 'little Japan' countries -
Hong Kong, Singapore - and other countries of Southeast Asia.''

As he rose to take a call, Carnegie complained that Australia was living beyond
its means and accumulating an unbearable amount of debt as a consequence of its
unfavora-ble trade balance. ''Visit our mines,'' he said with a wave of his
hand, and we did.

VIEWED FROM THE air, the open pit mine at Paraburdoo is an enormous wound of
terraced benches in the red soil of the hilly Pilbara region. Combined with the
Tom Price mine 35 miles to the north, Hamersley is the largest iron ore
operation in Australia. At the mine headquarters center, not far from the
company town of 2,300, a Chinese flag flies beside Australia's in honor of a
visiting team of Chinese engineers studying the mine's computer-control
techniques. We are met by the mine manager, Brian King, who tells us that the
Chinese delegation is one of a dozen such study groups.

As we tour the mine, huge Canadian Titan trucks, each carrying 170 tons, haul
away ore blasted loose in the pits. At a plant, the ore will be crushed,
screened and shipped by rail to the port of Dampier on the Indian Ocean.
Speaking of the company's struggle for markets, King says the mine is shipping
45 percent of its ore to Japan, down from the 85 to 90 percent range. ''The
Koreans and Taiwanese are doing to the Japanese what the Japanese once did to
the rest of the world,'' he said.

''The Japanese tell us they can't compete. Their mills are static at 100 million
tons and they are shifting from common stocks, which can be made more cheaply
elsewhere, to things like stainless steel and high-tensile steels. Our major
potential market is China, where the Japanese are building new steel mills that
would take our high-grade ore.''

The Argyle Diamond Mine, over a thousand miles away in the far north Kimberley
region, has happier prospects. When it is in full operation next year, Argyle
will be the largest in the world, producing an estimated 25 million carats a
year: 55 percent industrial class, 40 percent near-gem and 5 percent gem.

From a hill, we watch earth being blasted and hauled away. Some 20 million tons
must be stripped from the mountain to get to the lamproite pipe, or main ore
body, which should last about 20 years. In the valley, a new processing plant
nears completion. The eventual work force of 460 will not live in a company
town, but will commute by air - 14 days in Perth, 14 days on-site. John Wither,
a mine official, explains: ''We considered the impact on the environment. We
didn't want to build another mine town like Paraburdoo. We took an obligation to
maximize earning and leisure. So we will commute, and that is the way most mines
are going to work now.'' THE FIRST AUSTRALIANS IN THE CENTER OF THE continent we
came upon Ayers Rock, glowing in a crimson sunset. For some, this enormous
monolith, six miles in circumference and rising to 1,143 feet, is a profitable
tourist mecca. But to Australia's Aboriginals, the 600-million-year-old
formation of sandstone is the most sacred place, Uluru. Some of the aspects of
the shocking plight of the Aboriginals, who like the American Indians have been
victims of the white man's encroachments, are revealed in the controversy over
rights to Ayers Rock.

The dark-skinned Aboriginals, thought to have migrated from mainland Southeast
Asia 40,000 years ago, numbered 300,000 when the first British settlers arrived.
Harassed by the newcomers, their population declined to 170,000. A bungling
policy of assimilation under successive governments left the Aboriginals,
according to a Government 1975 report, ''the most poverty-stricken of the
Australian community, with the highest death rate, the worst health, housing and
legal status.'' A new policy of integration and self-determination followed in
the 1970's, recognizing the need of the Aboriginals to preserve their culture
and communities. Their wretched state today suggests that the enlightenment was
too little and came too late.

Among white Australians there are strongly contrasting attitudes toward the
Aboriginals. Some express deeply felt guilt and the desire to make amends; some
regions, including the Northern Territory, have enacted land-rights legislation,
so that Aboriginals now hold title to about 10 percent of the continent. Other
Australians feel such compensation is extravagant and say the generous social
security benefits allowed the Aboriginals contribute to alcoholism and
indolence.

Mining interests, land developers and tourist operators - some of them at Ayers
Rock - have actively resisted the land-rights movement and have been
instrumental in the delay in Parliament of new national land-rights legislation,
introduced by the Hawke Government. Thus, the handing over of a symbolic title
to the Uluru National Park, which embraces Ayers Rock, has been stalled. In the
meantime, motels and camping sites in the immediate vicinity of the rock have
been removed. Tourists who want to make the milelong climb to the top must now
travel 15 miles to the site from the new village of Yulara (meaning howling
dingo in the Aboriginal dialect).

Access to some of the more sacred sites of the monolith has been restricted to
Aboriginals. In caves are ceremonial rock paintings of their godlike spirit
ancestors at the onset of creation in Dreamtime, the continuum of birth and
rebirth in the past, present and future. For Aboriginals, the black rills on the
ochre-colored rock are streams of ancestral blood; other crevices are the brain
or scars on the chest of an elder.

In contradiction to their communal decline, the Aboriginals have become a major
source of inspiration for Australian art. When I toured the Australian National
Gallery in Canberra, the curator of international arts took me first to view
original Aboriginal works painted in ochre with strands of grass.

''The next thing Americans might discover about Australia is the quality of the
indigenous art, that is, Aborginal art,'' Michael Lloyd said. After viewing the
magnificent bark paintings depicting myths of the spirit ancestors, I followed
Lloyd through the gallery, which is only five years old, to a hall where the
contemporary works of Aboriginals were hung. We stood before a stunningly vivid
work painted on canvas in synthetic polymers by Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri.
''These Aboriginal artists working in the Outback or in studios in urban
situations are producing modern art unlike any modern art produced anywhere,''
Lloyd said. ''It's very good and exciting.''

Other distinguished Australian artists of European stock, such as Sidney Nolan,
have also viewed the land with a sort of reverence. As we strolled past
paintings of harsh brown deserts and mountainsides carpeted with wild flowers
and tall, golden grasses, Lloyd said: ''Our painters share in the concept that
the true Australian identity will come through in a confrontation with the
landscape. From comfortable living, they have gone into the Outback as a kind of
cleansing, a completion of their education. So a lot of their painting is
inspired by coming to terms with the landscape. The great interest in Aboriginal
art has accentuated the tendency.''

TOWARD THE FUTURE

MOST OF THE 15 MILLION Australians live in cities on the southeastern rim of
their continent, and 3.3 million of them dwell in Sydney. It is a beautiful
city, cosmopolitan and lusty, embodying the energy, aspirations and vices of the
urban Australians. Sydney - the capital of the state of New South Wales - is the
chief entrepot, the center for manufacturing and media. It is also the center
for organized crime, illegal gambling and drug traffic.

Flying into Sydney, we looked down on a vast expanse of red tile roofs of single
family dwellings punctuated with blue dots of swimming pools shining in the sun,
symbols of the addiction to middle-class comforts. Seventy percent of
Australians live in homes like these. The skyscrapers of the business hub front
on the magnificent harbor; beyond are the garish signs of Kings Cross where
prostitutes and transvestites prowl. Farther down the bay lie the secluded posh
suburbs of Rose Bay and Point Piper.

More than any other Australian city, Sydney bears the American imprint.
Businessmen regard themselves as entrepreneurs of the Pacific basin, taking
Californian life styles and enterprise as their models. ''When I think of doing
business in America, I think of California, of Los Angeles, because that is
where we reckon we've got more of a chance,'' says Neville Wran, the Premier of
New South Wales. We were talking in his office overlooking the harbor just as it
became great spectacle at twilight, with ship lights and reflections of the
illuminated soaring architecture of the Sydney Opera House.

In the popular culture, American influence is so pervasive - in book publishing,
television and films - that one wonders if Australians have simply exchanged
what they call the ''cultural cringe'' to the British for infatuation with
America. United States films are dominant and about half of the television
programs shown on the Government-owned channel and the three commercial stations
are of American origin or format. During my visit, there was an uproarious tilt
between the minister for communications, Michael J. Duffy, and the chairman of
television Channel Nine, Kerry Packer. Duffy was complaining that the station
had stuck by its normal programming and postponed televising the cricket Test
Matches in England. Packer won the day: How could one argue against his
triumphant revelation that the scheduled American show, ''Love Boat,'' had
better than twice the ratings of the Test?

Australians and Americans do not necessarily view each other to best advantage
through the media of television and movies. Such Australian films as ''Breaker
Morant'' and ''The Man From Snowy River,'' acclaimed in the United States,
failed to win honors at home. They were criticized as nostalgic throwbacks for
the American market, exploiting Australian stereotypes and wild-west high jinks
of the Outback. Australians good-naturedly complain that Americans hardly know
them and, despite their contribution to the defense of the United States, assign
them little credit. Australians greeted with wild jubilation the capture of the
America's Cup in part because it compelled American attention.

As Australia searches for a new role in the Pacific and its people undergo rapid
economic, cultural and ethnic change, there is a need for greater American
understanding. If nothing else, it becomes a matter of self-interest. Australia
stands today as the only stable military ally of the United States in the
Pacific. Americans who visit Australia will find renewal in rare expanses of
unspoiled natural retreats. And they will discover something else: For, in its
pioneer heritage and diversity, Australia is close kin to the United States, a
young nation struggling to mold a humane society, compatible with Western values
and attractive to its Asian neighbors. THE AUSTRALIAN CONNECTION UNDER VARIOUS
conditions of secrecy, the United States has use of some 20 installations in
Australia. These aid in early warning against Soviet missile attack;
intelligence gathering, including monitoring Soviet and Chinese missile tests
and experimental nuclear explosions; military communications; naval navigation;
satellite tracking, and scientific research. The Australian facilities are
strategically significant because the curvature of the earth does not allow
stations in the United States to perform the same functions. American bases, for
instance, simply cannot physically receive signals from spy satellites
monitoring the Soviet Union. The three most important installations -Pine Gap,
Nurrungar and North West Cape - are so vital to the United States they are
regarded as certain priority targets for Soviet nuclear missile attack in the
event of general conflict.

The facilities are jointly operated with Australia but, in compliance with an
agreement with the United States, the Australian Government has never published
a list of the facilities or described their functions, except in general terms.
Australian commentators such as Desmond Ball, the head of the Strategic and
Defense Studies Center at the Australian National University in Canberra, have
protested the policy of secrecy, arguing that the Australian people have the
right to know what the Russians have gleaned from information in the public
domain. Many facts in this report were obtained in an interview with Ball, who
extracted most of them from official United States documents and reports to
Congress that are available to the public.

NORTH WEST CAPE is equipped with one of the most powerful very low frequency
transmitters. It relayed commands to Polaris missile-firing submarines before
they were replaced with Tridents. Tridents, which have a longer missile range
than the Polaris and can operate closer to the United States, receive
communications from a base in Washington state and from North West Cape. North
West Cape continues to relay commands to American and Australian attack
submarines and surface naval groups in the western Pacific and Indian Oceans.

NURRUNGAR, about 300 miles northwest of Adelaide, is one of two key
ground-control satellite stations in the United States' early-warning system.
Code named Casino, it is the downlink for the geosychronous Defense Support
Program (DSP) East satellite that monitors the Soviet Union and guards against
Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile attack. Another station in Colorado
controls the two DSP West satellites over the Pacific and Atlantic that guard
against submarine-launched missiles. Every year, Nurrungar detects the firing of
about 400 tests, including those of Soviet ICBM's, intermediate range SS-20's
and satellite launches. DSP satellites function by means of infrared telescopes
that record emissions of intense heat in a spectrum that can only be produced by
rocket engines. The ground stations insure that the satellites do not drift away
and that their telescopes are correctly oriented. Data are transmitted, or
downlinked, to ground stations and then relayed at high speed to the North
American Air Defense Command (NORAD) at Cheyenne Mountain in Colorado Springs.
The United States is developing relay satellites and a ground station in West
Germany that will provide alternate means of receiving data, but Nurrungar will
continue to control positioning of the DSP East satellite.

PINE GAP, near Alice Springs, orients Rhyolite satellites. These
antenna-carrying, eavesdropping satellites suck up, vacuum-cleaner style, a
variety of communications in the Soviet Union and China: telemetry data
transmitted during Soviet ballistic missile tests; radar transmissions;
telephone, radio and microwave communications. The station consists of a large
computer complex and giant plastic radomes that contain monitoring equipment and
transmission links to intelligence centers in the United States.

The Australian Government recently sought clearance from the Pentagon to give
the public more information about these facilities, but was dissuaded for what
seemed to be political rather than security reasons. In June 1984, after
extended negotiations with the United States, Prime Minister Robert Hawke made a
statement on the installations to Parliament. Though sketchy, it was the most
comprehensive report since the facilities were first installed in the 1960's.
Hawke justified the bases as contributing to the Western alliance and as
deterrents against nuclear war. They are, he explained, indispensible to
verifying compliance with the SALT and ABM arms-control treaties. The opposition
view was expressed to me by Gerard Hand, a leader of the left wing of the Labor
Party: ''We are locked into an arms system that we have absolutely no control
over. We don't want any early-warning systems here. In Europe, there are those
sort of installations and a whole defense mechanism built up around them. Here,
they sit in the middle of the desert with absolutely no defense. Through no
fault of our own, we are a nuclear target.'' ----SEYMOUR TOPPING

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 13, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

A picture on the cover of the Times Magazine on Sept. 29, 1985, with an article
about the character of Australia, showed a cowboy on horseback against a rugged
landscape. The caption said, ''A cowboy rides past Ayers Rock in Australia's
vast Outback.''

The photographer, Pete Turner, has now published the picture in a book entitled
''Pete Turner Photographs'' (Harry N. Abrams Inc.). His caption discloses that
the scene was a compsite, with the cowboy actually photographed about 125 miles
from the rock.

The Times would not have published the picture if it had known the scene was
assembled optically.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sydney Opera House (Robert Frerick/Woodfin Camp); Photo of
drover in New South Wales (Penny Tweede); Maps illustrating role of Pine Gap
installation in U.S. intelligence network (Pages 22-23); Photo of ''train''
truck for transporting cattle (Audrey Topping) (Page 24); Photo of cockatoos
(Audrey Topping) (Page 25); Photo of Pine Gap radar station (Australian
Deparment of Defense) (Pa

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WINNING: WHY WE KEEP SCORE

BYLINE: By Roy Blount Jr.; Roy Blount Jr.'s most recent book is a collection of
humor pieces called ''Not Exactly What I Had In Mind'' (Atlantic Monthly Press).

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 25, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2083 words


For when the One Great Scorer comes To mark against your name, He writes - not
that you won or lost - But how you played the Game.> - GRANTLAND RICE Winning is
fun; losing is hell.> - BILLY MARTIN I HOPED THAT MY RESEARCHES into the matter
of winning would verify something I had long suspected: that the word
''triumph'' derives from the Roman custom of requiring the vanquished to say
''umph'' three times. No such luck.

I have learned, however, that the roots of the word ''win'' go very deep,
perhaps all the way back to a Hittite verb meaning ''to copulate.'' ''Win'' is a
branch of one immemorial tree whose diverse other sprouts include ''Venus,''
''venerate,'' ''venison'' and ''venom.'' I have also at long last figured out,
to my own satisfaction, why it is that advertisements for watches - watches with
hands - almost invariably show the time to be somewhere between 10:08 and 10:12.

V for victory. Rocky frozen with his arms upraised. Actually, Rocky may have
stood at something closer to 11:05, but it's the same principle. People
eternally tend to take sides and to want their side to win. Watchmongers know
this.

So do people in the sports business. Life, history and serious literature seldom
provide examples of outright uncontestable victory, but sports does every day.
In sports, what's won won't come unwon. Sportspersons who win get to keep on
making a living by playing games, or by managing those who play games, or by
hiring and firing those who play or manage. Sportspersons who lose, don't. One
way or the other, sportspersons tend to get pretty grim. So how come we call it
''playing'' and how come we call them ''games''?

I promise this will not be another of those ''Are we placing too much emphasis
on winning and thereby losing track of the true purpose of sport?'' ruminations.
For one thing, I'm not sure what the true purpose of sports is, aside from
moving the runner on second to third with less than two outs.

On the other hand, when was the last time you read one of those ruminations?
Isn't it getting a bit thick lately, all the talk about winning, being a winner,
in sports and out? Thicker even than usual? And is anybody even complaining
about it anymore?

''Wanna be a winner?'' asks a television commercial. ''Buy a Chevy.'' What? Are
people running home to their families these days and shouting, ''I won! I won! I
bought us a Chevrolet''? I wouldn't be surprised.

In this country today, 220 books are in print whose titles begin with the word
''Winning.'' Only the One Great Scorer knows how many other available titles
contain some form of the word ''win.'' Here are just a few:

''A Winner's Notebook,'' ''Be a Winner,'' ''How to Win at Office Politics,''
''How to Unlock the Secrets of Winning & Good Luck,'' ''Win the Happiness
Game,'' ''Act Like a Winner,'' ''Dressing to Win,'' ''It's Your Turn to Win at
Work & at Home,'' ''Why Winners Win,'' ''Choose to Win!'' and ''Z-Cycle: Winning
by a Force of a Fourth Type.''

I don't know what a force of a fourth type is, '' but more and more it seems
that Americans are being divided into two types. The business news is full of
coups: the overtakers taking over the overtaken. A magazine ad for Puma sneakers
shows George Brett of the Kansas City Royals poised to swing his bat with a
vengeance, and the caption reads: ''ATTACK. Because if you're not the predator,
you're the prey.'' The Republicans - led by a man who once made a baseball movie
called ''The Winning Team'' and a football movie in which he played the person
referred to in the phrase ''Win one for the Gipper'' - seem to have a Dynasty
going; whereas the Democrats are too abject at the moment to be identified with
any television program, unless it be ''One Day at a Time.'' The term for a
social misfit in high school these days, I gather from my children, is
''loser.''

How can anybody in America relax and have a good time anymore, if every morning
presents anew the question, ''Am I going to win today?'' Even the defense
establishment seems to feel insecure. One bright A.M. this winter, The New York
Times reported that, ''The Reagan Administration, rejecting proposals for delay
or compromise, began a high-level lobbying effort today to win a showdown on the
MX missile.'' Fearful that Congress would ''kill the new missile,'' the
Administration was eager to win overwhelming Congressional support for it before
the Easter recess, when Congressmen were seen likely, in the words of a Pentagon
spokesman, to ''get their brains beat out by every church group, every Mother
for Peace.'' I didn't even know there still were any Mothers for Peace, and yet
the military-industrial complex is afraid it can't lick them.

Can this prevailing state of mind be explained by the notion that we now live in
a ''zero-sum society,'' in which any one faction's gain is another's loss? Or is
fallout from America's no-win situation in Vietnam (and now in the Middle East,
if not Latin America) to blame? You can't win, trying to answer questions like
that. I will attempt only to make a few points. About winning, its relativity,
its limitations. ''Winning is the ethic of football,'' Don Shula, the head coach
of the Miami Dolphins, once said. ''You start with having to win, and you work
back.'' It must be noted that the most insistent talk of winning in sports comes
from coaches and managers. That's because a coach or manager's won-loss record
is his only statistic. He must win to have coached well. But that doesn't mean
Shula is out of line.

If all you care about a sports event is who wins, you can't appreciate it fully.
But neither can you if you don't care at all. To get into a game wholeheartedly
you have to root. And to play a game wholeheartedly, at its highest levels, you
must go all out - not to look pretty or enjoy the way the playing surface feels
under your kangaroo-skin shoes, but to win. Falling in love is solipsistic
unless it involves winning another's heart.

But romance is not pretty if it aims to squelch another's heart. The most recent
final National Basketball Association playoff series, between the Los Angeles
Lakers and the Boston Celtics, should have been a beaut, but for me it was
spoiled by Boston's constant harping on intimidation. The Celtics kept implying
that the Lakers lacked character, would fold; to prove their point, the Celtics'
big men tried to beat up the Lakers. As it happened, the Lakers called upon
their own heavy bangers, Mitch Kupchak and Kurt Rambis, who busted heads
effectively enough that Los Angeles (thanks also to magnificence from the
stately Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and the Celtics' forgetting how to make the ball go
through the basket) wore Boston down. But only one of the six games was
delightful. That was the fourth, won at the buzzer by the Celtics. ''There is so
much spunk in this game,'' exclaimed Tom Heinsohn, the telecaster, and he was
right. But the kind of courage shown in the series generally had too much to do
with pressure and not enough with grace.

Winning is the ethic of sports in the sense that, as a novelist once said,
credibility is the ethic of fiction. When Donald Trump, the owner of the New
Jersey Generals, says he'd rather see his team lose an exciting game than win a
boring one, you wonder whether he wouldn't be better suited to the movie
business. (Trump reportedly suggested to other owners that their teams go easy
on his quarterback, Doug Flutie, because Flutie's entertainment value was so
crucial to the United States Football League). When John McKay, in his last game
as head coach of Tampa Bay in the National Football League, directed his
defensive unit to lie down and give up a quick touchdown so that his running
back, James Wilder, could get the ball back in time to try for an N.F.L.
single-sea-son record for yardage gained rushing and receiving, lovers of
football cringed. The integrity of sports lies in trying to win, not to show
off. Players must be determined to win if fans are to suspend their disbelief.
UT NOBODY WANTS TO READ A novel whose narrator keeps crying out, ''By God, this
story is credible! No, damn it, now it's losing credibility! I'll see about
that! These characters better be credible, or I'll kill them off!'' That is, in
effect, what George Steinbrenner - the most visible owner, unfortunately, in
sports - keeps saying about his Yankees. When they lose, he apologizes for them
publicly (though he is constitutionally unapologetic about himself). He accuses
various Yankees of having ''spit the bit.'' He takes it upon himself to assert
that Dave Winfield, whom he acquired for the Yankees and who is one of
baseball's best players, is ''not a proven winner.'' He dismisses managers
obsessively. He does not understand the game.

''Winning ugly'' is a phrase that is gaining currency in sportswriting. As a
description of inelegant fortitude, it is amiable enough. Perhaps Shakespeare's
Henry IV had a point when he said, ''For nothing can seem foul to those that
win.'' But since he spoke of war we know he was overlooking a great deal. The
lust for victory can be ugly indeed, as we saw when 38 people died last May in a
soccer riot in Brussels.

''Winning isn't everything,'' said the late Vince Lombardi, revered head coach
of the Green Bay Packers, ''it's the only thing.'' You have to give Lombardi
credit. He produced great teams, and his players, at least in retrospect, said
they loved him. The kind of drive he apotheosized is America's motor. If life
were based on need, rather than hustle, then winning might be regarded as
everything. The athlete's will to win is one of those primal amoral urges -like
the businessman's to maximize profits and the journalist's to get the word out -
that our system takes as a given. And competition is not an exclusively
capitalistic tool. It was Marx who said: ''The proletarians have nothing to lose
but their chains. They have a world to win.''

It is worth reminding ourselves, however, that Lombardi's famous saying is
crazy. The only thing that is everything is everything itself, and not even
sports can be boiled down any further than to the binary W/L. If winning were
the only thing it would not be such a big deal. And we would not treasure the
memory of Joe Don Looney, Bo Belinsky, Johnny Blood. There wouldn't even be any
Chicago Cubs.

When I heard that Angelo Dundee, the trainer of Muhammad Ali and Sugar Ray
Leonard, had a book out entitled ''I Only Talk Winning,'' I was at first
dismayed. Dundee is widely regarded as a decent, affable, hardly monomaniacal
man. I JUMP felt better when I read the book's last paragraph:

''I've called this book 'I Only Talk Winning' for a reason. In life, there are
positive and negative thoughts. And hey, it doesn't cost you a cent more to
think positively. 'I Only Talk Winning' stands for 'Don't be afraid of losing.'
Losing is nothing. There is no such thing as failure, only learning how.''

Literally, I guess that, too, is crazy. It comes off a bit over-rosy compared
to, say, these lines by William Blake:

They win who never near the goal; They run who halt on wounded feet; Art hath
its martyrs like the soul, Its victors in defeat.

But, hey, could Blake handle fighters? I like what Dundee says, because it rises
above venom, aversion, totalitarianism.

Something else I like is a memory from the 1973 N.F.L. playoffs. I had spent
that season hanging around with the Pittsburgh Steelers to write a book. The
Steelers had just been trounced by Oakland. Their campaign had been a failure,
in pro football terms, because it had not ended in ultimate victory. I had stood
with the players on the sidelines as Raider fans threw things at us, reviled us,
cried out in the nastiest of tones, ''You guys are lewsers.'' The following
season the Steelers would win the first of four Super Bowls, and I would
celebrate that triumph, which was sweet, on the sidelines. But this was a losing
locker room. And yet here's what Andy Russell, the Pittsburgh co-captain, told
me, his eyes shining:

''I was into that game. There was no other world outside it. There was nothing.
That's the thrill.'' ''Does that make it hard to lose?'' I asked. ''No, easier.
You know you gave it all you had. Some games you're distracted, by an injury or
something, and you get down on yourself, question your character. This game I
was away; into the game. We lost. But all I could think afterwards was, 'Damn,I
had fun.' ''

Another thing that 10:10 on a watchface suggests is a big smile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bill Walsh, 49ers coach, after 1985 victory; Photos of winning
and losing team members from various sports

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: Sept. 29, 1985

SECTION: Section 7; Page 58, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


Fiction

* 1 1 5 LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $17.95.) Recollections
of a small American town.

* 2 2 6 LUCKY, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The heiress of a
crime lord takes on the heiress of a shipping tycoon.

* 3 4 15 SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Putnam, $18.95.) Twenty-two tales of
horror set in contemporary America.

* 4 10 2 THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $16.95.) Family and
female friends impose order of a kind on the errant life of a male travel
writer.

* 5 6 11 THE FOURTH DEADLY SIN, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $17.95.) Which of
six suspects murdered a saintly New York psychiatrist?

* 6* 5 7 THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $14.95.) Romance,
scandal and murder in New York's high society.

* 7 3 28 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Naval Institute Press,
$14.95.) A Lithuanian submarine driver defects to the United States with the
Soviet Union's most advanced nuclear secrets.

* 8 7 14 LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The Old
West seen larger than life.

* 9 9 3 A MAGGOT, by John Fowles. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Five travelers in
18th-century England have mysterious, wonderful and eerie adventures.

* 10 13 6 TOO MUCH, TOO SOON, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Putnam, $17.95.) Three
sisters find their destinies bound by an obsession with the same man.

* 11 8 19 THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) Life in a
Maine orphanage earlier in this century.

* 12 11 36 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $17.95.) A young woman
destroys the crime lords who got her an undeserved prison term.

* 13 15 19 JUBAL SACKETT, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) In this forerunner
to the 17-volume Sackett saga, a restless explorer scouts the 17th-century
American wilderness.

* 14 14 2 AFTER THE REUNION, by Rona Jaffe. (Delacorte, $17.95.) The surprises
and betrayals that befell four Radcliffe women in the five years after their
20th reunion.

* 15 1 THE RED FOX, by Anthony Hyde. (Knopf, $17.95.) A thriller about an
idealistic Westerner who rejects democratic society in favor of the Soviet
Union. Nonfiction

* 1 3 2 ELVIS AND ME, by Priscilla Beaulieu Presley with Sandra Harmon. (Putnam,
$16.95.) The rock legend as friend, mentor, lover, husband, father.

* 2 1 DANCING IN THE LIGHT, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $17.95.) The
entertainer recalls the year she reached 50 and won an Oscar.

* 3 1 12 YEAGER: An Autobiography, by Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam,
$17.95.) The story of the first man to fly faster than sound.

* 4 2 48 IACOCCA: An Autobiography, by Lee Iacocca with William Novak. (Bantam,
$19.95.) The rise of an immigrants' son to top jobs at Ford and Chrysler.

* 5 4 21 A PASSION FOR EXCELLENCE, by Tom Peters and Nancy Austin. (Random
House, $19.95.) Ways to achieve distinction in management.

* 6 1 LAST WISH, by Betty Rollin. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) The ordeal
of a woman whose mother, dying of cancer, wishes to commit suicide.

* 7* 5 26 SMART WOMEN, FOOLISH CHOICES, by Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder.
(Clarkson N. Potter, $13.95.) Two clinical psychologists analyze modern women's
efforts to find acceptable men.

* 8 8 8 HAMMER OF THE GODS: The Led Zeppelin Saga, by Stephen Davis. (Morrow,
$15.95.) The British heavy metal group's boisterous tours of the 1970's.

* 9 9 7 THE AMATEURS, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) Four American men
seek the 1984 Olympic gold medal for single sculling.

* 10 1 COMMON GROUND, by J. Anthony Lukas. (Knopf, $19.95.) How school
desegregation affected three Boston families from 1968 to 1978.

* 11 10 10 THE MICK, by Mickey Mantle with Herb Gluck. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The
former Yankee's story.

* 12* 14 2 RE-INVENTING THE CORPORATION, by John Naisbitt and Patricia Aburdene.
(Warner, $17.50.) A description of ''the new information society'' and its
opportunities for employees and employers.

* 13 1 JAGUAR WOMAN, by Lynn V. Andrews. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A Californian's
search for wisdom in the jungles of Central America.

* 14 12 8 FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) The scandal surrounding
the 1982 collapse of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City.

* 15 11 4 FINAL CUT, by Steven Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) How the making of the
film ''Heaven's Gate'' proved the unmaking of United Artists.

* 16* 6 56 LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia. (Slack/Holt, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' Advice and Self-Help

* 1 2 6 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond. (Warner, $16.50.) A
diet for weight loss and physical fitness.

* 2 1 16 DR. BERGER'S IMMUNE POWER DIET, by Stuart M. Berger. (NAL Books,
$14.95.) A regimen designed to produce weight loss while improving health and
increasing energy.

* 3 3 47 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard reference work updated in 1983.

* 4 25 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) Recipes for dishes
prepared at moderate cost.

* 5 4 7 WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Tarcher/St. Martin's,
$14.95.) Ways to avoid or end addictive, unhealthy relationships with men. The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable. *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
GIACOMETTI, by James Lord. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) The career of Alberto
Giacometti (1901-66) spanned Surrealism, Existentialism and the intervening isms
while remaining true always to itself; Mr. Lord's sympathetic interpretations of
the Swiss sculptor's ways of seeing include lots of gossip.

THE PARADOX OF HISTORY: Stendhal, Tolstoy, Pasternak, and

Others, by Nicola Chiaromonte. (University of Pennsylvania, paper, $13.95.) The
relations of individuals, revealed in fiction, to great historical events as the
ages of faith gave way to mechanistic ideas of progress; lectures by the late
Italian critic. STANLEY AND THE WOMEN, by Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $14.95.) Both
sexes are mad but women are wilier in this novel featuring, perhaps, Mr. Amis's
angriest protagonist yet.

MIDAIR, by Frank Conroy. (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $15.95.)

Eight spare, realistic stories by the author of ''Stop-Time'' offer us
confirmation of common experiences for which, by ourselves, we would probably
never have been able to find the right words.

IN COUNTRY, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (Harper & Row, $15.95.)

Questing - to exorcise the Vietnam War, to grow up, to become free - is the
heart of this short, sharp, brilliant novel.

OUR THREE SELVES: The Life of Radclyffe Hall, by Michael

Baker. (Morrow, $17.95.) A fine biography of the popular novelist whose courage
possibly exceeded her literary skills but whose frankly lesbian ''Well of
Loneliness'' shocked England in 1928 by its articulate claim for a place in
society for people like herself.

CRIME AND HUMAN NATURE, by James Q. Wilson and Richard

J. Herrnstein. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A massive summary (639 pages) of what
behavioral science thinks about how criminals are made (a lot) and how to make
fewer (not as much).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
A CARIBBEAN COURSE, A PACIFIC CRUISE

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1664 words


French Cooking On St. Barts As the nights grow longer and the cold days of
winter near, no one can be blamed for fantasies built around some sun-drenched
Caribbean island. If the prospect is the 9.5-square-mile French Antillean speck
that is St.-Barthelemy, 12 miles southeast of St. Martin, then it might
accurately include a series of cooking courses to be taught this winter by the
man known as Chef Hubert.

The chef, who presides over the Michelin one-star restaurant Bistro d'Hubert in
Paris, where the emphasis is on nouvelle cuisine, will conduct four sessions of
instruction in January and February. In each of the courses, the chef - author
of the cookbooks ''Les Recettes Preferees d'Hubert'' and ''Le Grande Cuisine
d'Hubert'' (published in France by Les Editions J.A.) - will teach his students
how to cook five complete meals, from appetizer to dessert. Each session will be
followed by lunch with wines from California and from France, and the afternoons
will be free for leisure activities such as windsurfing, playing tennis, sailing
and shopping.

Sessions are scheduled Jan. 20 to 24, Jan. 27 to 31, Feb. 3 to 7 and Feb. 10 to
14. The price is $995 for a single student, or $995 plus $495 for two people who
take the course together. A package for two people - including round-trip air
fare from New York, accommodations at the Hotel Manapany, the cooking course and
five lunches - is priced at $4,975. More information is available from Pat
Wright (3770 Tansy Street, San Diego, Calif. 92121; 619-453-8900) or Frank
Brooks (115 Mason Street, Greenwich, Conn. 06830; 203-622-8684). A Voyage With
Memories of World War II Two leading retired officers, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer of
the Navy and Gen. William C. Westmoreland of the Army, will be aboard the Royal
Viking Star during its Coral and Java Seas Pacific Memories Cruise, scheduled to
leave Sydney, Australia, on April 9.

En route from Sydney to Hong Kong, where the cruise will end May 7, the Viking
Star will call at Santo Espiritu Santo, Vanuatu; Honaira, Guadalcanal, Solomon
Islands; Rabaul, New Britain; Manus (Seadler Bay), Admiralty Islands; Milne Bay
and Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea; Bali, Indonesia; Singapore and Manila. Shore
excursions to landing beaches, former airstrips, Japanese wartime installations
and similar sites will include Corregidor and Henderson Field.

Admiral Moorer's Pacific war service extended from Pearl Harbor through World
War II, and General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam,
will compare the Pacific war to operations in the European Theater, and will
place Pacific combat during World War II in the perspective of more recent
developments.

Based on double occupancy, fares for the cruise range from $5,656 to $20,440 a
person, depending on the choice of accommodations. The prices include round-trip
air fare to Sydney and from Hong Kong, from some 50 cities in North America. The
prices are effective until Dec. 1, when an increase is anticipated.

More information and a brochure are available from the Royal Viking Line (1
Embarcadero Center, San Francisco, Calif. 94111; 415-398-8000 or 800-222-3891
from outside California). Observatory In London Honors Halley In all the hoopla
about Halley's comet, not much has been said about Edmund Halley, the astronomer
and mathematician whose name it bears. Besides being the first astronomer to
predict the return of a comet, Halley served as astronomer royal at the Old
Royal Observatory in Greenwich, southeast London, from 1720 to 1742.

At the observatory, where some of Halley's instruments are on display, a special
program is planned between Dec. 8 and 20 to celebrate the return of the comet.
During the evening, the public will be able to view the comet through the
observatory's 28-inch refractor telescope.

At the nearby National Maritime Museum, a major exhibition called
''Spaceworks,'' dealing with artificial satellites, with special emphasis on the
Giotto mission, the European Space Agency's probe to Halley's comet, will run
from Nov. 14 until the end of 1986. The observatory and the museum are open
seven days a week, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Monday through Saturday until Oct. 27,
when the closing hour becomes 5 P.M., and on Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. Admission
to both is about $2. More information is available from the Old Royal
Observatory, Greenwich, London SE10 9NF, England (858-1167). Getting Around West
Africa From Dakar in Senegal and Abidjan in the Ivory Coast, the tours spread
out to such places as Accra in Ghana and Lome in Togo. And from there, the
routes run to Ganvie and Cotonou in Benin. This is the akwaaba, or welcome, tour
of Scantravel, an organization that specializes in trips to West Africa.

Combining history, art, architecture and scenery, this two-week journey includes
a visit to Goree, a tiny island two miles east of Dakar where, it is estimated,
over a period of 300 years 40 million human beings were held by British, Dutch
and French slave traders, before being shipped to the New World.

Other places on the tour's itinerary are the Ifan Museum in Dakar, home to an
impressive collection of West African art, Cape Coast Castle, a British fortress
in Ghana where slaves were imprisoned, the equatorial forests of Togo and (by
motorboat) the lake dwellers' village of Ganvie in Benin.

Departures of the tour from New York are scheduled for Oct. 5, Nov. 2 and 30,
Dec. 21 and next year May 10, June 4, July 19 and Aug. 2. Based on double
occupancy, the tour is priced at $1,485, including accommodations, most meals,
transfers, sightseeing, taxes, and tour guides. International air fare is not
included. Until May 15, it is estimated at an additional $1,069. During June,
July and August, it is estimated at $1,194. More information and a brochure
describing this and other tours of West Africa are available from Scantravel
Africa (911 South Craycroft, Tucson, Ariz. 85711; 602-622-0361 or, from outside
Arizona, 800-528-5151). Riding New Zealand's Rails In an age of space
exploration and supersonic jets, there remains a band of travelers whose hearts
are forever possessed by railroads - the hiss and rhythm of engines, plumes of
steam, the wail of whistles in the night, diners and Pullman cars and endless
freights rattling across soaring trestles in the middle of nowhere.

In November, and again in March, romance and reality will meet during a 25-day
''Rail Fans' Tour of New Zealand.''These tours offer enthusiasts an opportunity
to ride behind historic locomotives, aboard crack passenger and freight trains,
and to visit 12 railway museums. Attractions include a journey aboard one of the
last regularly scheduled steam passenger trains in the world, the Kingston
Flyer, which makes four daily runs between Kingston and Fairlight on New
Zealand's South Island.

Other highlights are travel on the Pukemire line behind the small steam engines
called bush locomotives, a trip on the Ocean Beach Railway, and a rail journey
up the Raurimu Spiral. Besides the railroading attractions, there will be a
visit to Rotorua, a center of Maori culture, to the Waitomo Caves, to Milford
Sound, Mount Cook and Lake Manapouri, in addition to such cities as Auckland,
Wellington, Christchurch and Queenstown.

Beginning in Auckland and ending in Christchurch, trips are scheduled from Nov.
8 to Dec. 2 and next year from March 7 to 31. Based on double occupancy, the
cost is $1,092 a person, including all hotel accommodations, airport transfers,
breakfasts, some lunches and dinners, admissions to all attractions and all
transportation within New Zealand. International round-trip air fare is not
included; from Los Angeles, it is estimated at $896 in November and $1,250 in
March.

Additional information and an itinerary are available from the New Zealand
Tourist Office (630 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10111; 212-586-0060). Maine's
Mushrooms Arrive Shaggy mane, gem-studded puffball, sulfur shelf and velvet foot
are the prey of a certain breed of hunters who roam the forests of Maine these
crisp fall days. Though these are simply edible wild mushrooms, they are
considered a rare treat to those who prize good food.

And this is the time of year when several restaurants in Maine - a state
normally associated in the hungry traveler's mind with fresh lobster and
blueberry pie - are likely to offer the mushrooms.

Local, handpicked chanterelles are favored by Nicole Purslow, the chef-owner of
Le Domaine (207-422-3395), a classic French country restaurant on U.S. 1 in
Hancock, nine miles east of Ellsworth.

The chanterelles are likely to be offered as an appetizer (sauteed with a little
cream and white wine and served with toast points) and in pheasant and chicken
dishes. Dinner is served from 6 to 9 P.M. Tuesday through Sunday until Oct. 20,
when the restaurant closes for the winter season. Miss Purslow expects to reopen
for the 40th season May 18.

At 22 Lincoln Street (207-725-5893) - the restaurant's name is the same as its
address - in Brunswick, the co-owner and chef Sam Hayward makes a mille-feuille
appetizer with a wild mushroom filling as well as a boned veal rib rack with
chanterelles. Dinner is served from 6 to 9 P.M. Tuesday through Sunday in one
part of the restaurant; in another, called the cafe, a menu that includes the
mille-feuille appetizer is offered from 5:30 to 11:30 P.M.

And at Alberta's (207-774-5408), an establishment at 21 Pleasant Street in
Portland, favored by the community's art crowd, the three owners and chefs
-Thomas Roussell and Jim and Anne-Marie Ledue - have a stock of butter-packed
frozen mushrooms, harvested on an earlier trip to northern Maine, that will be
augmented by fresh mushrooms as available.

Large mushrooms, stuffed with an herb-flavored filling, may be offered with a
smoked trout, monkfish or bluefish entree. Lunch is served Monday through Friday
from 11:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M., dinner from 5 to 11 P.M., except Sunday when the
hours are 5 to 10 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Kingston Flyer; Photoof mushrooms

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
