
                               1 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE OFFICIAL ASKS END TO ARMS RACE IN SPACE

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 30


In a rebuke to both the Soviet Union and the United States, China's Foreign
Minister called today for both countries to halt the arms race in outer space
immediately.

An international treaty on the ''complete prohibition and destruction of
outer-space weaponry should be concluded as soon as possible,'' he said.

The Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, told the 40th General Assembly that ''outer
space belongs to all mankind and ought to be used for peaceful purposes for the
benefit of all.''

He expressed the hope that arms-control talks between the United States and the
Soviet Union ''will reach a practical and effective agreement without prejudice
to third countries.''

''Of course,'' he said, ''it would be unrealistic to pin our hope for peace only
on their talks.''

Mr. Wu also made these points:

* He called on all nuclear powers to pledge not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons. He said they should then conclude an international treaty banning the
use of nuclear weapons.

* He said NATO and the Warsaw Pact nations should reach an agreement as soon as
possible on drastically reducing their conventional armaments.

* He called on the 40-nation conference on disarmament in Geneva to complete
negotiations speedily on a treaty to ban production, deployment and use of
chemical weapons.

In other speeches before the General Assembly today, President Jaime Lusinchi of
Venezuela welcomed the recent meeting of top economic officials of the United
States and four other countries as signaling a possible shift in the perception
of large economic powers toward the global economic situation.

In a speech largely concerned with the Latin debt crisis, Mr. Lusinchi
acknowledged that a meeting of Finance Minsters and Central Bank heads from the
United States, Britain, Japan, France and West Germany on Sept. 22 yielded
nothing concrete, but said the meeting was part of the much-needed move to
coordinate economic policies.

'Could Signify a Change'

''The mere timid acknowledgement of the need to resist protectionist
pressures,'' he said, ''the possibility of opening markets to our exports and a
certain understanding in matters concerning reasonable interest rates and the
granting of financing in suitable quantity and conditions could signify that we
are witnessing a change in the perception of the great powers. The developing
world has been waiting for a long time for the materialization of the necessary
dialogue.''

In a declaration after their secret meeting, the finance officials said they
were prepared to work in concert to bring the dollar down and vowed to fight
protectionism.

Mr. Lusinchi, echoing earlier remarks by other Latin American leaders last week,
warned that growth in protectionism would cripple efforts to repay Latin
America's $370 billion regional debt.

The Sudan's Foreign Minister, Ibrahim Taha Ayoub, also focused on the debt
problem on his continent.

Referring to the African debt, Mr. Ayoub said, ''We will, of course, honor our
obligations to repay these debts, but it is becoming glaringly evident that we
cannot continue to service and repay these debts and succeeed at the same time
in providing our people with the minimum requirements of survival.''

Underlining what previous speakers from the developing world have said so far in
the general debate, he called for ''creative and new solution,'' including
rescheduling over longer perods, longer grace periods and restructuring of debts
with easier terms.

Thiland's Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, in his address said General
Assembly resolutions condemning Vietnam for its continued occupation of Cambodia
''is proof that the plight of the Kampuchean people speaks more loudly than any
cunning maneuver or confusing tactic on the part of the aggressor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


READING ALOUD The fourth year of free programs sponsored by Free Theater
Productions, in which well-known actors and actresses read from their favorite
writers, begins today at St. Thomas Church. Past programs have included Roscoe
Lee Brown, Betty Comden, Colleen Dewhurst, Jeremy Irons, Anne Jackson, Raul
Julia, Michael Moriarty, Geraldine Page, Jason Robards, Eli Wallach and Hattie
Winston.

On the bill today are Frances Sternhagen and Thomas Carlin with three of their
six children. The Episcopal church is on Fifth Avenue at 53d Street.
Information, Free Theater Productions, 737-0073.

THE CAMERAMEN

Tuesdays are long days at the International Center of Photography. Instead of
the usual 12-to-6 hours, the center opens at 12:30 P.M. and closes at 8. And not
only is the time extended, but after 5 P.M. admission is free. Today, therefore,
is an opportune time to view exhibitions by two classic photographers: Robert
Capa, whose speciality was war photography, and the photojournalist Henri
Cartier-Bresson.

''Robert Capa: A Retrospective, 1932-1954'' covers Capa's career from its
beginnings to his death in Vietnam in 1954. The work by Cartier-Bresson,
pictures of people, will be shown in ''Henri Cartier-Bresson: A Half Century of
Portraits.'' The center is on 94th Street at Fifth Avenue. For information, call
860-1777.

CATCHING TIGERS

On the west side of Central Park, at the American Museum of Natural History,
there are photographs also, but here the subjects are the stars, not the
photographers. The exhibition, which opens today, is named ''Tiger, Tiger,
Burning Bright: An Indian Wildlife Portfolio,'' and it is devoted to the
preservation of the tiger, which until recently faced extinction.

There are several tigers in this display of 64 color photographs, including one
of an Indian white tiger. Others show the deer, leopard, rhinoceros, black buck,
lion, elephant, crane, flamingo, stork, heron, pangolin, python, buffalo and
sloth bear.

The museum, on Central Park West at 77 Street, opens at 10 A.M. seven days a
week. Closing time is 5:45 P.M. daily except Wednesday, Friday and Saturday,
when it stays open until 9 P.M. Admission is on a pay-what-you-wish basis. For
information, call 873-1300.

Tuesday Sports is on page A28.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 2, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILIPINO QUANDARY: THE YES AND NO OF U.S. BASES

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: OLONGAPO, the Philippines


Richard Gordon, the Mayor of this mountain-rimmed harbor city, puts it bluntly:
''Olongapo is a company town.''

In Olongapo's case, the ''company'' happens to be the Pentagon. The town's
nightclubs, bars, hotels, restaurants, massage parlors and 250,000 people are
almost wholly dependent on the huge United States naval base at Subic Bay, whose
grounds cover an area slightly larger than Manhattan and whose gates open onto
the city's main street.

Yet even in Olongapo, and even in the Mayor's office, there is a hint of the
ambivalence Filipinos increasingly express toward the presence of two big
American military bases on their soil, Subic Bay and the nearby Clark Air Base.

Mayor Gordon recognizes that the American base is his town's lifeblood, and at a
time when the Philippine economy is depressed and businesses are closing down,
he notes with relief, ''No one is being laid off here, thanks to the U.S.
Navy.''

Cites Soviet Buildup

Mr. Gordon also speaks knowledgably of the Soviet buildup in Cam Ranh Bay,
Vietnam, a 70-minute jet ride across the South China Sea, and of what he terms
''the need to balance Soviet power in the region.''

Yet as a Filipino, the Mayor acknowledges that he has other feelings as well.
''As a principle, no one wants the foreign bases here,'' said Mr. Gordon, 40
years old, whose father, a former Mayor of Olongapo, fought for the town's
independence. Until 1959, Olongapo, 50 miles northwest of Manila, was part of
the Subic base and was run by an American administrator.

American strategic interests in the Philippines are now confronting a rising
wave of sentiment against the bases. The movement is partly a resurgence of
Filipino nationalism and partly a reaction to continuing American economic and
military support for the embattled Government of Ferdinand E. Marcos.

To the left, including a fast-growing Communist insurgency, the military bases
are a symbol of America's neocolonial influence and Washington's backing for
President Marcos. At anti-Government demonstrations in Manila, the removal of
the American bases is a rallying point, along with calls for the overthrow of
the ''U.S.-Marcos dictatorship.''

Declaration Against Bases

Moreover, as opposition to the Marcos Government has stepped up and the
influence of the left has increased, more centrist politicians have also come
out against the bases. Last December, a dozen prominent opposition leaders
signed an agreement stating that ''foreign bases on Philippine territory must be
removed and no foreign military bases shall hereafter be allowed.''

The agreement between Manila and Washington permitting Amerihe health of Mr.
Marcos, 67 years old, is uncertain, and the position of any successor government
toward the bases is unpredictable. Accordingly, the United States Government is
concerned about the future.

''The loss of the bases in the Philippines would be a body blow to Western
strategic interests in the Pacific and globally,'' an American diplomat said.

As a fallback, the United States is trying to lease possible alternative sites
in Guam and on the islands of Micronesia and the Northern Marianas. Military
estimates of the cost and time that would be required to replace Subic and Clark
range from $2 billion and three years to $5 billion and eight years.

Location and Workers Unequaled

Moreover, almost any replacement would be a significant loss militarily. It
would be impossible to equal the location or the inexpensive, skilled workforce
at Subic, the center of support operations for the 90 ships, 550 aircraft and
70,000 troops of the Seventh Fleet in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.

Subic lies at the center of the vital ocean lanes running from the Sea of Japan
to the east coast of Africa. The Marianas, by contrast, are far more
peripherally situated, being four days steaming time from Subic. Guam, too, is
far more remote.

''Take away Subic and you double and triple the distances and greatly reduce the
time for operations in key areas,'' said Lieut. Comdr. James Van Sickle, a
briefing officer at the base.

The Philippines also offers the Pentagon skilled labor at bargain rates. The
Navy estimates that a day's work shift at Subic costs about one-sixth the rate
in Japan and one-seventh that in the United States.

The central indictment of American foreign policy in the Philippines, heard from
both Marcos opponents and Congressional critics, is that Washington is focused
single-mindedly on the bases. Washington's fixation, they argue, undermines its
efforts to press the Marcos Government for political and economic changes.

Although opposition to the bases is vocal and growing, it does not yet appear to
be the majority opinion. In an independent nationwide poll issued last month, 43
percent of Filipinos surveyed agreed that the American bases should ''kept or
tolerated,'' and 23 percent disagreed. The movement against the bases has gained
most among younger, better-educated Filipinos, the poll indicated.

Willing to Compromise

And even some of those who oppose the bases appear willing to compromise.
Significantly, the call for their removal signed by opposition leaders in
December was vague, leaving out such details as a timetable. Foreign diplomats
suggested that the declaration was a harmless gesture of nationalism, which
allowed the still-divided opposition to agree on a largely theoretical issue
while sidestepping thornier matters, such as choosing a single candidate to run
against President Marcos.

''I'm against the American bases, but there are practical considerations that
must be taken into account,'' said Aquilino Pimentel, an opposition leaders who
signed the declaration.

Of these practical matters, the first Mr. Pimentel mentioned was employment.
About 43,000 Filipinos work at Clark and Subic, and the American Government is
the third largest employer in the country, after the Philippine Government and
the San Miguel Corporation.

''Besides, not even Castro could kick the U.S. out of its base at Guantanamo,''
Mr. Pimentel said. ''There's not much chance we will get rid of these bases
anytime soon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of entertainment center of Philippines (Renato Press); photo of
Mayor Richard Gordon (Renato Press)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 2, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 965 words


BACK IN THE WORLD. By Tobias Wolff. 221 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.

''WE used to talk about how when we got back in the world we were going to do
this and we were going to do that,'' says a character in one of Tobias Wolff's
fine, angular stories. ''Back in the world we were going to have it made. But
ever since then it's been nothing but confusion.'' Though this happens to be a
Vietnam veteran talking about the disillusion he experienced on returning home
after the war, he might well be speaking for any one of Mr. Wolff's disaffected
heroes. Frustrated, lonely and divorced from their youthful expectations, these
people all drift through the present, trying to get by day to day, by telling
assorted stories and lies. For them, as for Mr. Wolff, lying - in this case,
fiction-making -represents a way of imposing a narrative order on their lives,
as well as a means of connecting with others and with their receding dreams.

Hooper, the hero of ''Soldier's Joy,'' considers making up a story about
himself, so as to help comfort a distraught soldier in his command. And in ''The
Missing Person'' a shabby priest concocts an outrageous tale about killing a man
- just in order to have something to share with his new friend, a fast-talking
con man with lots of tall tales about his past. Father Leo, writes Mr. Wolff,
''believed about half of what he heard. That was fine with him. He didn't mind
having his leg pulled. He thought it was the sort of thing men did in lumber
camps and on ships -sitting around, swapping lies.''

Jean, the 15-year-old shoplifter in ''Coming Attractions,'' lies to ward off
boredom, to ward off fear and to protect her delicate father from distress,
whereas Mark, the unemployed singer in ''Desert Breakdown, 1968,'' cherishes an
elaborate fantasy in which he becomes a star, goes on stage to take a bow and
then delivers a phony childhood reminiscence, designed to humiliate his anxious
parents.

Other characters in ''Back in the World'' simply tell stories - both ''real''
ones and made-up ones to reconcile their wished-for identities with the dull
reality of their daily lives, or to convey something about themselves by
indirection: ''Our Story Begins'' features a shaggy-dog anecdote that functions
as a prelude to a marital break-up, and ''Leviathan'' a self-dramatizing tale of
heroism that fails to achieve its desired effect.

As this volume of stories, along with a previous collection (''In the Garden of
the North American Martyrs'') and a prize-winning novella (''The Barracks
Thief'') abundantly demonstrate, Mr. Wolff is a masterful storyteller, a natural
raconteur, who is willing to take all sorts of technical risks. Sometimes those
risks don't completely pay off: ''The Rich Brother,'' a kind of contemporary
parable about Abel and Cain, set down in colloquial but slightly formalized
prose, never quite manages to sketch in the moral ambiguities suggested by its
action; ''Our Story Begins'' - which uses the frame device of a story within a
story, overheard within another story - leaves the reader all too aware of the
narrative machinery at work.

If such efforts fail to trace a perfect emotional arc, however, they are not
without their pleasures; even the weakest stories in ''Back in the World'' are
enlivened by gleaming moments that display Mr. Wolff's quick eye, his gift for
meticulous observation. The sound of magazine pages being turned with the quick
snap of anger; the glitter of a sparkly ceiling in a cheap Las Vegas hotel; the
swollen look that too-white, too-new sneakers give to a young girl's feet - such
details take on an understated metaphorical power in these stories. Indeed, Mr.
Wolff shows he is as fluent in evoking mood through naturalistic descriptions of
the mundane - ''The woman had all the shades pulled down. It was like evening
inside: dim, peaceful, cool. Krystal could make out the shapes of things but not
their colors'' - as he is in creating a Sam Shepard-esque sense of menace
through the manipulation of bizarre images: a hearse, filled with partygoing
kids, speeding through the desert; an old bicycle lying at the bottom of a
chilly swimming pool.

In the end, though, what really makes the finest of these stories so compelling
is the author's sympathy for his characters, his clear-eyed but generous sense
of their weaknesses, their frustrations and disappointments. Most of the people
in ''Back in the World'' are losers or lapsed dreamers, weary people who have
passively allowed circumstance and blind chance to dictate the shape of their
lives: in ''The Poor Are Always With Us,'' a garage mechanic throws away two
cars - and his financial security - on a silly bet; in ''Desert Breakdown'' an
aspiring singer desultorily contemplates abandoning his pregnant wife and child
at a local gas station. Aimless about their future, oblivious to the
consequences of their past actions, these people all inhabit that precarious
emotional terrain where discouragement threatens to turn into despair and a
sense of permanent dislocation. Some have had a taste of success, a glimpse of
that place where fantasy begins to merge with fact, but that only makes their
current loss of control all the more distressing. As one character observes of a
friend: ''Dave was centerfold material for a while there, but nowadays things
just keep messing up on him. It's like the well went dry.''

There is not a lot of hope for these people, but Mr. Wolff suggests the promise
of some kind of redemption in their fumbling efforts to connect with one
another, and even in their sad attempts to shore up their dignity with their
pipe dreams and clumsy fictions. This is what enables these characters to go on,
and it is also what invests these stories with the burnished glow of compassion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tobias Wolff

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE PALESTINIAN-ISRAELI FIGHT: ARAB LANDS NOW SPECTATORS

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3158 words


The Israeli air strike Tuesday against the P.L.O. headquarters near Tunis
underscored the degree to which the Arab-Israel conflict has been transformed in
the last year. It has gone from a conflict primarily between Israel and the
surrounding Arab countries to a struggle almost exclusively between Israel and
the Palestinians, with the Arab countries as spectators.

Although the scene of the latest clash was Tunisia, Israeli statements and
actions suggest that the real motivation stems from events that have been taking
place inside Israel and the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.

There, during the last 12 months, the level and ferocity of Palestinian attacks
against Israelis have intensified, going from stone-throwing and tire-burning
incidents to abductions and stabbings committed by individual Arabs against
individual Jews. #16 Israelis Slain In the last year, 16 Israeli men and women
have been killed - most with kitchen knives or pistols - in such attacks in
Israel and the occupied territories, as well as in nearby Cyprus. At least 12
others have been wounded.

This wave of violence is new, Israeli military experts and West Bank Arabs say,
in that while a substantial amount of it appears to have been directed by the
Palestine Liberation Organization, most attacks by Palestinians against Israelis
inside Israel and the occupied territories have been locally generated by
individual Arabs who use crude homemade weapons and display considerable
audacity.

Some examples are the recent daylight stabbings of two heavily armed Israeli
soldiers in Hebron and the shooting at point-blank range of Israeli soldiers in
Ramallah and El Bireh earlier in the year.

In many ways, the Israeli raid on the P.L.O. office near Tunis appears to be a
retaliation for this new and, to Israeli authorities, extremely frustrating
series of Palestinian attacks.

''Today Hebron, two days ago Nablus, yesterday Tulkarm,'' Zeev Schiff, the
widely respected military editor of the newspaper Haaretz, wrote recently of the
new wave of violence. ''Between murders a rabbi was stabbed in Jerusalem and an
explosive device went off in Ashkelon, and it goes on and on.

''Why should we delude ourselves regarding what's happening between us and the
Arabs who are under our control?'' he wrote. ''The events which are occurring
are the buds of a civil war, another round of war between two populations
grasping the same plot of land.

''Ironically,'' Mr. Schiff continued, ''it is the local and individual
initiative of several of the murderers, stabbers and shooters which proves that
the coals are glowing right here and are not always imported from Amman or
Beirut, Damascus or Algeria.''

While Arab officials in the West Bank publicly condemn these acts of violence
against Israelis, in the privacy of their homes some Palestinians are quietly
cheering the attackers on. In interviews, several West Bank residents said that
when the two Israeli soldiers were stabbed in Hebron, phrases such as ''God
preserve the belly of the mother who produced the stabbers'' and ''God protect
the hand that stabbed them'' were whispered in many an Arab house.

In a way, said Meron Benvenisti, a former Deputy Mayor of Jerusalem who is the
leading Israeli expert on land use in the West Bank, the Arab-Israeli conflict
seems to be shrinking back to its pre-1948 roots.

A New Attitude

The conflict first went through a pan-Arab phase and then a P.L.O. phase, both
of which were characterized by local Palestinians looking to outside forces to
bear the brunt of the fight. But now a new attitude seems to be developing among
Palestinians of the occupied territories that the only way to maintain their
hold there is to take the initiative themselves. This feeling seems to have
become particularly acute since the decline of the P.L.O. as a military force
capable of putting pressure on Israel.

''This is a grass-roots reaction,'' Mr. Benvenisti said, ''and Israelis will
have to address themselves to something real now - not an enemy across the
border but one within, which is just where the conflict started 100 years ago.''

Palestinians, Israeli experts on Palestinian history and the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and military officials who deal with the West Bank say this
transformation is a result of developments both historical and recent. They
include the rise of a new, more militant generation of Palestinians in the West
Bank, the influence on it of the war in Lebanon, the actions of the Israeli
settlers, the transfer of some P.L.O. offices to Amman, Jordan, and the impact
of the release of 600 Palestinian terrorists into the occupied territories as
part of a prisoner exchange.

The experts nearly always begin their explanations with the generation of
Palestinians that is now turning 18, 19 and 20 years old in the West Bank. These
Palestinians have known no other life than that of Israeli occupation, and they
refuse to accept the docility of their elders.

''The old generation of leaders, the contemporaries of King Hussein and Yasir
Arafat, are gradually dying out and being replaced by young leaders who have
grown up and developed under Israeli rule,'' a recent analysis in the rightist
newspaper Maariv said.

It continued, ''A local resident researching his Ph.D. thesis conducted a study
of what was termed 'changes in viewpoints regarding the occupation regime,' from
which it emerged that if the parents' generation loathed Israel as a state, the
children hate Israelis both as Jews and as people.''

Hostility Toward Israel

Among the old leadership, the newspaper added, it was customary to compare the
way the Israeli administration rules to what the heavy-handed Jordanian
administration did in the territories, and ''so to make do with the lesser of
two evils.''

But the new generation cannot draw that comparison. ''For them,'' the paper
added, ''there is but one real, hostile regime which they encounter day in and
day out, and which they are forced to confront at every road junction, every
movie theater entrance and every bridge over the Jordan River.'' The regime
referred to is Israel. Members of this young generation have become increasingly
nervous about their future on the land, according to many Palestinians as well
as the Israeli experts.

Mona Rishmawi, a 27-year-old Palestinian lawyer in Ramallah, explained: ''When
young people here add up the pressures coming from the settlers, the stories now
emerging about how hundreds of Arabs were swindled out of their land, the rise
of Kahane and the double system of justice here, which allows Jewish terrorists
to get light sentences when they do violence to Arabs and Arabs to get heavy
sentences when they do violence to Jews, then you can see the logic of why some
of them go out and commit some of these acts.''

''You know,'' Miss Rishmawi added, ''when I was growing up I constantly heard my
mother's story about how she was driven out of her house in Jaffa. We heard it
over and over, and it became kind of a family legend, but I never really thought
it would apply to me here in the West Bank. But now I think many young people
are beginning to realize that their parents' stories may end up being their
stories as well - that we will be kicked out too because some fanatic holding a
Bible in his hand says that this is his land and we have to get out.''

Fear Lessens

Not only do the younger Palestinians carry a sharper sense of grievance than
their parents. They are also less afraid of the Israelis than are their elders.

''The generation that grew up in the territories before 1967 witnessed Israel
crush three Arab armies at once,'' said Amnon Cohen, an expert on Palestinian
history at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

''They were shocked by this and they took the might of the Israeli Army for
granted. The young generation do not suffer from this shock. They grew up with
the Israeli Army of the 1973 war and Lebanon.''

A 30-year-old Palestinian activist who lives in Jerusalem and recently completed
a prison term for planting bombs against Israelis said, ''People are not afraid
of the Israeli soldiers like before. Before we used to call them 'supermen,' but
not anymore, not after what we saw happen in Lebanon.''

In three recent incidents, Israeli troops shot and killed one Arab and wounded
six others who had refused to halt and produce identification.

The ability of the Lebanese Shiites to drive the Israeli Army out of most of
Lebanon appears to have had an important psychological impact on West Bank
youths and to have contributed, in part, to the new wave of violence.

Examples on TV

One Palestinian journalist explained: ''Every night on Syrian, Jordanian and
Israeli television young people received news of successful attacks against
Israeli soldiers. They saw the Lebanese get the Israelis out by making their
lives hell and inflicting casualties. Many think, why not do the same here? They
can't get explosives here, so they go into the kitchen and get a knife
instead.''

Another factor encouraging this trend, the experts say, was the release last May
20 of 600 convicted Palestinian terrorists to their homes in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip as part of an exchange of 1,150 prisoners for 3 Israeli soldiers.

Israeli military officials say they believe that the 600 prisoners freed to the
occupied territories, who included some of the best-known Palestinian killers of
Israelis in the last 20 years, are not themselves engaging in subversive
activities. They are all being very closely watched. However, the military
officials said, the freed prisoners serve as important role models.

In the last 18 years, Israel has systematically destroyed the traditional Arab
leadership in the West Bank and Gaza Strip through expulsions or dismissals from
posts. Only one mayor of a major Arab town, Elias Freij of Bethlehem, remains in
his job, with virtually all other such towns under the administration of
military governors.

In the absence of strong, authentic and moderate local leaders, the young
generation has been looking to the released prisoners for inspiration. When the
prisoners were released, Palestinians say, there were celebrations that went on
for days in villages all over the West Bank.

One former prisoner, who served more than a decade in an Israeli prison for
planting a bomb that killed and injured Israelis, spoke in an interview last
week about the reception he and his fellow prisoners received.

''Wherever I walk, people want to come up and shake my hand or try to kiss my
hand,'' the former prisoner said. ''I don't let them kiss my hand. That is not
right. But I do shake a lot of hands.''

'It's Your Turn'

One of the most senior Israeli military officers in the West Bank said in an
interview that he was walking through the market in the Old City of Jerusalem
two weeks ago when he saw a former prisoner being mobbed by young people and
shopkeepers wherever he walked, like a Pied Piper.

''I was shocked,'' the Israeli officer said. ''This man had a lot of Israeli
blood on his hands. I am sure that he is not going to do anything again, but I
am also sure that he is telling young people, 'Look, I did my job for the armed
struggle, and now it's your turn.' ''

Another factor that has subtly facilitated the recent violence, the experts
said, has been the weakening of Israel's intelligence-gathering capabilities in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip as a result of the Lebanon war.

The day-to-day gathering of intelligence in the West Bank was always carried out
by agents of the Shin Beth, the security agency that is Israel's equivalent of
the F.B.I. However, when the Israeli Army invaded Lebanon, the Shin Beth, with
its experienced case officers and members fluent in Arabic, had to transfer much
of its resources to help with the occupation. Many agents still work in southern
Lebanon.

According to Israeli military sources, about 20 Shin Beth agents were killed
during the invasion of Lebanon and in the suicide car-bombing of the Israeli
intelligence headquarters in Tyre on Nov. 4, 1983. That is more than all other
losses sustained by the Shin Beth since it was established in Israel's early
days as a nation.

''The main tool for fighting terrorism is intelligence,'' a senior Israeli
officer in the West Bank said. ''The Shin Beth had been geared to deal with the
territories but shifted because of Lebanon. Also, the new generation of Israelis
coming into the army these days was born here, and fewer and fewer of them can
really speak fluent Arabic the way an intelligence officer must and the way the
generation before them, which immigrated from Arab countries, did. Intelligence
needs infrastructure and we really have to go through a process of rebuilding in
the territories.''

Small Groups

In addition, the nature of the violence in the territories is changing, making
it more difficult to detect in advance, the military officer noted. At most, he
said, only 50 percent of the recent violence has been directed from the outside.

The rest, he said, was undertaken by individuals who are no longer willing to
wait for the P.L.O. to win the fight for them. They act on their own or in
self-contained small groups that are very hard to penetrate.

The Shin Beth was set up to crack terrorist cells and detect infiltrators
dispatched or controlled from abroad. Very few of those responsible for the
recent violence have been caught. Those who have been arrested, such as the two
youths accused of stabbing an Israeli truck driver in Gaza three weeks ago, have
been found to have acted on their own initiative.

Still, the P.L.O. presence in Amman has undoubtedly contributed something to the
recent spate of attacks, the Israeli military officials said. Even though the
Jordanians try to make certain that the P.L.O. does not engage in any
cross-border violence, the presence there of dozens of P.L.O. security officials
makes it much easier for them to make contact with the thousands of Palestinians
who go to Amman and back every month by way of the Allenby Bridge across the
Jordan River.

''Two years ago a young man from the West Bank would have had to go to Tunis or
Algiers if he wanted to get in touch with the P.L.O.,'' a senior Israeli
military officer in the West Bank said. ''Now they are waiting for him 20 miles
from the Allenby Bridge. They have meeting places, safe houses and they can
easily send in money, or a knife or instructions.''

Israeli military officials say they believe that Mr. Arafat, the P.L.O.
chairman, has been impelled to step up violence inside Israel because he is
reportedly considering recognizing Israel's right to exist as part of a
Jordanian-P.L.O. initiative to open a dialogue with the United States.

''It is the 'Christmas bombing of Hanoi' theory of violence,'' said the Israeli
officer, referring to the bombing of North Vietnam by the United States in
December 1972, which preceded the signing of a truce agreement in Paris the
following month. ''Strike hard just before you negotiate in order to build up
credibility within your own ranks to be able to make concessions.''

The Settlers

The last factor contributing to the increase in Arab violence, according to
Israeli military experts and Palestinians, has been the behavior of the Jewish
settlers. They have become increasingly aggressive in trying to expand into
densely populated Arab areas, attacking the homes of the Palestinians released
from prison and conducting armed patrols in the main streets of West Bank towns
after Israelis are attacked.

The settlers say they believe they are just reacting to Arab violence and are
demanding the security to which they feel entitled as Israeli citizens.

However, Israeli military experts say the settlers have been provoking the Arabs
- Rabbi Moshe Levinger, a leader of the settlers, sat outside a refugee camp for
two months waiting for an Arab to throw a stone at him - and trying to pressure
the Government into rekindling the settlement drive at a time when it has run
out of money to finance new settlements.

''The settlers say they are moving into the Hebron marketplace because they want
to live with the Arabs,'' Amnon Cohen, the historian, said. ''In reality they
want to replace them. They want friction in order to justify bringing the army
in and imposing harsher security. We must not only condemn Arab aggression but
Jewish aggression.''

In fact, in the last two weeks both David Levy, a minister from the right-wing
Likud bloc, and Prime Minister Shimon Peres, leader of the left-of-center Labor
Party, have scolded the settlers for trying to take the law into their own
hands.

''The presence of the settlers in densely populated areas adds to the Arab
anxiety that the Israelis are closing in on them and that desperate steps are
necessary,'' the senior military officer in the West Bank said. ''The settlers
want the security on the road to Hebron to be as perfect as the security on the
road to Tel Aviv. They forget that this is occupied territority.''

New Philosophy

Shlomo Gazit, a former head of military intelligence who was the military
governor of the West Bank from 1967 until 1974, said that people forget how far
the current Israeli approach to the West Bank has moved from the original
philosophy of occupation instituted immediately after the 1967 war.

The original philosophy of Israel's military government, said Mr. Gazit, who has
just completed a book on the subject titled ''The Carrot and the Stick,'' was
twofold: ''It said, first, that we must wait for a political settlement to
determine the fate of these areas and that settlement will not be between Israel
and the local inhabitants but between Israel and some outside power. Until that
settlement comes, the two sides should find a way to live together with the
minimum damage to both.''

''Secondly,'' Mr. Gazit continued, ''we Israelis argued that 'We were as
embarrassed at being a military government as much as you Arabs are suffering.
Hence, if you behave yourself, you will not see us, you will not notice our
patrols, you will not feel our presence.' ''

After all of the settlement activity, though, Mr. Gazit said, this philosophy
has been almost totally forgotten. To protect one settler around the clock in
the middle of Hebron now requires more than a dozen soldiers and support
personnel, he said, and that creates an additional layer of security on top of
the continuing occupation.

''Our original philosophy doesn't hold water anymore,'' said Mr. Gazit. ''We
have gone from a policy that subtly facilitates peace and quiet and keeping all
political options open to one that subtly facilitates the closing of political
options. This latest wave of violence may calm down, but things cannot go on
like this. I don't know whether it is going to be the summer of '86 or '87 or
whenever, but if this situation continues there is going to be a real
explosion.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Isreal highlighting the West Bank (page A10); photo of coffin of
slain Israel being carried by mourners (Reuters) (page A10)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK, AT U.N., SAYS REBELS AREN'T LOSING

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 2


Prince Norodom Sihanouk told the General Assembly today that his rebel forces
were holding their own against the Hanoi-backed Government in Phnom Penh.

The Prince, who is recognized by the United Nations as the legitimate head of
state of Cambodia, asserted in a speech that forces of the opposition coalition
he leads had recently made inroads into regions near the Cambodian capital,
causing ''serious concern'' for the Vietnamese. The rebel alliance consists of
two non-Communist groups and the Khmer Rouge, which is Communist.

The Prince said that despite claims by Hanoi, his troops had not been
''seriously weakened by the so-called big victories of the Vietnamese
offensive'' this year.

The war that has plagued Cambodia since 1979, when Vietnam invaded, removed Pol
Pot from power and installed its own regime, has been touched on by other
speakers at the General Assembly in recent days. But other speakers, unlike
Prince Sihanouk, have given greater urgency to such matters as racial violence
in South Africa, nuclear arms and the increasing debt of developing countries.

Last June, the Prince expressed concern that his guerrillas' inability to take a
single town or district could jeopardize United Nations recognition of the
coalition. But Vietnam said in August that it would not fight to seat the Phnom
Penh Government at this year's General Assembly.

Quoting extensively from newspaper reports to support his statements, the Prince
accused the Hanoi-backed regime of systematically violating human rights and
encouraging torture. He said it was the duty of the United Nations to protect
human rights ''at all costs.''

In another address, Pakistan's Foreign Minister concentrated on the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan, which has been raised only marginally by other
speakers. Calling the invasion in 1979 a flagrant violation of that country's
independence, the official, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, said Pakistan suffered effects
of the conflict.

Pakistan has absorbed more than three million Afghan refugees, Mr. Yaqub Khan
said, ''testimony to the popular rejection of the foreign presence.''

In addition to the refugees' strain on Pakistan's ''limited resources,'' he
said, his country faced ''repeated attacks'' from the Afghan side on Pakistani
territory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECURITY COUNCIL DEBATES AIR RAID

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 2


Israel's Foreign Minister, Yitzak Shamir, appeared before the General Assembly
today and strongly defended the Israeli bombing of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization headquarters near Tunis.

Mr. Shamir's speech came as the Security Council met to consider a draft
resolution condemning the raid.

All delegates from the 21-member Arab group except for Egypt walked out of the
session as Mr. Shamir stepped to the podium to speak. They were joined by Iran,
Vietnam, Nicaragua, Afghanistan and some African nations, including Zimbabwe and
Burkina Faso. With the exception of East Germany, whose entire delegation left
the hall, members of the Soviet bloc, including the Soviet Union, each left one
junior delegate in the six-seat section allotted to member nations.

In his speech, Mr. Shamir said: ''We had no intention of attacking Tunisia
although this country has permitted terrorist bases to exist on its soil. We
acted against murderous criminals in order to prevent the continuation of their
criminal acts.''

Repeated Israeli Position

Mr. Shamir repeated the Israeli position that the raid was in retaliation for
the killing last Wednesday of three Israelis aboard a yacht in Larnaca, Cyprus,
which he said was ''directed and commanded from Tunis.''

While walkouts during speeches by Israeli representatives before the General
Assembly are not uncommon, more nations joined in today in the aftermath of the
Israeli raid. One was Turkey, which maintains low-level diplomatic relations
with Israel.

Sharp condemnations of Israel were heard in the Security Council, which met
today at Tunisia's request. Not since the Israeli bombing of the French-built
nuclear reactor outside of Baghdad, Iraq in 1981 has there been such strong
condemnation of Israel, according to Western and Arab diplomats at the United
Nations.

Representatives from a number of Western countries, including France, Britain,
Denmark and Australia, joined Arab delegates and speakers representing the
so-called nonaligned nations in condemning the raid.

Both the British and Danish delegates referred to a declaration by the Common
Market, which condemned the bombing as a violation of Tunisia's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

Criticize U.S. Statement

Tunisia's Foreign Minister, Beji Caid Essebsi, who led off the debate, appeared
to criticize White House statements that saw some justification in the Israeli
bombing.

''Any attempt at justifying it, any indulgence shown to its perpetrators on
whatever pretext can only be a way of encouraging agggression and setting the
seal of approval on the aggressor,'' he said. ''In any case, my country has no
alternative but to consider this as an unfriendly gesture from which it will
draw the necessary conclusions.''

The Turkish Foreign Minister, Vahit Halefoglu, called on the Security Council to
condemn the raid as an act of aggression, demand full reparations for any damage
caused and declare its determination to ''avert and prevent any future act of
terrorism committed against a member state of the United Nations.''

These three demands are included in a draft resolution circulated by the
Tunisians, according to diplomats. The resolution is expected to be vetoed by
the United States.

Initially, the draft resolution was milder, according to Western and Arab
diplomats, but the language became harsher after the White House characterized
the raid as ''a legitimiate response'' against ''terrorist attacks.'' As debate
progressed, however, a reference to Israel's ''policy of state terrorism'' was
deleted in an attempt to prevent a veto, according to diplomats.

The United States did not request time to speak in the Security Council today.

Israel's delegate to the United Nations, Benjamin Netanyahu, was alone in
defending the raid in today's debate.

''Under no circumstances can Israel accept the notion that bases and
headquarters of terrorist killers should enjoy immunity anywhere, anytime,''
said Mr. Netanyahu. ''It was against them that our action was directed, not
their host country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Beji Caid Essebsi and Farouk Kaddoumi (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING;
Mets vs. Cards: Winner Is WOR

BYLINE: By Craig Wolff

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Among all the people who have taken delight in the final-week confrontation at
St. Louis, you'd be hard pressed to find any who are more gleeful than the
executives at WOR-TV, the Mets' flagship station. Why? Because when the
overnight numbers from the A. C. Nielsen Company were issued yesterday morning,
they showed that the opening game of the Met-Cardinal series had drawn a 22.4
average rating and a 36 share in the New York market for the time period between
8:30 P.M., when the telecast began, to a few minutes past midnight, when it
ended. Those figures made the game the highest-rated program in WOR's 38-year
history, substantially ahead of the 20.6 rating and 30 share achieved by the
station's previous record-holder, ''The Deer Hunter,'' the acclaimed Michael
Cimino film about three friends and their Vietnam experiences, which was
broadcast five years ago.

Needless to say, WOR swept the ratings game against its six competitors Tuesday
night. The Met telecast was most successful in the 15-minute segment just after
the end of prime time, when it drew a rating (the percentage of all
television-equipped households in the market) of 27 and a share (the percentage
of such households whose sets were in use) of 47. Or, put another way, 1.8
million of the area's 6.7 million TV-equipped households were watching the Mets
from 11 to 11:15 P.M. Why watch late news when you can watch late baseball?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

UNITED NATIONS CALENDAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


WINDING DOWN - The second week of the General Assembly's general debate winds
down today with speeches by representatives from 10 nations. The morning lineup
features Ethiopia, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Turkey and Malaysia.
Guinea, Vietnam, Somalia, Nepal, Brunei and Angola will speak in the afternoon.

ANGOLA AGAIN - The Security Council, after yesterday's resolution by South
Africa calling for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Angola, is expected
to continue its debate on the Angolan complaint. In the afternoon, the Council
will resume consideration of the complaint by Tunisia against Israel after the
attack Tuesday on the Palestine Liberation Organization's headquarters in Tunis.

AUSTRALIAN'S DAY- Foreign Minister William G. Hayden of Australia will have only
two discussions scheduled: one with Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, who is
recognized by the United Nations as the leader of Cambodia, and the other one
with Foreign Minister Bohuslav Chnoupek of Czechoslovakia. Mr. Hayden plans to
take a long weekend off.

MORE MEETINGS - Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, who has met with more
than 50 foreign ministers since the debate began, has 11 meetings planned for
today.. He will talk with the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dato Musa
Hitam, and the Foreign Ministers of Czechoslovakia, Israel, Haiti, Costa Rica,
Chad, Djibouti, Indonesia, Mongolia, Jordan, and Iceland. In between, he will
meet with Bolivian and Brazilian diplomats and attend the Security Council
meetings.

GUEST OF HONOR - Jaime de Pinies, President of the General Assembly, will be the
guest of honor at a luncheon at the Turkish Center given by the Foreign Minister
of Turkey, Vahit Halefoglu.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 5, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday about a meeting of the United Nations Security
Council misidentified Venancio de Moura, an Angolan official. He is Deputy
Foreign Minister.

GRAPHIC: photo of Igmac Golob, Venancio de Moura and Elisio de Figueiredo
(NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

TYPE: schedule

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EVEN FUN IS WORK AT U.N. PARTIES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1240 words


Surveying the roomful of drinking diplomats Monday night at a dinner given by
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Richard
A. Woolcott, Australia's chief delegate to the United Nations, joked about the
social demands of his occupation. ''Apart from a good mind,'' he said, ''the two
most important assets for a U.N. diplomat are a good tailor and a strong
liver.''

Humor helps ease the trying pace of social life on the United Nations circuit.
This year, diplomats won't get a breather until after Oct. 24, following the
world body's official celebration of its 40th anniversary. That birthday has
made this United Nations session the most hectic in many diplomats' memories,
with scores of heads of state and foreign ministers arriving and endless social
events scheduled, most during the opening week last month and the special
commemorative session later in October.

''Today we had a lunch for Jaime de Pinies, the President of the General
Assembly, then we had cocktails with the Foreign Minister of Austria,'' said
Otilia Barbosa de Medina, wife of Portugal's chief representative, as she sipped
a Perrier at the Southeast Asian nations dinner. ''We passed through a Chinese
dinner, and now we are here.'' Then Mrs. Barbosa de Medina sighed. ''It's our
life.''

'The Refinement of Royalty'

''You need the constitution of an ox and the refinement of royalty just to get
through,'' said Natalie Thomas, an officer in the Secretariat. Miss Thomas, who
is Australian, has worked at the United Nations for 15 years, and she is one of
about 6,500 permanent employees at the Secretariat.

''It is an endless procession of surprises,'' added Lieut. Gen. Vernon A.
Walters, chief delegate of the United States. ''The expected rarely occurs and
never in the expected manner.''

The season opened Sept. 18 with the 19th annual dinner for delegates and top
officers of the Secretariat, sponsored by the Business Council for the United
Nations at the Waldorf-Astoria. Amid the swirl of elegant men and women, many in
national dress, the Soviet delegate Oleg A. Troyanovsky chatted in Russian with
General Walters. ''We spoke,'' General Walters recalled several nights later.
But he added a quibble: ''I don't know if we had a lovely chat.''

Still, informal get-togethers like these do complement the serious work of the
United Nations. ''If we only met in the General Assembly, we would be stiff and
stern and quarrelsome maybe,'' said Wiryono Sastrohandoyo, a delegate from
Indonesia. ''But here we meet as friends, even if we have opposing views.'' He
pointed to the guest list for the Southeast Asian nations dinner. ''We have
problems with Portugal, for example, but they are here. Vietnam is occupying
Kampuchea, but they are here, too.''

''It's easier to work with a couple of drinks,'' said Carlos Alzamora, Peru's
chief representative, who was standing nearby. ''It's more fluid. You cross many
barriers when involved in this exercise.''

The exercise can be strenuous. Mr. Alzamora said he had attended 20 parties in
the preceding 7 days. And when Britain's Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe,
visited New York last week, ''every meal, bar one or two, was taken up with
work,'' said Roderic M. J. Lyne, the mission's first secretary. ''The time
available for our more luminous personages to gad about has been limited.''

''They may look like parties, but actually they are working occasions,'' said
Gillian Martin Sorensen, New York City's Commissioner for the United Nations and
Consular Corps. This year, Mrs. Sorensen observed, many gatherings have been
kept small and private because diplomats ''want a chance to converse.''
Unspoken, but also understandable, was the need for security when so many
leaders meet.

The United Nations itself is an important social host and ''any invitation from
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar'' is considered important, Mrs.
Sorensen said.

The anniversary celebration is attracting an unprecedented number of world
leaders. ''We had to have big lunches to thank them for their support,'' said
Aly I. Teymour, the United Nations chief of protocol. ''You cannot just receive
them.'' Occasions sponsored by the various missions also crowd the social
calendar, and events sponsored by the permanent members of the Security Council
''are command performances,'' one Secretariat official said. ''It's in one's
interest to go, not for the dancing, but for the proximity to power.'' Soviet
bloc parties ''are not glamour events,'' the official continued, ''but they are
politically important.'' Other power events include those involving Latin
nations. ''This is the Latin era, because the people in power - Perez de Cuellar
and Jaime de Pinies - are Latin,'' the official said. ''Latins have cachet.
There's a certain esprit there that doesn't exist in cooler climates.''

'All Young and Lively'

United Nations employees and diplomats also look to developing nations. ''Their
ambassadors are all young and lively,'' said Mona Sinclair, the wife of Guyana's
representative. Once-favored events sponsored by oil-producing nations of the
Mideast are no longer considered to be hot tickets. Because of regional strife
and declining oil prices, ''the caviar doesn't flow the way it used to at the
Iranian Embassy,'' the Secretariat official observed. Still, last night's
reception at the Waldorf-Astoria for Prince Sultan of Saudi Arabia, the Minister
of Defense, was a sought-after invitation.

Security was heavy at the Waldorf's Empire Room, both inside and out. A metal
detector and 12 security men from the United States State Department were
stationed at the doors. Just beyond, Prince Sultan stood in the receiving line
with Saudi Arabia's representative at the United Nations, Samir S. Shihabi.
Close behind them stood Prince Saud al-Faisal, the Saudi Foreign Minister, and
five unsmiling Saudi Arabian guards, black briefcases by their feet. It was the
kind of party where conversations stopped whenever strangers neared.

''We think a lot of Prince Sultan,'' said Roy A. Anderson, chairman of the
Lockheed Corporation. ''We've done a lot of business with Saudi Arabia and have
come to pay our respects.''

No alcohol was served, but fruit juices and soft drinks were available at
several bars.

Very few women were there. ''I'm told it is a stag evening, but we're invited in
our official capacity,'' said Mrs. Sorensen.

Like the reception for Prince Sultan and last week's dinner for President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Temple of Dendur, there
will be other private parties where diplomats mix with New Yorkers and the
city's various expatriate communities. ''It's more interesting in people's
homes,'' said Audrey del Rosario, wife of a delegate from the Dominican
Republic. ''It helps to soften the tension.''

Sometimes, though, tension does surface. As guests left the Southeast Asian
nations dinner at the Waldorf, several diplomats hung back to avoid crossing
paths with a man they identified as a representative of the Khmer Rouge in
Cambodia.

But ''people tend not to make heavy weather of these things,'' observed Mr. Lyne
of the British mission. ''You try to behave in a perfectly civilized manner. You
can accidently but deliberately bump into someone at a party whose office you
cannot enter.'' Like the United Nations itself, the parties that surround it
often have a civilizing effect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of guests

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words


''IT'S a play that was living somewhere inside me,'' said John Pielmeier, the
author of ''The Boys of Winter,'' a drama about Vietnam that will open at the
Biltmore Theater Nov. 17.

''I always wanted to write a war play,'' said Mr. Pielmeier, whose ''Agnes of
God'' ran on Broadway for 17 months. ''This play began as a commission and the
only qualms I had were that I hadn't served in Vietnam. I did tremendous
research, but the most nervous I ever was was when I showed the first draft to a
veteran.''

The playwright, who was in the midst of rehearsals with the cast of eight - Matt
Dillon, Thomas Ikeda, Andrew McCarthy, D. W. Moffett, Tony Plana, Ving Rhames,
Brian Tarentina and Darnell Williams - described his new work as an ensemble
piece ''about discoveries that were made in that war by the men involved in it
and, hopefully, also by our country.''

Herbert Ross, who is directing, said, ''The play is full of scenes that are
great for actors and I wanted to be part of it.'' Mr. Ross, who was last on
Broadway with two Neil Simon plays, ''I Ought to Be in Pictures'' and ''Chapter
Two,'' said, ''I postponed two movie projects to do this, it knocked me out of
other things for five or six months, but it's a big challenge and it stretches
me - it's important not to stay in the same place.''

The big news for budget-conscious theatergoers comes from the producers, Raymond
Katz, CBS Productions and Ivan Bloch: the top ticket price will be $29.50.

''The Blood Knot,'' which opened the Yale Repertory Theater's season in New
Haven, will probably come to Broadway next month. The play, by Athol Fugard,
which was acclaimed as a ''major theatrical event'' and a ''celebratory
occasion,'' co-stars the author and Zakes Mokae. The two co-starred in the
original production in South Africa 25 years ago.

Not too long ago, Mickey Rolfe produced a play called ''Second Prize: Two Months
in Leningrad'' in Greenwich Village It closed almost before it opened. As Mr.
Rolfe said, ''There is no nice way to put it - the customers didn't come.''

The experience didn't discourage the 29-year-old producer because he met an
actress named J. Smith Cameron, who gave him a script to read called ''Alice and
Fred'' by Dan Ellentuck. Mr. Rolfe loved it, he got together with Joel Key Rice
and raised $80,000, and the play will begin previews at the Cherry Lane Theater,
38 Commerce Street, on Oct. 15.

The true story is about Alice Mitchell, a tomboy, and Freda Ward, a beauty, who
were close childhood friends in upstate New York before the turn of the century.
As the two girls reached maturity, Freda became interested in men while Alice's
attachment to Freda intensified. Miss Cameron is playing Alice and Laura Innes
will be Freda.

When Edward Herrmann was appearing in ''Plenty,'' he asked David Hare to write
him a play about the poets of World War I. Mr. Hare said he wasn't interested,
but three months later he sent Mr. Herrmann the script of ''Not About Heroes,''
by Stephen MacDonald. The rights to the play had already been acquired by
someone else, but, said the actor, who won a Tony for his role in ''Mrs.
Warren's Profession,'' ''I made myself available to them.''

Now the play, which Mr. Herrmann describes as about ''the power of poetry, the
pathos and beauty of the relationship between Wilfred Owen and Siegfried Sassoon
and the senseless waste of young lives in war,'' is scheduled to open Oct. 21 at
the Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street. Mr. Herrmann plays Sassoon,
Dylan Baker plays Owen and Dianne Wiest, who most recently starred with Frank
Langella in ''After The Fall,'' will be making her debut here as a director.

Cleavon Little, the co-star of ''I'm Not Rappaport,'' which moves to Broadway
next month, is hoping that past experience won't repeat itself. ''You do
something that has some significant effect and nothing happens after it,'' he
said. ''After I did the movie 'Blazing Saddles,' I wasn't offered another
picture. I guess you constantly have to pay your dues.''

What he'd really like to do after ''Rappaport,'' he said, is work with Murray
Schisgal and Dustin Hoffman on a musical. Mr. Schisgal wrote two plays that Mr.
Little appeared in early in his career, and Mr. Hoffman directed one of them.

The 46-year-old actor, who plays an 81-year-old man in ''Rappaport,'' says that
he and Judd Hirsch work so well together that they are like a dance team. ''We
subconsciously move faster or heighten the intensity for certain audiences,'' he
said. ''There are some audiences that catch all the little nuances and
participate with us, and then the dance is between the three of us. The Sunday
matinees are usually magnificent - everyone is very relaxed. Saturday night,
they enjoy themselves, but there is generally a more conservative reaction.''

Was he pleased to be back in New York after 13 years on the West Coast?

''I never knew what it was like to be happy until I moved back here,'' he said.

Dr. Jay H. Lefkowitch is the director of medical pathology at the College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, but pathology isn't his only
interest. ''Centerstage,'' his paintings and drawings of scenes from theater and
opera, opens Oct. 23 at the National Arts Club, 15 Gramercy Park South. Included
in the exhibition's 72 works are scenes from ''Big River,'' ''The King and I,''
''Biloxi Blues'' and ''Mame.'' The hours are 3 to 7 P.M. and admission is free.
More information: 475-3424.

A major New York revival of Luigi Pirandello's classic dark comedy, ''Six
Characters in Search of an Author,'' begins tonight at the Jean Cocteau
Repertory, Bouwerie Lane Theater, 330 Bowery, (212) 677-0060. Pirandello's most
popular work, the play within a play is directed by Daniel Irvine and translated
and adapted by David Caldwell.

The Manhattan Theater Club is planning a second performance space at City
Center, behind the present 299-seat theater. Construction will start next summer
and it is hoped that the 100-seat theater will be completed by next October. The
kind of news we all like to hear - the club has 2,500 new members this season,
bringing the subscriber total to 6,700.

''Little Shop of Horrors'' will have its 1,338th performance tomorrow, making it
the 10th longest running production in Off Broadway history. Its gross to date:
almost $13 million. ''Cats'' begins its fourth year on Broadway Monday.

''4 One-Act Musicals'' is the name of the Artsangle production now at the South
Street Theater, 424 West 42d Street, and it's exactly that. ''Soap Opera'' is
pop rock, ''Leo'' is jazz-opera and ''Madonna'' and ''3 Complaints'' - well, pay
your money and find out. Reservations: 279-4200.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLES COLLINGWOOD IS DEAD; CBS CORRESPONDENT WAS 68

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


Charles Collingwood, a CBS News correspondent who covered World War II, the
Vietnam War and a host of other major events in a career that spanned more than
four decades, died of cancer yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital. He was 68 years
old and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Collingwood began his career in 1939 as a reporter for The United Press in
London. In 1941, he joined Edward R. Murrow's CBS reporting staff in London,
where his assignments included the Allied invasions of North Africa and Europe.

After the war, he came back to the United States to become CBS News's first
United Nations correspondent. Mr. Collingwood went on to become the network's
White House correspondent and the chief of its London bureau.

In 1959 he succeeded Mr. Murrow as host of the ''Person to Person'' series, one
of the series and specials he hosted over the years, including ''A Tour of the
White House With Mrs. John F. Kennedy'' in February 1962.

Correspondent in Indochina

Mr. Collingwood was chief foreign correspondent for CBS News from 1964 to 1975.
He covered the warfare in Indochina from the early 1960's, and went to South
Vietnam on special assignment in 1965.

Three years later, he became the first American network correspondent to be
admitted to North Vietnam. Mr. Collingwood was the anchorman or correspondent
for several broadcasts on Vietnam in late 1972 and early 1973.

Mr. Collingwood's assignments were of striking variety. In 1973, he was the
co-anchorman of the CBS News coverage of Princess Anne's wedding in London; in
1972, he was the New York anchorman for the network's coverage of President
Nixon's visit to China; in 1967, he covered the Arab-Israeli war, and in 1968,
he was the anchorman for CBS's reports from Prague during the Soviet occupation.

Mr. Collingwood also served as the host-narrator of the ''Chronicle'' series, as
the reporter on the ''Eyewitness'' series and as the host of the ''Adventure''
series.

He retired from CBS News in 1982, and served as a special correspondent until
his death.

He received many journalism awards, including the Peabody Award, two awards from
the National Headliners Club and several awards from the Overseas Press Club.

In 1975 Mr. Collingwood was appointed a commander in the Order of the British
Empire by Queen Elizabeth, in recognition of his contributions to
British-American friendship and understanding. He was also a chevalier of the
French Legion of Honor.

William S. Paley, the founder of CBS, said in a statement that Mr. Collingwood
''represented the very best - the highest standards of accuracy, honesty and
integrity, leavened with humanity and sensitivity.''

Mr. Collingwood was a native of Three Rivers, Mich., and a graduate of Cornell
University, where he majored in law and philosophy. During the summers, he
worked as a cowpuncher in California and a deckhand on a freighter. After
graduation, he went to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar.

He was married to the actress Louise Allbritton from 1946 until her death in
1979. He is survived by his second wife, the Swedish concert singer Tatiana
Angelini Jolin.

Funeral arrangements were incomplete last night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Collingwood (CBS News)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 KEY SENATORS JOIN IN ASSAULT ON THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


The chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and its senior Democrat have
begun a concerted assault on the way the American military is run, calling the
current system wasteful and dangerous.

In a series of speeches to prepare the way for a staff report next week, the
committee chairman, Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, and Senator
Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, portrayed the military as a confusion of
competing factions, quarreling over money in peacetime and tripping over one
another in battle.

''If we have to fight tomorrow, these problems will cause Americans to die
unnecessarily,'' Mr. Goldwater said. ''Even more, they may cause us to lose the
fight.''

Opening Shots of Campaign

Senate aides said the speeches this week were the opening of a campaign that
would eventually lead to legislation to streamline the military, impose greater
unity on the services and change the role of Congress in military affairs.

For advocates of reorganizing the military system, the enlistment of Senator
Goldwater is an important advance. In recent years the House has supported the
cause while the Republican-run Senate Armed Services Committee has been
considered an obstacle.

The Reagan Administration has staunchly resisted fundamental changes in how the
military is organized. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has said he is
generally satisfied with the system and has repeatedly dismissed calls for
change with the dictum, ''If it ain't broke, don't fix it.''

Mr. Goldwater, who hinted earlier that he might be sympathetic to changes in the
system, clearly broke ranks with the Administration this week. ''It is broke,
and we need to fix it,'' he said. ''It is clear that the Department of Defense
won't make the necessary changes.

''As someone who has devoted his entire life to the military, I am saddened that
the services are still unable to put national interest above parochial
interest,'' said Mr. Goldwater, who has retired from the Air Force Reserve after
37 years with a two-star general's rank.

The two Senators' speeches this week included a stinging denunciation of the
role of Congress. They pictured Congress as a dawdling, self-indulgent overseer,
preoccupied by trivia, jealous of its parochial interests, obsessed with how
much the military spends but indifferent, Senator Goldwater said, to ''what for,
why, and how well.''

Huddle Over a New Study

This weekend he led a dozen members of the Armed Services Committee and several
former top military officials to Fort A. P. Hill in Bowling Green, Va., for a
private discussion of a two-year, 600-page staff study of military organization
that is to be made public next week.

At that bipartisan retreat there were several former Defense Secretaries and
military Chiefs of Staff. A Senate aide said the Pentagon had asked to be
included but was not.

Although the Senators did not go into detail on how they would change the
system, most proposals, including one approved last month by a House Armed
Services subcommittee, call for strengthening the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff by giving him an independent staff, making him the chief military
adviser to the President, and allowing him to transmit orders from the President
to combat commanders.

In the current system, the Chairman is the spokesman for the Joint Chiefs, who
give advice and transmit orders as a committee. Critics say this produces
diluted advice and permits the services to work at cross-purposes.

Top Goldwater-Nunn Priority

Senate aides said the speeches this week - the texts of which the two Senators,
in turn, read aloud every morning to a nearly empty chamber as the Senate began
its business - were an orchestrated attempt by the two ranking committee members
to draw attention to an issue they have picked as their top priority for the
rest of the year.

In their speeches, the two men recounted quarrels or miscommunications among the
military services that hampered military operations, dating to the
Spanish-American War and continuing through the 1983 invasion of Grenada.

Senator Nunn told of an Army officer in the Grenada invasion who used his
American Telephone and Telegraph Company card to phone his office in North
Carolina. The officer was seeking to coordinate Navy air support for his troops
because Army units on the ground and the Navy's shipboard command post had
incompatible radios.

More recently, Mr. Nunn said, the fractious nature of the services hindered
readiness to handle medical emergencies such as the bombing of a Marine barracks
in Beirut and had larded the military budget with duplicated weapons.

Joint Chiefs' System 'Mushy'

The Senators assailed the Joint Chiefs' system for providing the President with
what Mr. Goldwater called ''mushy'' advice, including an ambiguous go-ahead for
President Kennedy's abortive Bay of Pigs venture and muted criticism of the
conduct of the war in Vietnam.

Congress compounds the problem, the Senators said, by tarrying over military
budgets until late in the year, then patching together stopgap spending bills,
like the 45-day spending measure approved this week, which give the military
little chance to plan ahead.

Senator Goldwater said a proliferation of subcommittees poking into military
affairs had led to time-consuming duplication and contradictory marching orders.
Last year, he said, while the services were working out their purchasing plans
for ammunition, ''half of Congress said 'buy more' and half said 'buy less.' ''

Exploiting of Factions Seen

He said the military services exploited factions in Congress to promote programs
they could not sell within the Pentagon. Senator Nunn said Congressional demands
for Pentagon reports and studies had multiplied to 458 last year from 36 in
1970, most of them suitable for a game of ''Trivial Pursuit.''

''Congress directed the Secretary of Defense to study the feasibility of selling
beef, pork and lamb produced in the United States in overseas commissaries,''
Mr. Nunn said. ''We didn't direct him to evaluate how well D.O.D. could meet our
overseas military commitment, however.''

The military programs bill still awaiting final House approval would provide a
two-year military budget, would allow the Pentagon to plan ahead and free
Congress to look at broader issues of policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS HONOR SOUTH AFRICAN VICTIMS

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


Nearly two thousand people, including the Rev. Benjamin J. Hooks, John Cardinal
O'Connor, Mayor Koch and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato gathered in Saint Patrick's
Cathedral yesterday morning for a memorial service commemorating black South
Africans who died in the last year during racial violence.

The service was part of a ''national day of mourning'' organized last month by
the Mayor and Mr. Hooks, the executive director of the N.A.A.C.P.

The ceremonies in New York City began with a 9:30 A.M. procession in midtown
Manhattan. The two-block march along 51st Street, led by city officials,
clergymen and labor leaders, ended 15 minutes later on the steps of the
cathedral.

During the procession, the Mayor said he was impressed by the number of people
who had turned out for the program despite threatening skies.

A Challenge to President

He also repeated his challenge to President Reagan to impose more stringent
economic and diplomatic sanctions against the South African Government.

''This march, and many more that are going to follow, will have an impact not
only on South Africa but on our own country and our own President,'' Mr. Koch
said. ''It's an appeal to the conscience of President Reagan that he should be
taking the lead. He could say that 'Unless you end apartheid, unless you lift
the yoke of oppression and lift martial law, we will stop your ships and your
planes from entering the United States.' ''

Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, conducted the
hourlong service, which was highlighted by a moving performance of the folk song
''Kum-Ba-Ya,'' sung by Glenn Jones. In his brief message, the Cardinal said that
South Africa's system of apartheid represented an assault on the fundamental
human rights of South Africa's black majority.

''The foundation of the biblical mission of the Christian tradition is the
conviction that every person is created in the image of God. Every person
reflects the presence of God. Apartheid tries to define the ultimate value of a
person on the basis of race or creed or color,'' Cardinal O'Connor said.
''Change in South Africa cannot come too quickly for those bearing the indignity
and the injustice of apartheid.''

Reference to Poet

Mr. Hooks, speaking in an emotional, poetic cadence, shaped his remarks around a
reference to the 19th-century American poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.

''Longfellow said that a man must either be an anvil or a hammer,'' Mr. Hooks
said. ''We, today, must be hammers shaping a new society rather than anvils
bolstering old ones.''

''Let us, as a nation, stand up for what is morally right rather than that which
is momentarily convenient. We must speed up the day when all of God's children
will enjoy the blessings of liberty, security and justice.''

Mayor Koch compared the news coverage of violence in South Africa with the
coverage of the United States' involvement in Vietnam.

''I believe that just as television brought the United States out of Vietnam
because of what Americans saw each and every night, in the same way television
coverage, night after night, will bring not only America but the entire world to
the side of the black citizens of South Africa.''

Comparison to Nazis

The Mayor urged Americans to recognize the similarities between apartheid and
Nazi oppression. ''I know in my mind, and I think you know in your hearts, that
what we are saying today is that South Africa rivals that which the world saw in
Nazi Germany in l933. Must we then wait 10 years before we do what is right?''

''I say that every decent American, every decent human being - I say the
President of the United States - must stand up and denounce South Africa.''

Similar programs were scheduled to take place in dozens of other cities,
according to the N.A.A.C.P.

To mark the day in Missouri, Mayor Larry Foster of Sedalia asked residents to
wear red ribbons to protest the ''brutal apartheid killings.'' In Salt Lake
City, a state senator and the local N.A.A.C.P. chapter sponsored an
anti-apartheid rally in front of the Federal building.

In New York, the day of mourning ended with an evening service conducted by
Rabbi Arthur Schneier at the Park East Synagogue, at 163 East 67th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of dignitaries attending service at St. Patrick's Cathedral
(NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEDIATION IS TAUGHT AS ALTERNATIVE TO COURTS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 43, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


With court calendars crowded and litigation increasingly costly, a movement is
growing in law and business schools to teach the use of negotiation and
mediation as alternatives to courts.

Labor and management have long used such techniques to resolve disputes. But at
a two-day conference at the New York University Law School this weekend some 125
law and business school professors were taught them so they could pass them on
to the next generation of lawyers and executives.

Some speakers at the conference, sponsored by the American Arbitration
Association and the National Institute for Dispute Resolution, cautioned that
many lawyers and executives preferred court settlements.

''Some clients would rather go down in flames,'' a professor at the Columbia
University Law School, Maurice Rosenberg, said. Some lawyers, he said, ''think
real advocates don't give ground.''

Robert B. McKay, an N.Y.U. law professor and the president of the City Bar
Association, said: ''The senior members of the bar often have not embraced the
techniques of alternative dispute resolution. The present generation of lawyers
is more receptive.''

Speakers stressed how useful the techniques could be in saving time and money in
resolving disputes.

Mr. Rosenberg said he saw three ways to reduce the dependence on court
settlements: restricting by law the kinds of disputes that may be brought to
court, creating new agencies to handle disputes in place of courts and
increasing mediation and arbitration as secondary procedures for courts. He said
the third method wass the most used.

The techniques of mediation were outlined by Prof. Leonard Greenhalgh of the
Amos Tuck Graduate School of Business Administration at Dartmouth. He said the
parties must be persuaded that issues they see as matters of principle could be
divided into smaller, resolvable issues.

The parties, he said, must be made to understand that they often can gain more
by settling than by continuing disputes, and that long-term relationships
outweigh immediate conflicts.

The task of alternative-dispute managers, he said, is to move parties in
disputes from believing that their principles are so important that they cannot
be compromised and that by maintaining uncompromising attitudes they will win
all their goals.

In resolving conflicts, Professor Greenhalgh said, both sides must often be made
to appear to be winners.

Asked whether someone who followed his principles could be accused of
manipulating clients, Professor Greenhalgh said that resolving disputes must
involve helping clients alter positions. ''I'm not advocating manipulation in
any form,'' he said.

Judge Jack B. Weinstein, chief judge of the Federal District Court of the
Eastern District of New York, said his court would soon start using a panel of
arbritrators for all cases involving claims for damages of $50,000 or less.

Judge Weinstein, the architect of the Agent Orange settlement, which involved
claims by Vietnam veterans who said they had been injured by exposure to the
defoliant Agent Orange, sounded a cautionary note about the process. Arbitration
itself can be expensive, he said, and access to the courts is a fundamental
right that cannot be ignored in the quest for efficiency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ELIZABETH WILLIAMS FULBRIGHT; WIFE OF EX-SENATOR WAS 79

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 44, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


Elizabeth Williams Fulbright, wife of former Senator J. William Fulbright of
Arkansas, died today at her home here. She was 79 years old.  Mrs. Fulbright had
been ill for some time, according to her daughter, Roberta Fulbright Foote.

Mrs. Fulbright was born in Philadelphia and grew up there. She married Mr.
Fulbright in 1932.

Mr. Fulbright, a Democrat, was a member of the Senate from 1945 to 1974. He was
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during the Vietnam War and
held widely publicized hearings on United States aims in Southeast Asia.

Mrs. Fulbright was widely regarded as an effective campaigner for her husband.

A columnist in The Washington Post once identified her as possibly ''the most
popular Senate wife''

In addition to her daughter Mrs. Foote, of Coral Gables, Fla., Mrs. Fulbright is
survived by her husband and another daughter, Elizabeth Fulbright Winnacker of
Columbia, Mo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JESSICA LANGE TRIES ON ANOTHER LIFE

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words


In ''Sweet Dreams,'' Jessica Lange plays the part of the late Patsy Cline, an
ebullient, freewheeling, country-and-western singer, who struts around in
calf-high cowboy boots and is unabashedly chunky.

Intensely private, obsessed about staying slim and so self-conscious about her
voice that she doesn't even sing in the shower, Miss Lange says the persona of
Miss Cline could not be more remote from herself.

But it was just this that attracted her to the part.

''She was direct,'' said Miss Lange during an interview at her suite in the
Carlyle, where - five months pregnant and with only a trace of eye shadow - she
looked radiant in a loose-fitting blue blouse over black trousers.

''There was nothing hidden or neurotic or withheld,'' Miss Lange said. ''Those
are great qualities. Something I never played before. Tremendous ranges in
emotion that last 30 to 40 seconds. Nothing harbored. Like a firecracker going
off all the time. I felt that at this time in my life it was a good exercise as
a person to play this character.''

The movie ''Sweet Dreams,'' which opened last week, chronicles the life of Miss
Cline, who started singing in the local taverns of northern Virginia, was
discovered by a Nashville agent and performed such songs as ''Crazy'' and
''Cheating Heart'' at the Grand Ole Opry. She was killed at the age of 30 in a
plane crash that ironically catapulted her to a greater celebrity in death than
she ever enjoyed in life.

At the heart of the film is Miss Cline's tempestuous relationship with her
second husband, Charlie Dick (played in the film by Ed Harris), who is depicted
as being alternately delighted and defeated by his wife's mounting success. The
two share a passionate - at times violent - union replete with shouting,
bickering, taunting and smashing plates that lends an urgency to their
relationship in bed.

With her hair dark brown and knotted with spray and intentionally 10 pounds
heavier, Miss Lange appears buxom in ''Sweet Dreams'' and far more earthy than
the blond, ethereal beauty she has consistently portrayed in such films as
''Tootsie,'' ''The Postman Always Rings Twice,'' ''Frances'' and ''King Kong.''
Yet as remote as Miss Lange said she found the persona of Patsy Cline - and in
particular the singer's absence of vanity - Miss Lange said she identified
instantly with the overwrought, self-destructive streak of her romantic
passions.

''It was familiar,'' Miss Lange said. ''I saw it very clearly.''

Miss Lange, who has always been reticent about her romantic liaisons, said that
until recently her perpetual quest for intensity had plagued her own romantic
life.

''It was a trap for me,'' she said. ''As long as it was passionate. Either
negative or positive. Then I knew it was love. As long as it was extreme. That
was its validity. As soon as anything became too settled, too regular, too
placid, I'd have to get in there with the Mixmaster to make sure things were
still cooking.''

Miss Lange said that since she began living with Sam Shepard, the actor and
playwright, all that has changed. The couple alternate between Mr. Shepard's
home in New Mexico and Miss Lange's log cabin on a lake in Minnesota. They are
in New York for the next several months as Mr. Shepard mounts his latest play,
''A Lie of the Mind.'' Miss Lange's 4-year-old daughter, Alexandra, whose father
is Mikhail Baryshnikov, is with them, as is a perfectly clipped standard black
poodle. Miss Lange's baby is due in January, and although she and Mr. Shepard
have no specific plans to marry - Miss Lange derides society's conventions - she
said that marriage to Mr. Shepard was ''an absolute possibility.''

Unlike her part in the movie ''Country,'' which she co-produced, Miss Lange said
she came to play the role of Patsy Cline almost by accident. She had barely
heard of the singer when her agent sent her a copy of Robert Getchell's script,
and Miss Lange said she was instantly drawn to Miss Cline's zestful, childlike
personality. She also had been eager to act in a love story and was intrigued
that Miss Cline's biography was organized around her relationship with her
husband.

Portraying Miss Cline, Miss Lange said, was ''the most fun I've ever had.'' She
said that she found the part ''liberating'' because, among other things, it
forced her to sing; something she has been reluctant to do since childhood. Miss
Lange describes her voice tersely as being ''disappointing.'' Although the
entire vocal portion of the film's soundtrack is composed of recordings by Miss
Cline, Miss Lange would belt out the songs herself during the frequent scenes in
which Miss Cline is portrayed on stage.

''For me it was an extraordinary thing,'' said Miss Lange of using her voice.

Miss Lange spoke of the difficulty in preparing for the role because beyond
still photographs of Miss Cline, who died in 1963, and several old television
clippings there was little tangible evidence of how the singer behaved. Miss
Lange said she met with numerous individuals who had known Miss Cline, but
''they all remember what they want to remember.'' Almost no one could tell her
about how Miss Cline walked, for example, or whether she had any special quirks
of expression or gesture. The trouble, too, Miss Lange said, was that the style
of the day was for a singer to simply stand prim and proper at the microphone
and belt out songs almost without physical expression.

It was Miss Cline's mother, Hilda Hensley (portrayed in the film by Anne
Wedgeworth), who provided Miss Lange with the one detail around which she found
she could focus Miss Cline. It was just a simple movement - how Miss Cline would
gesture behind her back to the musicians - but Miss Lange said it helped her
crystallize the character's stage persona.

Miss Lange said she believed the role of Patsy Cline was the most ''complete''
she has ever played and among the most instructive.

''Patsy never over-thought anything,'' Miss Lange said. ''That's a good lesson
for me. Things with her were fast, expedient. I tend to overthink. If she was
angry, she got angry. I knew I had to do that in life. I had a sack on my back
with old emotions and I kept toting them around -anger, guilt.''

Miss Lange said that she regards every part she plays as a personal exercise.
When she portrayed the actress Frances Farmer, the tortured heroine of
''Frances,'' for example, the role provided her with an opportunity to explore
the depths of her own anger, an exercise she found at once fascinating but
debilitating and difficult on those around her.

''I'll never do a role like that again,'' she said, adding that there are few
roles these days that are of interest to her. ''I don't want to work for the
money. I don't want to work for the work. I don't need to validate my
existence.''

At one point during the interview Mr. Shepard arrived unexpectedly, and Miss
Lange leapt to his side in midsentence as if she had not seen him for weeks.
Without a word of explanation, the two disappeared into the bedroom from where
they could be heard giggling for at least 15 minutes.

On returning, Miss Lange offered un-self-consciously that whereas years ago she
believed separations were important in keeping couples together, she no longer
believes that. She said she has a lifelong commitment to ''taking care of'' Mr.
Shepard and that the only area of independence they maintain is in the process
of their work. Even when they collaborate on projects (as they did in
''Country,'' in which they played opposite each other in a film about the plight
of Middle Western farmers), ''We don't get into explanations,'' she said. ''It's
organic. That's how I like it.'' She says that Mr. Shepard rarely asks her
advice on plays. She rarely asks his advice on her performance.

Miss Lange speaks obliquely of slowing down, of not wanting to drag her daughter
around on location now that she has started school. She speaks of having become
''more selective'' in her choice of parts, about not wanting to take on roles
unless ''something captures my imagination.''

Then Miss Lange mentions something about having no discipline and being
fundamentally lazy. Yet in the next breath, her eyes widen and she speaks with
animation about plans to play opposite Diane Keaton and Sissy Spacek in a film
of Beth Henley's Pulitzer Prize-winning play, ''Crimes of the Heart,'' which is
to be directed by Bruce Beresford.

Although her experience producing ''Country'' was in large part a struggle, Miss
Lange is unequivocally positive when asked if she ever plans to become involved
in producing movies again. She mentions that she has optioned the film rights to
Jayne Anne Phillips's novel, ''Machine Dreams,'' a tale about a West Virginia
couple and their two children and what becomes of them in the wake of the 1960's
and Vietnam. She says she asked Miss Phillips to write the screenplay and when
the novelist declined, Miss Lange - who has never written anything in her life -
said she would do it herself.

''The first draft is done,'' Miss Lange said, looking around the room for a
piece of wood. She raps a knuckle on a glass coffee table.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jessica Lange and Patsy Cline

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MIND OF THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; Leslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security
correspondent.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5128 words


RONALD REAGAN IS unique in the history of American Presidents. He is alone in
possessing the mind of both an ideologue and a politician.

He has all the moral force and power that swell from absolute conviction. His
rhetorical lightning bolts about what is good and evil seem to set him apart
from the world of waffling politicians. Yet, unlike other true believers who
have ascended the national stage -like a Barry Goldwater or a William Jennings
Bryan - he is a natural horse-trader, often compromising his positions to move
toward his political ends.

Somehow, this contradictory cast of mind works for Ronald Reagan. In political
terms, he has been an extraordinary success. His popularity remains
astronomical. For all of his compromises, he still manages to look like a man of
unbending principle. He has seen many of his ideas translated into legislation,
and helped move the national agenda in his direction - toward the right.

Yet the President's commitment to his principles has led him to take
extraordinary, controversial actions, such as running up unprecedented budget
deficits and igniting new military competition with the Soviet Union in space.
Critics and even members of his own staff question just how deeply he
understands the issues in these and other areas. They worry about his frequent
carelessness with the facts.

How can one understand the mind of Ronald Reagan?

That was the central question posed in dozens of interviews with President
Reagan's past and present aides, with his adversaries and during an hour-long
interview with the President himself. They were also asked how he goes about
making decisions, his sense of history, his system for getting information, the
roles played by his wife and his aides.

What emerged was a rich, provocative and sometimes contradictory portrait. Not
one of the friends and aides interviewed, for example, suggested that the
President was, in any conventional sense, analytical, intellectually curious or
well-informed - even though it would have been easy and natural for them to say
so. They clearly did not think it necessary. Time and again, they painted a
picture of a man who had serious intellectual shortcomings but was a political
heavyweight, a leader whose instincts and intuition were right more often than
their own analyses. His mind, they said, is shaped almost entirely by his own
personal history, not by pondering on history books - he thinks anecdotally, not
analytically.

The President's mind, they suggested, turns on two philosophical poles, truth
and necessity. To him, truths are simple and he knows them. He may momentarily
yield if he feels he has no choice politically, but he almost invariably keeps
coming back to his principles. And he is tough-minded and stubborn about it. No
sooner does he compromise (as he did in 1981, approving a tax measure that had
fewer breaks for business than he wanted) than he reaffirms his goal (slashing
Government regulation of business). He is a sincere believer, his aides say, but
they also depict him as a man who is quite capable of sophisticated maneuvering
that includes the usual kinds of political deception.

These are the keys to Ronald Reagan's thinking - and to his political success as
head of the Screen Actors Guild, as Governor of California and President of the
United States. His critics have often attributed those successes to his skills
as the ''Great Communicator'' or to bumbling good luck. But the President knows
what he is doing, when to yield and when to fight, and he talked freely about it
during an interview in the Oval Office.

At one point, he was asked about criticism of some of the political compromises
he has made. He said he knew who the critics were.  ''Die-hard conservatives
thought that if I couldn't get everything I asked for, I should jump off the
cliff with the flag flying - go down in flames. No, if I can get 70 or 80
percent of what it is I'm trying to get, yes I'll take that and then continue to
try to get the rest in the future. And maybe it's easier to get it as they see
that this works. And this was what they were critical of. They couldn't stand it
that I would compromise and settle for less than I'd ask.''

Just within the past month, President Reagan has dramatically demonstrated this
political flexibility on foreign trade. For four and a half years, he stoutly
resisted protectionist pressures from Congress. But with the trade deficit
approaching $150 billion for the year, and with Congress threatening its own
action, he shifted ground - seeking subsidies for American exports and driving
down the value of the dollar to make American imports dearer and exports
cheaper.

The President was very much in control of the interview, during which we were
seated side-by-side facing a camera in front of the fireplace. Asked why he had
been underestimated throughout his political life, he lost his smile. Turning
his head, he fixed me with a hard stare as if hitching up his belt for a barroom
brawl. ''By whom?'' he wanted to know. That toughness, natural and purposeful,
was in evidence every time he felt challenged.

''The polls kind of indicate that the job rating right now is very reassuring,''
he continued. Maybe, he said, people had sometimes underestimated him because of
''my previous profession'' as an actor. ''You know, it was only a generation ago
that actors couldn't be buried in the church-yard.''

The President said what he wanted to say, his mind never wavering from that
goal. He was asked about his sense of history. ''You have to have an historical
background for really sane policy decisions,'' he replied. Then he told about
doing his ''own research'' while writing speeches early in his career, and that
led suddenly to an explanation of how he stopped being a New Deal Democrat when
he came to believe that ''government had grown beyond the consent of the
governed and that it was government that was contributing to our economic woes -
and incidentally, I'm not an intellectual, but my degree was in economics.''

He was asked to explain some of his contradictory statements and actions. He
condemned the Panama Canal Treaty before becoming President, but has done
nothing about it since. ''Well, it's passed.'' He had called the signed but
unratified SALT II Treaty of 1979 ''fatally flawed,'' but has been informally
observing its terms as President. ''I learned that the Soviet Union had a
capacity to increase weaponry much faster than the treaty permitted, and we
didn't.'' What about the huge national debt - it has more than doubled in the
five years of his Administration - in light of his promise to eliminate
deficits? ''They aren't quite as far out of line if you take them as a
percentage of gross national product.''

It was an interview with a man who had a clear idea of what he wanted to
accomplish and how to go about it. Yet, according to his friends and aides, he
can be complex, opaque. They had trouble explaining his occasional moral
obtuseness -as in his statement that the German soldiers buried in the cemetery
at Bitburg were ''victims of Nazism . . . victims, just as surely as the victims
in the concentration camps.'' Faced with a decision, he will usually consult
with his staff and take their advice, but sometimes he suddenly veers off on his
own in entirely new, untried directions. He can be so secretive that his aides
could not predict with any confidence what kind of compromises he might make,
either at the November summit meeting in Geneva with Soviet leader Mikhail S.
Gorbachev or with Congressional leaders on tax reform and trade.

In so many ways, for good or ill, Ronald Reagan is a different kind of
President.

ONE KEY TO PRESIDENT

Reagan's success is that he's always been underestimated,'' says Michael K.
Deaver, aide to Governor Reagan in California, deputy chief of staff in the
first Presidential term and a close personal friend of Nancy Reagan. It has been
said again and again by those who have worked with and against the President,
but it never seems to sink in.

The standard line from most academics and commentators is that the President is
ignorant, dogmatic and lucky - very lucky - and that he gets by on being a nice
guy and a master of the media. But that ignores eight successful years as
Governor, four as President and a resounding re-election in 1984. No one is that
lucky, that nice and that sonorous.

Time after time during his Presidency, Ronald Reagan has demonstrated his
unrelenting determination to have his way. In the process, he may outrage
supporters, employ sophistry, totally reverse his position while all the while
denying it. Yet he is also capable of making the kind of difficult decisions his
recent predecessors in the White House have avoided. It is a different cast of
mind.

Richard Nixon and Jimmy Carter, for example, often played at the margins of
issues, moving incrementally. President Nixon withdrew from Vietnam slowly, over
years, and never finished the job; President Reagan withdrew American forces
from Lebanon in a single stroke. President Carter tinkered with the economy;
President Reagan made bold, vast changes.

Previous Presidents have spent their days reading lengthy position papers,
meeting with outside experts, keeping up to the minute on international
developments. But President Reagan, according to legislators and others who see
him privately, generally shows little knowledge about most subjects under
discussion. They say that his participation in discussions is often exhausted
after he has read aloud the information his staff has written for him on
three-by-five index cards.

According to a member of the President's Commission on Strategic Forces, ''He
never participated in meetings beyond what he'd been told to say by Bud
McFarlane.'' (Robert C. McFarlane is the President's national security adviser.)
''He didn't understand what it was we were trying to do with strategic programs
and arms control. He just understood that what we were recommending was the way
to get the MX missile.''

But whatever the President did or did not understand, he bought the commission's
compromise proposal, worked out a deal with Congress and got his missile.

Controversy has erupted this year over the President's words and actions
concerning Bitburg and South Africa. How was it possible that a President could
be so unthoughtful and so ill-informed?

During the course of a European tour, the White House announced, the President
would visit the German military cemetery at Bitburg. When it became known that
Nazi S.S. troops were buried there, the uproar began. According to some of the
aides directly involved in the issue, virtually all of the President's staff
recommended that the visit be canceled. Nancy Reagan agreed, says a senior aide,
''because she felt it was a no-win situation and would ruin the President's
whole trip to Europe.'' The President's comment equating soldiers and Holocaust
victims added fuel to the fire.

But the President was adamant. The senior aide quotes the President as telling
his staff: ''I don't want you to change anything. History will show I'm doing
the right thing.'' He was going to prove to the German Government that he was a
staunch ally, and, according to several of his aides, he predicted that the
incident would soon be forgotten.

Why did he make the ''victims of Nazism'' remark? Some of his aides suggest that
their boss just did not think the issue through and spoke off the top of his
head. In the interview in the Oval Office, he insisted: ''Never would I ever
suggest that those other victims were victims in the same sense as the victims
of the Holocaust.'' Yet that was in fact the suggestion he had made, seeking to
justify his visit to the German cemetery.

In August, President Reagan declared that the Government of South Africa had
''eliminated the segregation that we once had in our own country.'' The
statement produced an uproar.

But the President had made the remark as part of a defense of his firmly held
policy at the time, that the best means of influencing Pretoria was to avoid
public condemnation of the Government there. And though he somewhat backed off
from his words, he was still ambivalent. At a press conference, the President
said he hadn't intended to say what he did, and he went on: ''I did know that
all the people that have been coming back here have been reporting to me on how
widespread was this, and I'm sorry that I carelessly gave the impression that I
believed that it had been totally eliminated. There are areas where it hasn't.''
Indeed, most areas.

Not for the first time, the President was - after having a factual error pointed
out - hanging tough, even repeating the original error. A willingness to
knowingly bend the truth if it serves his cause is part of the political
technique of most Presidents. President Reagan does not normally get blamed for
it. But this is the same man who, while refusing to publicly name Communist
sympathizers before the House Un-American Activities Committee in the 1950's,
was privately providing the names to the F.B.I.

Michael Deaver sees his former boss in somewhat different terms: ''The President
has been accused of contradicting himself and denies it, and he believes his
denials. He rationalizes them in his own mind. When it comes to changing
positions, he convinces himself that it has to be done in the short term, but he
keeps his goals.''

These qualities were clearly demonstrated in President Reagan's decisions on
Lebanon and on the deficit.

When the President sent the Marines to Lebanon, he declared that the viability
of that nation was vital to American security. Congress went along with the
decision. When he took the Marines out, after 241 Americans were killed by a
terrorist bomb and Lebanon lay in chaos, he insisted that their mission had been
accomplished.

A senior Administration official explained the President's moves this way: ''The
statement about getting into Lebanon, the importance of Lebanon, was made to
justify the action. He believed in the vitalness of Lebanon because that is what
his briefing papers said. When it was time to take the Marines out, I don't
think he believed their job was done, as he said publicly. He had to put the
best face on a bad situation.''

In the end, President Reagan decided to cut his losses, even though he knew it
would be viewed by many as confirming a major policy error. Other Presidents
have been unwilling to face that consequence.

Ronald Reagan showed equal boldness when it came to making the decisions that
led to the doubling of the Federal deficit. According to a senior Administration
official, the President was well aware that the burgeoning deficit could lead to
a severe economic downturn. He was also aware that tax cuts and increased
military spending -two of his most cherished goals - could make it necessary for
the Government to borrow more money, worsening the deficit. But, the official
says, ''If Reagan has to choose between taxing and borrowing to cut the deficit,
he believes that borrowing is the lesser of the two evils.''

He also continues to believe that his tax cuts will produce enough economic
growth eventually to take care of the deficit. Most economic analysts disagree.
Even his advisers are uncertain, feeling less optimistic about the prospects of
growth. But although his staff has great influence with him on most matters,
Ronald Reagan thinks like a gambler when it comes to the big issues. He trusts
his instinct and so far, it has paid off for him.

ONE OF THE PRESIDENT'S real strengths is his inner compass,'' says Treasury
Secretary James A. Baker 3d who served as White House chief of staff in the
first term. ''He not only believes certain things strongly but has believed them
for a long time.''

Perhaps more than anyone in American politics, Ronald Reagan is the embodiment
of 20th-century America - the radio announcer, the movie star, the television
host for General Electric's ''Death Valley Days.'' It has been an era of
communication, of symbols; make-believe has become central to our daily lives -
more real than reality.

He got ahead easily and without much apparent pain or effort. Self-confidence
and optimism became ingrained in his whole outlook. Nothing was impossible for a
man born under a lucky star.

Books never played a major role in his early years. The President likes to say,
as he did in the interview, that he is ''a voracious reader'' and ''history
buff.'' But neither he nor his friends, when asked, could think of particular
history books he had read or historians he liked.

Rather, it seems, the President's ideas about the world flow from his life, from
personal history rather than studies. He developed, not so much a coherent
philosophy, as a set of convictions, lodged in his mind as maxims.

From his Bible-quoting mother came a kind of fundamentalism. He grew up with a
strong sense of right and wrong, with a view of the world as a battleground of
good and evil. ''Mr. Reagan believes in a literal interpretation of the Bible,''
says Michael Deaver.

From his father, a down-on-his-luck, New Deal Democrat, and from the experience
of growing up in a small town in Illinois, came his populist instincts,
including nationalism and anti-elitism. The anti-elitism emerged as
anti-intellectualism, in attacks on the Northeast establishment and, ultimately,
in speeches denouncing the bureaucrats of Washington. There does not seem to be
any hint of populist racism in his personal life, but he came out against early
civil-rights legislation and has consistently opposed affirmative action. During
his presidency of the Screen Actors Guild from 1947 to 1952, while battling a
Communist takeover of the union, his nationalism began to encompass a fervid
anti-Communism. It became almost his entire worldview, expressed in tough
anti-Soviet rhetoric, a deep suspicion about negotiating with the Russians and
frequent demands for greater and greater American military power.

Another element became part of Ronald Reagan's set of beliefs as he went around
the country delivering his famous speech for G.E. and as Nancy Reagan began to
bring big-business executives into their social life. He chose to become a
Republican. He managed to reconcile his new devotion to capitalism with his
populism, insisting that if the reins of Government were removed, business would
boom, spreading prosperity to all the people.

Everything locked into place in that G.E. speech. There he spoke of tax reform,
school prayer, the dangers of appeasing the Russians. Above all, he called for
getting the Government off the backs of the people and of business.

By the time he became Governor of California in 1967, Ronald Reagan's ideas were
fully formed. In fact, Michael Deaver could recall only two instances when his
boss agonized over a decision. As Governor, he had to take a stand on abortion
and ''he had never really thought that out before,'' Mr. Deaver says. ''So, he
talked to lawyers and doctors and came to the opinion that a fetus was a human
being. Then he held to this view from then on.'' Capital punishment was the
second instance. ''He was the first governor to put anyone to death in eight or
nine years,'' Mr. Deaver says. ''He had his minister fly up to Sacramento and
talked for a couple of hours in 1967. Then, he went ahead with the execution.''

Since those days, Mr. Deaver says, ''He has seldom admitted changing his mind on
anything. I can't think of an instance.'' And that view was echoed by Mr. Reagan
himself, when he was asked whether he had changed his mind or learned anything
as President. He responded, ''I'm continuing the same thing that we did in
California,'' namely: ''to reduce the size of government.''

R ONALD REAGAN'S old friends and aides believe that, once he became Governor, he
made certain assumptions about his future. If he just stuck to his fixed ideas
and never budged, he would end up being a one-term Governor, or possibly a
Senator. The public had rarely elected ideologues to executive positions - and
never to the Presidency.

The first order of business was to find a staff that could both stand up for the
truth and bend to necessity. The people around him in California and later in
Washington have always included both ideologues (to vouch for his continuing
ideological purity) and conservative pragmatists (to get the job done).

What happens if the two groups clash? Says Mr. Deaver, ''He appreciates that he
needs expediters and technicians who get the best deal for him. When there's a
conflict of the people around him, he opts for keeping the pragmatists.''

The Governor's office and the White House staff became bargaining machines - not
eager to compromise, but willing. According to a former top White House
official, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. ''always says that the problem of
compromising with the President is that every time you compromise, Reagan gets
80 percent of what he wants.'' Actually, the former official continued, ''he'll
take 40 percent and call it 80.''

Meanwhile, throughout the process, the President denies that he is a politician,
even to his staff. He is a far cry from Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson who
were forever bragging to their aides about how clever or cynical they were.

During the interview, without being asked, the President told of a speech he
gave his staff after he became Governor: ''I told them that the one thing I did
not want to hear was the political ramifications of any issue. I wanted only to
hear debate on what was good or bad for the people, because the minute you start
thinking about votes and political things, it's a bit like seeing a player's
card -you can't take out of your mind that you know where that card is no matter
how honest you want to be.''

President Reagan may believe every word of it, but at the same time, some of his
aides see it as part of his conscious, political technique.

''He once described to me how he got into politics by accident,'' says a former
senior Administration official. ''He told me he told someone, 'By God, what am I
doing in politics? The kinds of things I've done so far are far away from this.
But then I thought that a substantial part of the political thing is acting and
role playing and I know how to do that. So I used to worry, but I don't
anymore.' ''

I N GENERAL, SAYS former Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., ''The President is easy to
predict.'' And virtually all of the President's aides and friends agreed that,
with some important exceptions, if you know his basic positions, you know what
decisions he will make. ''He's extraordinarily analytical to test the options
against his philosophy,'' says a senior aide. The President puts his mind to the
big picture. The details he leaves to his aides, giving them power that is
unprecedented among modern Presidencies.

Says a senior White House aide: ''The President is not terribly interested in
the process, and for a long time I wasn't sure he knew what I did. He's
comfortable letting advisers come to him and tell him the issues and options,
and then he'll use his anecdotes.''

These are the maxims -some of his aides call them ''parables'' - that seem to be
central to the way the President's mind works. Often, it is not the logic of an
argument that he remembers or calls upon but a circumstance or story that
connects the issue at hand to his set of basic principles. And these anecdotes,
his staff says, are often the last word on a matter; the staff is expected to go
forth and carry out the boss's wishes.

The President's experience at the Screen Actors Guild, for example, may be cited
when the subject is negotiation with the Russians, the message being: don't
trust Communists. Or when his aides talk to him about the deficit, he often
recalls that President Kennedy's tax cut stimulated the economy, the message
being: stand fast against tax increases.

In fact, logical arguments do not always sway President Reagan. As a former
adviser puts it: ''If I told him something was probable or improbable, that
might not be persuasive because his life has been full of improbables that
worked out. It worked for him to be optimistic against long odds.''

By all accounts, his aides feel free to debate openly in front of the President,
short of directly challenging his basic beliefs. They say he is a good listener.
At most meetings, though, the President sits quietly. If he offers an opinion,
he seldom sets forth his underlying reasoning. Often, he keeps his own counsel
entirely.

Sometimes, the President will stake out a new position on his own - with little
input from his aides or even in the face of their opposition. This was the case
with his idea for the Strategic Defense Initiative. After a few casual
conversations on the subject with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and others, he
informed his aides that he wanted them to prepare a speech for him outlining a
bold new space-oriented missile defense system. Many staff members disagreed
with the scope of his plan, as did most military experts and members of
Congress, but found themselves yielding in the face of his unbending will.

The President's system for getting information is a critical factor in his
decision-making. According to his aides, he relies primarily on staff memos,
which generally are not detailed analyses. The staff also sends him letters that
tend to support his beliefs. He skims the headlines of several daily newspapers,
essentially looking for anecdotal material and editorial positions, usually not
reading the main news stories. Friends send along magazine articles, mainly from
conservative journals such as Human Events and Commentary. (A recent article in
Commentary suggesting that discrimination had been essentially eliminated in
South Africa was behind his controversial comment to that effect, his aides
say.) Members of the President's staff never know just what information the
President will remember from his reading or how he may use it. ''Reagan has
grown up in an intellectual cocoon where he can go from ill-informed articles to
reasonably conclusive statements,'' says a former White House aide who is now
elsewhere in the Administration. ''Other people would normally ask who wrote the
article, what's his reputation, what do others think. Reagan will go with a fact
or observation without going through a rigorous process.''

A member of the current White House staff describes his mission in these terms:
''You have to treat him as if you were the director and he was the actor, and
you tell him what to say and what not to say, and only then does he say the
right thing.'' The President's aides frequently refer to his ''intellectual
passivity.''

On domestic issues, the leeway given the staff will vary with the subject matter
and particular issue. On economic questions, the President may take an active
role - he usually, for example, goes down the prospective budget, giving his
decision on each item. But on most matters, he offers his views and expects
aides to find ways to accomplish those ends -through legislation, the courts or
Government regulations.

On foreign policy issues, where the President is less knowledgeable and less
confident, the staff is generally ceded even greater power. In those matters
where there is conflict among the aides, they tend to come up with a consensus
that seldom breaks new ground.

Among those who have been pushing the President to take a greater role on arms
control issues, aides say, is his wife. According to Mr. Deaver, Nancy Reagan
''is the most important person in his decisions. But on the big issues - like
Bitburg, taxes, defense spending - he's very independent. She thinks more about
his place in history than the President does. He doesn't think about it at all,
except to say that he wants people to say he did the best he could.''

I NTELLECTUAL CAPA- bility? That's the wrong question,'' a former senior
economic adviser replied. ''The right question is, does he get the right answer?
In my experience, he fails the essay questions but gets the multiple choices.''

Some critics see the President as being simple-minded. Rather, a number of his
aides suggest, he is simplistic. That is, he reduces complications to simple
symbols and images of good and bad, American and un-American. That allows him to
cut through the complexities that bewilder and hold no interest for the general
public, putting him squarely on the public's wavelength.

The President's cast of mind and political technique have given him a major hand
in reshaping the nation's attitudes toward the proper role of government in the
economy and the need for greater military spending. He has also restored the
public confidence that was so shaken by the events in the Administration of his
predecessor. In fact, two aspects of that earlier time - double-digit inflation
with high interest rates and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan - gave Ronald
Reagan a running start in his effort to win the country to his beliefs.

Today, though, he faces a new set of problems, with an economy faltering under
the weight of budget and trade deficits and the possibility of a new,
increasingly expensive and fruitless round of arms competition with Moscow. How
will he respond?

If past performance is any indication, the President will not wait until failure
overtakes him. If the economy starts to run sharply downhill, he will try the
other solutions - perhaps even some of those very measures he has so long
derided, such as increased taxes and decreased military spending. He would most
likely blame the decisions on everybody else and call them by another name, but
he would do it.

The President could count on substantial support from Congress and from some of
his key aides if he took such steps. On the issue of arms control, though, a
departure from form might run into trouble. A number of his key national
security aides, particuarly those in the Pentagon, strongly oppose offering
major compromises to Moscow on arms control. If an agreement is what the
President wants, and it seems that it is, he would need the cooperation of his
whole team, and even then he would face hard bargaining with the Russians.

President Reagan's thinking and technique have been enormously successful at the
simpler, negative tasks of hammering away at ''big government'' and rhetorically
bashing the Soviet Union. These were relatively easy targets, a matter of
checking the right boxes. But looming ahead are some dangerous economic icebergs
and an intricate summit meeting in Geneva with the Russian leader - more complex
enterprises that will test whether the mind of Ronald Reagan can construct
creative political essays.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan in Oval Office (NYT/George Tames); Photo of
sign, ''It CAN be done.'', on Reagan's desk (Stanley Tretick); Photo of Reagan
walking with advisers (Chick Harrity/U.S.N.&W.R.) (Page 22); Photo of Nancy
Reagan (Dennis Brack/Black Star) (Page 23); Photo of the Reagans, c. 1913 (AP)
(Page 24); Photo of Reagan at press conference, 1972 (Pictorial Parade) (Page
28); Photo of

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


Surprising, the number of college professors who have written mystery novels.
The latest to join the crowd is Peter Levi, with GRAVE WITNESS (St. Martin's,
$11.95). Mr. Levi is the Professor of Poetry at Oxford University.

Naturally, he is an erudite man. One expects the Oxford Professor of Poetry to
write a book sprinkled with all kinds of allusions and citations, poetic and
otherwise. And one is not disappointed. Mr. Levi's hero is an Oxford
archeologist who glories in the name of Ben Jonson.

He becomes friends with an older archeologist, an eccentric of tremendous
learning who does not publish. The old man, digging on his own property, has
opened a mound and found a Greek artifact of unusual value. He goes for an
opinion to Jonson, who is puzzled. How did a piece of sixth-century B.C. Greek
pottery in perfect condition find its way into an Oxfordshire grave?

Murder follows, and Jonson starts suspecting a hoax. Matters are developed very
nicely by Mr. Levi, who has written an unusually gripping first mystery. There
even is a bit of strenuous action, and romance as well. In these elements the
author breaks no new ground. But he has the university life and the speech
habits of scholars down pat, and he can be very amusing. He also seems to know
certain specialized aspects of British archeology, and he introduces his sources
and references painlessly.

Two years ago Eric Wright introduced the Canadian policeman Charlie Salter in
''The Night the Gods Smiled.'' That was a fine book, and it was succeeded by
another good one, ''Smoke Detector.'' Now comes the third Salter, DEATH IN THE
OLD COUNTRY (Scribners, $12.95).

The Old Country is England, where Salter and his wife, the strong-minded Annie,
are on vacation. The landlord of the inn at which they are staying is murdered,
and his wife confesses. But something is fishy, and Salter helps the local
police. He has to work with a tough British veteran who is smarter than he
appears. Smarter, indeed, than Salter, who is plenty smart himself, realizes.
There is some pleasant thrust and parry between the two cops. Salter takes it on
himself to go to Florence for an essential fact, and he does solve the case. At
least partly.

The Salter series is a valuable addition to the roster of procedurals. Mr.
Wright deliberately goes about everything in a rather low key, but the plotting
is impeccable and the characters nicely fleshed out; there is a highly civilized
feeling to the books. The author is especially successful in his dialogue. He
never strains for effect, and his people talk as quiet, well-bred people do or
as tough cops do or as men in the street do.

William Krasner, on the other hand, strains for effect in RESORT TO MURDER
(Scribners, $13.95). This is a Detective Capt. Sam Birge procedural. Birge works
in a Middle Western city and finds himself in a hassle with the chief of police
in a small nearby town. Who has jurisdiction over the case of a man, shot in the
small town, who dies in a hospital in Birge's territory?

The man was shot by one of the small-town cops, a deputy sheriff who claims he
was defending himself. But many witnesses say the deputy is lying. As it turns
out, he is a paranoid Vietnam veteran, a neo-Nazi and a very dangerous man.
Something unexpected happens, and Birge has to work with the old, canny
small-town chief of police.

The writing is often very talky and even pretentious in spots. Mr. Krasner has
not yet learned that less can be more. On the other hand, he can be a sensitive
writer who successfully creates convincing characters. Certainly the old police
chief shines believably through the action. And Birge is an exemplar of the
hardworking, honest police officer.

After this it is a relief to read THERE'S NOTHING TO BE AFRAID OF by Marcia
Muller (St. Martin's, $14.95). It may not be the best in the popular series
featuring Sharon McCone, but the writing is crisp, fluent, neat. There is no
extraneous material. In this book McCone is hired to look into the plight of
Vietnamese residents of a San Francisco hotel. They claim they are being
frightened and somebody is trying to get them to move. Playing important parts
in the action are an absentee landlord, a street preacher and a derelict who has
memorized all of Yeats. The trouble with this book is that it is
uncharacteristically sentimental, with an ending that almost outdoes ''A
Christmas Carol.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of jazz singer Cleo Laine (NYT/Jack Manning)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RAISE HIGH THE ROOF BEAM

BYLINE: By Paul Goldberger; Paul Goldberger is the architecture critic of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2321 words


HOUSE By Tracy Kidder. Illustrated. 341 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
$17.95.

THIS book is the story of the building of a house, and it is told with such
clarity, intelligence and grace it makes you wonder why no one has written a
book like it before. In the way that a well-told story of a marriage, or of a
love affair or of a child's coming of age fills you with a sense that you are
reading about a fundamental human experience for the first time, so it is with
''House.'' Tracy Kidder makes us feel with a splendid intensity the complex web
of relationships and emotions that inevitably comes into play in the act of
bringing a work of architecture to fruition.

Building a house is not as basic as falling in love, of course. It is far more
complicated. Think, just for a start, of the cast of characters. There are the
clients, the people who commission the house, will own and live in it and will
pay for it. There is rarely a single client; it is more often a family, and
sometimes its members disagree about what they want. There is the architect, who
will design the house and who is in the difficult position of being paid to
inspire the clients and to take orders from them at the same time. And then
there are the builders, who will take the architect's drawings and the clients'
checks and turn them into bricks and mortar.

The clients, the architect and the builders form a kind of triangle, and it is
of triangles that intricate plots are made: the relationship of the clients to
each other and of each of them to the architect; the relationship of the
architect to the clients and to the builders; the relationship of the clients to
the build-ers and of the various builders and craftsmen to one another - all are
parts of this triangle, and they push and pull each other in every possible way.
No one is in absolute charge - it is a kind of system of checks and balances in
which the clients wield the power of the purse, the architect the power of art
and the builders the power of work and craft. Each side of the triangle needs
the others, and each comes to the process of designing and building the house
with its own agenda. Place it all against the background of the strong emotions
that must weigh upon any event as major, and as expensive, as the creation of a
new residence and you have the stuff of real drama. T HE making of a house is,
in a true sense, the laying bare of character. We all reveal our needs and our
wants in the process; it is not for nothing that architects who specialize in
houses often joke that they feel more like psychiatrists. They know not only
what their clients desire - a big kitchen for this family, hardly any at all for
that one; closeness to children for one family, separation from them for another
- they know how these people react to one another, how they make decisions, how
they function under pressure, what they value most and what they are willing to
sacrifice.

Tracy Kidder understands all of this. Mr. Kidder, who won a Pulitzer Prize in
1982 for ''The Soul of the New Machine,'' which might be called a humanistic
quest into the world of computers, has written in this age of prolific
architectural publishing one of the few books about building that is actually
the story of people. It reads like a novel - not a thriller with startling
twists of plot, but an old-fashioned narrative that proceeds, chapter by
chapter, toward a conclusion that comes as no surprise but that still brings a
sense of deep pleasure. It is a sign of Mr. Kidder's talent as a writer that we
feel a great surge of emotion as Jonathan and Judith Souweine and their children
walk into their new house for the first time.

The Souweines - Jonathan is an attorney in Northampton, Mass., Judith is a
psychologist - are not, as one might expect, the central characters in this
tale. Neither is their architect, William Rawn, an alumnus of the firm of Davis,
Brody and Associates in New York who designed this house for a hillside site of
about four acres outside Amherst, Mass., just as he was beginning his own
architectural practice in Boston. The illustration on the book jacket - which
shows a toolbox, a couple of saws, a level and some nails - lets us know right
off who this book is really about. It is the story of the four men in their
mid-30's who, more or less by themselves, built the Souweines' house.

The men - Jim Locke, Richard Gougeon, Alex Ghiselin and Ned Krutsky - make up a
contracting firm known as Apple Corps. They are somewhere between businessmen
and what were once called hippie carpenters, with enough of the counterculture
left in them to let them work under a system in which the partner in charge of a
particular job earns less than the others for that assignment rather than more,
so as to make clear that what Apple Corps values most is real work, not
executive management.

The four men are very different: Jim Locke's background is more white collar
than blue collar; he is the son of a lawyer but never felt comfortable in the
world of his upbringing and took to working with his hands. Richard Gougeon was
brought up in the countryside near Amherst and served in Vietnam; Alex Ghiselin
went to Dartmouth University and owns a farm but supports himself with
carpentry; Ned Krutsky is a Quaker and a conscientious objector. They share
little in the way of temperament but much in the way of pride, both in
themselves and in their work, and they value their association.

The Souweine house was their biggest job in some time. It did not begin
smoothly, though the men of Apple Corps were pleased to have been chosen in the
spring of 1983 to erect the large, sprawling Greek Revival house the Souweines
had decided to build. First, there was a lot of unhappiness about the fact that
the builders could not promise the house by summer's end, as the Souweines had
hoped. And then there was the small matter of a dispute over the contract price,
a dispute that said much about the nature of the drama that was to play itself
out over the six months it would take to build the house. Mr. Souweine had
insisted on a firm contract price for the house, which required Apple Corps to
come up with an exact bid even though the architect had not finished designing
the details. When Mr. Locke, who took charge of this job for Apple Corps, and
the Souweines finally agreed on what was to be included in the house, Mr. Locke
priced it at $146,660.

Mr. Souweine insisted that the price be rounded down to $146,000, and harsh
words ensued. Apple Corps felt its profit margin was already slim, and given the
still-incomplete state of Bill Rawn's plans, the contractors needed to leave
some fat in the budget for unforeseen contingencies. Ultimately Apple backed
down, but Mr. Locke remained bitter about this concession throughout the job.
What is important here is not the money itself, but Mr. Kidder's ability to see
that it was a symbol and that it stood for much more than the fact that the
Souweines owned this house. The difference over the money was also a reminder
that Mr. Locke, as the son of a lawyer, had chosen a different kind of life to
get away from his own family background and felt he had been bettered by a
lawyer. A SUBTLE kind of class conflict is a theme that runs through the book.

Three of the four partners of Apple Corps had upbringings more white collar than
blue collar, and though they are craftsmen and builders by choice, they are
aware that their lives are different from those of people like Mr. and Mrs.
Souweine and that they cannot afford to live in the kind of house they are
building. The Souweines, for their part, grew up in the liberal politics of the
1960's, and though they have achieved prosperity, they are not the sort of
former activists who have decamped for Wall Street. They are not a little uneasy
about the prospect of building a house grand enough to have a separate master
bedroom wing, a playroom, a study and a sewing room, even if the house is as
relaxed and understated in tone as this one.

Mr. Kidder portrays the men of Apple Corps and the Souweines sympathetically,
and with such an even hand it is difficult not to feel both sides are right in
almost all the disputes and disagreements that come during the six-month-long
process of building the house. The struggles are sometimes over money, sometimes
over time, sometimes over esthetics -should there be pilasters on the front
porch? - but most of all they are over matters of organization and management.
Yet these conflicts are far less intense than in many construction jobs; no one
stopped talking to anyone else, at least not for long, and the nasty remarks the
builders tended to make about the architect were tempered by a certain
affection.

These remarks seem to have been the result of the fact that this was the first
house Mr. Rawn had designed on his own after leaving Davis, Brody and
Associates. He still had a few things to learn about the practical side of
building, and the men of Apple Corps were happy to show him - especially in
circumstances that demonstrated they knew more than he did, like the time Mr.
Locke looked at the drawings and realized the place set aside for the chimney on
the second floor did not line up with the chimney on the first floor.

Mr. Rawn is the person we feel we get to know least, even though he is surely
given his fair share of attention. Mr. Kidder seems to admire him greatly, but
there is always a sense of distance. It is as if the builders had become Mr.
Kidder's friends while he wrote the book and the architect, his teacher. Mr.
Rawn is impressive as architects go - he has worked as an urban renewal official
and as a lawyer, and he is described as a gifted artist as well as a trained
architect, with a pleasing combination of strong design instincts and personal
modesty. His values are civilized - he believes deeply in design, but he tempers
his love of beautiful objects with a determination to make buildings work for
their users and demonstrate some relationship to their surroundings. Like so
many architects today, he feels uncomfortable with the coldness of orthodox
modern architecture, and he has turned back to the architecture of the past, not
to copy it but to make of it something his own.

The Greek Revival house Mr. Rawn designed for the Souweines is a white
farmhouse-like building with generous, sprawling porches. It looks from
photographs - which are not included in the book, incidentally, but have been
published in newspaper articles - to be a splendid house, gracious, self-assured
and comfortable on the land. It is neither strikingly original nor exceedingly
derivative but reasonably in between, and it has the air of a house that has
been around for some time. M R. KIDDER has learned enough about architecture to
place this design in context, and he discusses the current movement that has
come to be called post-modernism with clarity, if with perhaps too much brevity.
He also provides a short history of the architectural profession and brief
passages on the American lumber industry, on the history of the ''balloon
frame'' wood structure and on just why it is that houses are so expensive. None
of these asides break the movement of the story; they are merely moments of
relief from the tale which, even with Mr. Kidder's considerable narrative skill,
can occasionally bog down in details.

One can quibble about a few more things. Since Mr. Rawn worked by himself, the
story reveals little about how most architectural firms operate and how they
treat clients in situations less personal than this one. It would also have been
pleasing to have had some sense of the Souweines' young twins and how they were
involved in the process of designing the house. But these omissions take little
away from a book that, on balance, will shed more light on the nature of
designing and building than anything that has been published in years. The
making of a house is a strange blend of dreams and mundane work, of heaven and
earth, and Mr. Kidder has explained it.

THE MATTER OF PILASTERS

Sometimes Jonathan [the client] could wish for a quicker, more decisive, and
less persistent Bill [the architect]. And then again, he isn't sure. Maybe he
needs the slowing down that Bill provides. Anyway, Bill is the sort of person
for whom one makes allowances. ''Bill's an artist,'' says Jonathan. ''I'm not.''
As he has for months, Bill is still arguing for those extra pilasters on the
temple end, and Jonathan is resisting, because he fears those additional
decorations will add to the grandness of the house. Jonathan also feels torn.

''You'll like it better,'' Bill has told him more than once.

''He may be right,'' Jonathan says, though not in front of Bill. Bill has been
right before, about the south wall, for example. Jonathan had his doubts, but
looking down on it from the Wiffle Ball field in the evenings, Jonathan really
likes the looks of that wall, now that it has taken shape. Jonathan believes
that Bill got his easygoing style from growing up in California and his
stubbornness and drive from attending Yale. The combination is formidable. The
application -Bill beating away at him on issues such as the pilasters -grows
tiresome. After a while, especially when Jonathan has spent a long day trying to
solve the problems of people with real trouble, some of Bill's arguments sound
ridiculous. Sometimes it seems that every tiny detail has become, in Bill's
parlance, ''exceedingly important.''

''To put so much energy into these personal aggrandizement things,'' says
Jonathan one day at lunch, just down the street from the office, ''well, it's
okay. It's great but . . . I know it sounds incongruous, given this elegant
house, but Judith and I are just not people who are that into houses.''

Bill will put on his deep stammering voice and say, ''Oh, I think it's
exceedingly important.'' - From ''House.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; Photo of the Souweine house (NYT/Clemens Kalischer); Photo of
owner, architect and builders (NYT/Clemens Kalischer); Photo of Tracy Kidder
(Lionel Delevingne)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAKING HISTORY WHOLE AGAIN

BYLINE: By Thomas Bender; Thomas Bender teaches history at New York University.
His intellectual history of New York City will be published next year.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2870 words


OVER the course of perhaps 20 years, the writing of American history by
professional historians has been transformed. The direction of this scholarship,
as Frances FitzGerald remarked in ''America Revised'' (1979), her study of high
school textbooks, had eclipsed the notion of a national past, replacing it with
many pasts, the history of many groups in America with little suggestion of how,
or whether, they make up a nation or a society. Historians, to whom we once
confidently entrusted the custody of our public memory of ourselves as a nation,
have been unable to pull together the vast mountain of scholarship produced in
the past quarter century and make of it a coherent and explanatory account of
American life. Both readers and writers have been drawn or directed, by a
variety of social and cultural mechanisms, to histories of their chosen or
inherited group. It is a phenomenon that may represent a disintegration of the
civic sense as much as purely intellectual trends in historiography.

American scholars are not unique; their work is part of a larger cultural shift.
In Europe, too, writers and readers have been drawn to studies of ordinary folk,
rather than to those of central institutions and established power. Such
interests are the product of a particular cultural moment, one marked, one
cannot help thinking, by deep ambivalence about power, and by an interest, at
least partially compensatory, in the dignity, but also in the picturesqueness,
of ordinary lives whose voices have been lost or repressed or simply not
attended to.

In their concern to capture the texture and meanings of ordinary life, writers
have turned from the grand synthesis of ''The Mediterranean and the
Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II'' (1949) by Fernand Braudel to much
smaller and finely grained analyses. Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Braudel's apparent
successor as the leader of French historians, provides an illuminating example.
After writing in the 1950's a vast account of peasant life, he has more recently
concentrated on interpretation of individual texts and the study of single
events or places, as in his best-known book, ''Montaillou'' (1978), an account
of daily life and religious belief in a medieval mountain village, explicated
almost entirely from the diary of one man. Carlo Ginzburg, a brilliant Italian
historian, has won an international reputation for his inventive inquiries into
the values and beliefs of particular 16th-century Friulian peasants and
artisans, most notably in ''The Cheese and the Worms'' (1980). T HESE recent
European books have been widely praised and published in translation in the
United States, but the specifically American version of this phenomenon is at
once more intense and distinct. Instead of recovering premodern moments of
romantic difference or astonishing continuity, American scholars have
concentrated on the particularities of existing groups in American society,
defined mostly by class, ethnicity, race and sex. Past and present concerns are
telescoped in American writing; indeed, one is constantly aware that the fate of
all these groups is relevant to the kind of democratic society we hope is still
on the American agenda.

The volume of work published in the last two decades on various subordinate
groups - immigrants, workers, blacks, women, American Indians - has been
staggering. Much of it has also represented contemporary scholarship at its
best. If part of the motivation for this writing has been to bring into
historical consciousness groups that have been excluded by traditional narrative
histories, which present the American past as the history of elites, mostly
white, male and Protestant, this new work goes beyond the valuable enterprise of
doing such historical justice. A good deal of the most interesting and
innovative work done over the past generation has been stimulated by this
project; new sources, new methods, new theories, new forms of presentation have
all been prompted. One thinks, for example, of Herbert G. Gutman's pioneering
studies of the working classes and his ''Black Family in Slavery and Freedom''
(1976), Eugene Genovese's study of the social relations of slavery, ''Roll,
Jordan, Roll'' (1974), Carroll Smith-Rosenberg's elaboration of the ''female
world of love and ritual'' in the first issue of the quarterly Signs, Nancy F.
Cott's ''Bonds of Womanhood'' (1978), Lawrence J. Levine's exploration of
popular cultural forms in ''Black Culture and Black Consciousness'' (1977) and
other studies.

There has also been a proliferation of community studies, ranging from Stephan
Thernstrom's quantitative analyses of working-class mobility in Boston and
Newburyport, Mass., to Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum's ''Salem Possessed''
(1974), a rich cultural analysis of Salem, Mass., during the witchcraft trials
of the 1690's. All these works, and many others as well, share a concern with
the group life of ordinary people, especially subordinate groups, focusing
particularly on the ties, values and experiences of family, sisterhood,
fraternity, community. What has not been much explored, however, are the
relations among these groups and their relation to public life - that
essentially civic arena where groups interact, even compete, to establish the
configuration of political power in a society and its cultural forms and their
meanings.

This recent American historiography has revealed notable strength, but it is
incomplete. We have learned more than we ever imagined we could about the lives
of women, slaves and workers, but we have not advanced significantly in our
understanding of the interrelations of races, classes and sexes in the formation
of American society and culture - or in the making of individual lives.

In the process of reaching out to incorporate more social territory for
historical narrative, writers seem to have lost their bearings, lost their sense
of the central institutions of society, of the state and of civic or public
culture. Since the time of Thucydides, history has meant the history of public
life, the doings and sayings of the governing and military classes. One of the
great achievements of American historical writing, something accomplished with
an acute awareness of the distinctive qualities of modern democratic life and
politics, is the vast expansion of historical concern from its tight political
focus to society and civilization itself.

''The New History,'' as James Harvey Robinson christened it in a book of that
title published in 1912, conceived of an educated citizenry, not merely
professional peers, as the proper audience for this broadened history. Robinson
and Charles A. Beard, the other major spokesman for the movement, sought to
enrich not only the understanding, but also the experience of civic life and the
practice of democratic politics. The best example of this new history was ''The
Rise of American Civilization'' (1927), written by Charles and Mary Beard. For a
generation or more, this book ''explained'' American life. It also sustained a
particular orientation to public questions, one we might fairly characterize as
New Deal liberalism.

During the 1930's, 40's and 50's, historians were drawn ever more deeply into
the exploration of various social groups. Much of this work, culminating in what
is called consensus history, subverted the Beards' interpretation, with its
emphasis on conflict. Yet, as the rich and diverse work of Richard Hofstadter
showed, particularly his ''Age of Reform'' (1955), the larger Beardian
conception of the historian's task survived. It was possible still to maintain
the tension between a politically centered historical narrative and the impulse
toward, in Hofstadter's phrase, ''a literary anthropology of groups and
classes.''

By the 70's, however, that center no longer held. Scholars were recovering the
various histories of particular groups, often in a celebratory way. But there
was little sense of the points of contact between or among them. Nor was there
any apparent inclination to find those points. In part, this was an extreme
extension of the logic of the new history, working in tandem, no doubt, with the
social movements of the 60's, which heightened our awareness of traditional
patterns of subordination and of the diversity of American life. But this trend
was also facilitated by intense specialization, a product of the vast expansion
of higher education. Nor can one discount the loss of faith in the public realm
during the era of Vietnam and Watergate. All of this undermined a narrative
sense of the whole. Neither whole lives nor the whole society found
representation in this historical writing. People were reduced to categories,
usually only one - worker or woman or immigrant - and the whole became a
presumptive but incoherent accumulation of these elements. T HE sorts of worries
I have been expressing tend to be identified with a methodologically traditional
or a politically conservative nervousness about social history and its (usually)
radical politics. Social historians, perhaps understandably, have feared that
those who call for synthesis seek to wash out the differences and pass over,
much too quickly, the oppression that they have been anxious to specify.

Yet, it is an error, I think, to mistake calls for synthesis as antiradicalism.
If my criticism of social history may find support among some political and
methodological conservatives, I suspect the sort of synthesis I have in mind may
well prompt a reversal of radical and conservative positions on my argument. If
opponents of social history have lamented its corrosive effects, they have not
themselves produced an alternative or even pointed toward one. Rather, some
ambitious and more or less politically radical social historians reaching to
reincorporate political and cultural history into their narratives offer the
best present prospect for synthesis.

No one was more prescient on this issue than Herbert Gutman. Gutman, whose
untimely death last summer was an enormous loss to scholarship, was certainly no
enemy of either social history or of radicalism. Indeed, he had been one of the
most influential leaders in the developing historiography of the 60's and 70's.
But never satisfied with mere technical accomplishment and always determined to
grasp the meaning of it all, he kept interrogating his own work as well as
general developments in the field. As early as 1976, in the introduction to
''Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America,'' he pointed out that an
Irish-born female strike organizer in Fall River, Mass., might be the subject of
10 different specialized studies - ranging from women's history to labor history
to community history. ''Something is learned from such specialized studies,'' he
observed, ''but in themselves such works often substitute classification for
meaning and wash out the wholeness that is essential to understanding human
behavior.''

Several years later, after noticing the nearly unanimous disregard of recent
historical writing at the 1981 American Writers Congress, Gutman speculated that
the problem was the failure of historians to produce a synthesis, a successor to
''The Rise of American Civilization.'' The current emphasis on groups, he wrote
in The Nation, makes the search for larger patterns difficult. ''The new
history,'' he concluded, ''has failed to produce a new synthesis. And that is
why its potential audience remains so small. . . . A new synthesis is needed,
one that incorporates and then transcends the new history.''

Such a synthesis demands that historians go beyond partial analysis; they must
reclaim the public realm, where groups interact to make a national politics and
culture, as the central territory of history. But this must be done without
sacrificing the rich harvest - as well as the cultural and political point - of
recent studies of particular groups.

We have been edging toward this act of recovery. The prospects for such a
narrative seem much brighter today than they were just a few years ago. It is
becoming apparent that recent studies do not preclude a concern for politics and
culture. Rather, they force a fruitful reconceptualization of public culture.
The public world, one realizes, is not a given; it is historically constructed,
the product of a contest waged, not necessarily fairly, among various social
groups. The way to recover the centrality of the public realm in historical
narrative is to focus on its making.

Such a history would concern itself with the relation of many smaller groups in
American life -some self-defined, some defined in part by exclusion - to the
process of establishing power and meaning (the definition of poverty, for
example) in public. In some ways this sort of history may seem reminiscent of
the pluralism that marked American social science in the 50's. But there is a
big difference. It is impossible any longer to assume, as the old pluralism did,
that all interests are fairly represented in the public realm. A new history
would seek to establish the different degrees and terms of participation of
various groups in the society as a whole.

Why are some groups and some values so much - or so little - represented in
public life? How do the lives, values and politics of particular groups affect
the larger world of the public? And how, in turn, are they affected by
particular patterns of public culture and state authority? With the center thus
restored, it becomes possible to ask whether the interests and values of
particular groups are justly represented in society, and to ask, as well,
whether the public denies the legitimacy of some groups' most deeply held
beliefs, whether about morality, art or politics.

If the history of groups practically amounts to scholarly support for a politics
of group advantage, a history concerned with the tension between group and
public values seems likely to sustain a discussion and a politics of civic
justice. Although historians of various groups have conceived of their work as
advancing the interests of ''their'' group, the advent of Reaganism should
establish the vulnerability of the weak, as opposed to the pre-eminence of the
strong, when the principled standards of civic justice are abandoned for a
politics of group advantage.

While the second half of the Reagan Presidency seems an unlikely moment for it,
there is evidence in very recent historical writing of a resurgent interest in
the public realm. One must, of course, be cautious about identifying a clutch of
books as a trend, but four recent books on women's history, perhaps the most
vital and fast-moving of the subfields, at least prompt reflection. Although
they differ in focus - one concerned with women as writers, one with women and
the social sciences, another with ''social reproduction'' and the last with
politics - Mary Kelley's ''Private Woman, Public Stage'' (1984), Rosalind
Rosenberg's ''Beyond Separate Spheres'' (1982), Mary P. Ryan's ''Cradle of the
Middle Class'' (1981) and Ellen C. DuBois's ''Feminism and Suffrage'' (1978) -
all make the relation of women to public life central to their story. E VEN more
striking is the emergence of a new political history deeply informed by social
and cultural history. Writers who are neither social nor political historians,
believing one can or should be both, have begun to readdress the
historiographical questions first posed by the Progressive historians at the
beginning of the century. It is hard to imagine more traditional questions than
those that surround the meaning of Jacksonian democracy and black emancipation
and Reconstruction. Yet two recent books address those questions in new and
exciting ways. In ''Chants Democratic'' (1984), Sean Wilentz connects class and
ethnic social developments to the larger political phenomenon of Jacksonian
democracy, and in ''Nothing but Freedom'' (1983), a brief but brilliant
comparative history, Eric Foner illuminates the individual, group and national
meanings of black emancipation and Reconstruction. In both cases, major periods
and events are evaluated - as a whole - for their contribution to what was once
called the promise of American life.

When we consider how well-regarded these two books are - Mr. Wilentz's won major
prizes from the Organization of American Historians and the American Historical
Association, and Mr. Foner's was originally presented as the distinguished
Walter Lynwood Fleming Lectures at Louisiana State University and represents,
one presumes, a preview of his forthcoming book on Reconstruction -we cannot but
wonder whether we may be on the verge of a new American historiography. It seems
to be a historiography that, like the Progressive history of Charles A. Beard
and James Harvey Robinson, is at once a product of a reviving public culture and
a contribution to it. It is foolish for historians to make predictions, and it
is particularly foolhardy to predict the renewal of civic life today. Yet there
are signs of such a revival among a significant segment of writers, and there
are indications that a new body of historical writings may play a role, once
again, in the revitalization of public life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Page 42)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE REGION;
New Jersey: A Canalled City in the Harbor To Evoke the Era of the Dutch

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section 12; Page 48, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words


AT the lip of New York Bay, where ocean water laps against reed grass and
tankers pass in the shadow of the Statue of Liberty, a Frenchman, a German, a
Swiss architect and an all-American hero intend to give back to the Hudson what
was taken from the river years ago.

The international assemblage comprises the Spoerry Group, the team designated by
Jersey City officials to redevelop 114 acres of land just south of Liberty State
Park in an area known as Caven Point. What the group has envisioned for the old
Army railroad depot at Caven Point is a canalled city of 1,690 condominiums -
the re-creation, on the outskirts of Jersey City, of a Dutch city that harkens
back to the area's first European settlers.

The primary mode of transportation in the new city will be boats. Everything
from dinghies to sailing cutters will ply the 25 acres of salt-water canals dug
into the site, which was created 40 years ago when the Army filled in the
river's edge. The canals will allow many owners to dock their vessels in what
essentially is their front yard.

The project, called Port Liberte, stands to be one of the most venturesome
condominium developments on the rapidly changing Hudson River waterfront and
among the most unusual of the multitude of condominium projects springing up all
over New Jersey as the state becomes more comfortable with a concept that was
all but unknown here a decade ago.

As the new form of ownership and its attendant maintenance-free life style
catches on, developers have broadened the types of condominiums available -
diversifying architectural styles, increasing living dimensions and, most
telling, broadening the range of prices. Ten years ago, the first New Jerseyans
who bought condominiums did so because the units were inexpensive; today, prices
often exceed those for traditional houses and can go as high as $700,000 -the
top of the line at Port Liberte.

Already five years in the planning, Port Liberte recently received a
waterfront-development permit from the State Department of Environmental
Protection, an essential step in the process of turning the abandoned acres of
Caven Point into a new city. Paul W. Bucha, chief executive officer of the
Spoerry Group, said that the approval came years earlier than he expected but
that site-preparation work will begin immediately now that it is in hand.

With billions of dollars of new residential and commercial developments planned
for the state's 18-mile Hudson riverfront, Port Liberte is one of the first
major projects to actually get started. Given the background of the developers,
who have worked successfully throughout Europe but never before in the United
States, their success in progressing so rapidly through the complicated and
sometimes murky regulatory process is considered something of an accomplishment.

Although Mr. Bucha is the leading financial and managment player in the Spoerry
Group, the inspiration for Port Liberte's design comes from Francois Spoerry, a
72-year-old French architect and sailor who has previously ''married the land
and sea'' at his 2,000-home Port Grimaud resort development on the Cote d'Azur
in the south of France. Begun in 1966, the canals and villas of Port Grimaud
have become one of France's most popular attractions, and the resort homes sell
for well over $1 million.

Mr. Spoerry has also designed waterfront developments in Mexico, California and
New Orleans, but Port Liberte is the first outside his homeland in which he is
playing a development role. The $600 million project is being financed by
American investors, primarily City Federal Savings and Loan of New Jersey.

His concept centers on a city of condominiums, shops, office space and
recreational facilities, all geared toward the water and laid out along an axis
with the Statue of Liberty. The Ehrenkrantz Group, a New York architectural and
planning company responsible for the restoration of the Woolworth Build-ing, has
worked out the details of Mr. Spoerry's idea, but Ezra D. Ehrenkrantz, its
president, said Mr. Spoerry reviewed the details every six weeks.

The overall project will be built in five phases, each taking one to two years.
The first will include 100 condominium units, 23,000 square feet of shops, a
yacht club with restaurant, a health club and the first segment of the canal
system.

Most of the units will range in price from about $100,000 to $630,000, with a
few special town houses exceeding $700,000. There will be three kinds, which the
developers described as canal town houses, canal condominiums and ring
condominiums.

The town houses will be built in clusters of up to nine in a row on the islands
formed when the canals are excavated. Containing two or three bedrooms, they
will be the showpieces of Port Liberte - some overlooking Upper New York Bay,
all with personal boat slips steps from their front doors.

The canal condominiums are four- and five-story buildings of flats and duplex
apartments, with docking spaces for owners. The ring condominiums are five- to
nine-story buildings around the project's perimeter. The owners will not have
direct access to the water, but half of the 250 slips in the Port Liberte marina
will be reserved for their use. The apartments on the upper floors will have the
best views of the bay and the Statue of Liberty. PETER KASTL, project director
for the Ehrenkrantz Group, said construction would not begin for at least four
years on the town center portion, the most complex portion. It will be the
site's most frequently visited section and the area where the developers hope
old Jersey City and the new Port Liberte will mingle. A 300-room hotel will
stand at its entrance, and visitors will be encouraged to use the lobby to get
to the 100,000 square feet of shops on the other side. Condominium apartments
will be available above the retail space, and a boating concession will be
sought at the end of the peninsula to open up the canals - legally public
waterways - to visitors.

Environmentalists have voiced concern over the development's effect on one of
the last wild sections of the shoreline, an area frequently used as a stopover
point for migratory waterfowl. The solution was to limit access to the most
fragile section, a sandy peninsula closest to Liberty State Park, to a footpath.
On the rest of the waterfront, the dunes and reed grass will be untouched in a
strip as wide as 250 feet, separated from the development by a wall and
available to bird watchers and hikers willing to negotiate a two-mile walk.

Mr. Bucha, a West Point graduate who won the Medal of Honor while serving in
Vietnam, said he believed that Port Liberte would open up a part of the Jersey
City waterfront that previously had been inaccessible to most people. In so
doing, the new residents of Port Liberte will be integrated with residents of
the city's older areas.

The range of condominium prices, he added, also will encourage a mixing of
different types of people. ''If we only have Ferraris and Jaguars here,'' Mr.
Bucha said, ''this is going to be a failure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Model of Port Liberte complex at Liberty State Park

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Legless Samaritan Subdues Would-Be Thief

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Oct. 6


A man who lost both legs when he stepped on a mine in the Vietnam War vaulted
from a truck Friday and made his way several hundred feet on his hands to help
capture a man who tried to grab an elderly woman's purse.

Sircy Scruggs, 74 years old, said she was surprised when the veteran,
40-year-old John D. Booker, arrived and helped another neighbor wrestle and hold
down the suspect until the police arrived.

Mr. Booker said the four-foot vault from his truck aggravated an old shoulder
injury, but he said he did not regret it.

''I didn't think it was right for anyone to abuse her like that,'' Mr. Booker
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Elizabeth Williams Fulbright; Wife of Ex-Senator Was 79

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 154 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


Elizabeth Williams Fulbright, wife of former Senator J. William Fulbright of
Arkansas, died Saturday at her home here. She was 79 years old.  Mrs. Fulbright
had been ill for some time, according to her daughter, Roberta Fulbright Foote.

Mrs. Fulbright was born in Philadelphia and grew up there. She married Mr.
Fulbright in 1932.

Mr. Fulbright, a Democrat, was a member of the Senate from 1945 to 1974. He was
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during the Vietnam War and
held widely publicized hearings on United States aims in Southeast Asia.

Mrs. Fulbright was widely regarded as an effective campaigner for her husband.

A columnist in The Washington Post once identified her as possibly ''the most
popular Senate wife''

In addition to her daughter Mrs. Foote, of Coral Gables, Fla., Mrs. Fulbright is
survived by her husband and another daughter, Elizabeth Fulbright Winnacker of
Columbia, Mo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


STAR-STRUCK The American Museum-Hayden Planetarium opened its indoor heavens to
the public for the first time just 50 years ago this month. New Yorkers, whose
own real sky sights are more often than not obscured by city lights and smog,
crowded into the building at 81st Street and Central Park West, on the north
side of the American Museum of Natural History. On a clear - or unclear - day or
evening, you could see, it seemed, forever, a pristine universe twinkling on the
underside of the big dome.

The Planetarium is still much as it was 50 years ago, and 25 million paying
customers have visited to enjoy the thrill of the houselights dimming as the
solemn, resonant music announced the start of the journey into space. Nowadays,
the Planetarium, in addition to its other exhibitions, has concerts and other
programs, having established itself as New York's own space center.

To celebrate its big 50, the Planetarium this week is giving patrons balloons
and pins through Friday. The show is a ''double feature,'' in a Planetarium way.
The main attraction keeps up with the news: ''Halley's Comet: Once in a
Lifetime,'' narrated by William Shatner. of ''Star Trek'' fame. With it is a
self-celebratory work called ''Hayden: The Golden Years.''

At 1:30 and 3:30 P.M. weekdays; Saturdays at 11 A.M., then, as on Sundays,
hourly from 1 to 5 P.M. Admission: 75; students and over-65's, $2.75; 2-to-12's,
$2.

JAZZ

There was a period, back in the New York of more than a half-century ago, that
jazz was an added thrill to the pleasures of eating in the then-recent
popularity of Chinese restaurants. Jazz singers and bands accompanied the
egg-drop soup and fortune cookies, and some artists got their starts in such
surroundings.

This bit of arcane history repeats itself now in the Chinese Tea Room, at
Seventh Avenue and 56th Street. The restaurant occupies the premises of the
long-lived Carnegie Tavern, which, lamentably, closed its doors several months
ago. The Tavern was known for its succession of jazz pianists, including its
most durable keeper of the keyboard, Ellis Larkins, who was on duty there for
two and a half years.

The new establishment, still under the same ownership as the Tavern had,
maintains basically the same decor, the same bar and the same piano enclave up
front. Happily, it still has the same pianist, the redoubtable Mr. Larkins. He
is a Juilliard graduate who made his performing debut at Cafe Society Uptown 40
years ago, accompanied Ella Fitzgerald, Sylvia Syms and Anita Ellis and is
considered an expert interpreter of Duke Ellington's music. Unlike the chatter
that is so often a leitmotif of restaurant-club pianists elsewhere, the house
usually mutes its talk and clank of silverware when Mr. Larkins takes over.

He appears Mondays through Saturdays from 8 P.M. to midnight. No cover charge,
but there is a $7.50 minimum when he performs. Drinks, $2.95 to $5.25. Main
courses, $10.95 to $14.95.

HERITAGE

This is Italian Heritage and Culture Month, a short interval to recall a long
and illustrious history, but nowhere is it being observed more intensely than at
City University's College of Staten Island, with programs of theater (including
companies from Italy), music, dance and exhibitions.

The college has two campuses, the Sunnyside Campus at 715 Ocean Terrace, near
the Clove-Road Hylan Boulevard exit at the western end of the Verrazano-Narrows
Bridge (named for the harbor's Italian discoverer), and the St. George Campus,
at 130 Stuyvesant Place, near the ferry terminal.

There is a free showing of three fine American films made by directors of
Italian heritage that will be screened in College Hall on the St. George campus
today between 4 and 10:30 P.M., a block of time that will be well-spent by
lovers of the cinema. It starts at 4 P.M. with Martin Scorsese's 1973 movie set
in Manhattan's downtown Italian-American neighborhoods, ''Mean Streets.'' At 6
P.M.: Frank Capra's classic 1934 comedy,''It Happened One Night,'' with Clark
Gable and Claudette Colbert. The last, at 8 P.M., is the 1979 Vietnam film made
by Francis Ford Coppola, ''Apocolypse Now.''

At 7:30 P.M. on Wednesday, Oct. 16, at the same time, the film is the rarely
seen cinematic landmark 1913 silent, ''Cabiria,'' made by the great film
pioneer, Giovanni Pastrone. Elliott Finkel will play the original score for the
movie on piano. Admission: $5.

Festival information: 718-390-7526.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ellis Larkins

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'PARK IS MINE,' ON HBO

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 650 words


EVEN Home Box Office doesn't seem to be terribly enthusiastic about ''The Park
Is Mine,'' this month's new ''premiere film.'' The made-for-cable movie, which
had its premiere last night, is being quickly shunted to limbo on the
pay-channel's schedule. It can also be seen at 5:10 this morning, 4:15 A.M.
Wednesday and 11:30 P.M. next Monday. HBO knows what it is doing. ''The Park Is
Mine'' is one of its more pompously silly concoctions.

This is ''a Steven Hilliard Stern Film,'' as was ''Draw!'', another of HBO's
more forgettable efforts. Using a teleplay by Lyle Gorch, adapted from a novel
by Stephen Peters, Mr. Stern has directed ''The Park Is Mine'' for Astral Film
Enterprises Inc. He does manage to pull off one not inconsiderable feat. Most of
the action really does look as if it is taking place in New York's Central Park,
even though the bulk of the film was shot in Toronto. That is about as magical
as things get.

Mitch Harris (Tommy Lee Jones) is an unstable Vietnam veteran who is out of work
and two months behind on support for his young son. When a former Vietnam buddy
commits suicide, Mitch is distraught until he gets a letter in which the dead
man describes how he had been stockpiling ammunition and explosives in Central
Park. His plan had been to take over the park in a symbolic protest to make
people listen to the plight of veterans and other neglected groups. ''I didn't
want to kill anyone,'' the letter explains, ''just get their attention.'' Cancer
and the suicide intervened.  This gives Mitch reason enough to feel useful
again. Settling into the park, he calls the police and announces his plan to
shut down the park for three days. The authorities are skeptical until a park
police-precinct is blown up and special task forces are confronted with barbed
wire and explosions when they try to enter the park. Gradually, the situation is
taken seriously and Mitch gets his opportunity to deliver his message to the
world at large: ''I'm just a guy, my life has been directed by other people,
there are a lot of people like me, they don't have any control over their
lives.'' No one seems overwhelmed by these insights, but enterprising vendors
quickly begin selling T-shirts reading ''The Park Is Mine'' and local television
news operations work themselves up into a frenzy usually reserved for hurricane
coverage.

Much of this might still make for tolerable melodrama, although the plight of
the Vietnam veteran was eased somewhat in the last year with assorted public
displays of support, including an emotional parade in New York City. But poor
Mitch is surrounded by idiocies. The true villain of the piece turns out to be
the Deputy Mayor (the real one is out of town). The Deputy, played to nasty
urban-professional perfection by Peter Devorsky, cannot bear the thought of
anybody holding his city up to ridicule and will stop at nothing, including
calling out the National Guard or using mercenary terrorists, to stop and
preferably kill this affront to authority.

And then there is Valery Weaver (Helen Shaver), who is supposed to be an
independent television newscaster. Valery pushes and shoves her way into the
middle of any story, lugging along her video camera and an assistant carrying
the portable power pack. Determined to get her exclusive interview with Mitch,
Valery hops over a stone wall with her camera, leaving the power pack behind.
Evidently, she has more than enough energy to spare in a pinch.

Needless to say, Mitch and Valery get to like and respect each other, especially
when he orders her to take off her clothes. ''Pardon?,'' she asks breathily.
''Get nekkid,'' shouts Mitch, his Southern accent getting thicker. He finally
sends her out of the park to safety with her camera and recorded interviews.
''Think it'll make prime time?,'' he wonders. Maybe, but like ''The Park Is
Mine,'' the less attention paid, the better.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tommy Lee Jones

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE CORPS: 25 YEARS' CARE FOR A WORLD

BYLINE: By SUSAN PASTOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., Oct. 7


At the University of Michigan, where John F. Kennedy asked students 25 years ago
if they would be willing to dedicate a part of their lives to serving their
country abroad, the anniversary of the idea that grew into the Peace Corps was
celebrated today.

Leading the ceremony was Vice President Bush who, while warmly received by about
200 former Peace Corps volunteers, was jeered by thousands of students holding
signs and banners protesting the policies of the United States in Latin America
and South Africa. At one point, Mr. Bush suggested that it would be ''nice'' if
the protesters had the freedom to ''take their act to Red Square in Moscow.''

Mr. Bush said that from its inception the Peace Corps was ''a show of good will
and caring of people, for people, unlike any country had ever undertaken
before.'' But, he went on, the organization will continue its efforts,
particularly in Africa.

Problems of Vietnam Era

Other speakers said the organization had largely recovered from problems it
suffered in the Vietnam War.

''The Peace Corps is better than ever,'' said Jack Hood Vaughn, a former
director. ''Vietnam almost killed us. On the one hand we were doing peace and on
the other hand we were at war. That conflict was just about to get us.''

R. Sargent Shriver, who directed the organization under President Kennedy, said
the Peace Corps ''did go through a dark night of the soul during the time of
President Nixon,'' adding, ''It has begun, in the last few years to emerge.''

Kennedy first proposed an organization like the Peace Corps early in the morning
of Oct. 14, 1960, on a campaign stop at the University of Michigan. It was only
hours after his third televised debate with Vice President Nixon, his Republican
opponent, and 10,000 students had waited for hours to hear him speak.

'Americans Willing to Contribute'

According to transcript of the speech, recorded by the University's radio
station, Kennedy asked the students if they were willing to use skills to serve
others abroad. ''On your willingness to contribute part of your life to this
country, I think will depend the answer whether a free society can compete,'' he
said. ''I think it can. And I think Americans are willing to contribute.''

The students' reaction was enthusiastic and, ultimately, more than 120,000
Americans joined the Peace Corps and served in 90 countries around the world.
Currently there are 5,200 volunteers in more than 60 countries.

Mr. Shriver said today that organization's objectives are the same as they were
in 1961 when Kennedy signed the Executive Order creating it: to send trained
workers where they were needed, to enable volunteers to learn about other
cultures, to teach people in other countries about the United States and to
enable Americans to learn from returned volunteers about the needs and hopes of
those in other countries.

Today the Peace Corps, directed by Loret Miller Ruppe, is seeking to raise the
number of its volunteers to 10,000, although its $120 million budget has not
been increased.

''That's less than the government spend on military bands,'' a spokesman for the
Peace Corps said. Nevertheless, a recent request for 600 volunteers to help
alleviate hunger in Ethiopia drew 10,000 replies. The average age of volunteers
now is over 30, compared with about 23 in the l960's. There are now more college
graduates and skilled specialists.

Two former volunteers, Representative Paul B. Henry, a Michigan Republican and
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, have introduced a
bipartisan resolution honoring Peace Corps volunteers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHIEF OF U.N. AGENCY FOR REFUGEES ASKS DONORS TO GIVE MORE MONEY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 7


The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees appealed today for $74 million
to help his agency meet a severe budget shortfall.

The commissioner, Poul Hartling, warned that failure to get the money could
limit existing and planned refugee programs.

Officials of the commissioner's office said the problems in the agency's $319
million general budget and a $107 million emergency budget for aid to African
drought victims marked the most severe financial crisis in the United
Nations-related agency's 34-year history and came at a time when the agency's
refugee caseload seemed to be expanding steadily.

In an address to the commission's donors, who are opening their annual meeting
here, Mr. Hartling, who is from Denmark, also called for ''large contributions''
at a pledging conference scheduled for Nov. 15 at the United Nations in New York
so the commission could begin its 1986 programs on time in January.

''The practical implications could be that refugee settlement or durable
solutions will be stopped,'' Mr. Hartling said about the problems. ''Housing and
schools for refugees will not be built. Health and basic education services and
equipment will have to be reduced to a minimum. And it goes without saying also
that the administrative costs of U.N.H.C.R., both in headquarters and the field,
are subject to the most severe restrictions.''

Agency's Steady Expansion

From a ''nonoperational'' agency formed in 1951 to give international protection
to refugees after World War II, the office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has seen its budget expand steadily to $35.2 million
in 1978, when Mr. Hartling became the commissioner, and over $400 million in
general and emergency assistance programs this year.

Mr. Hartling said the commission had raised $262 million so far this year in
voluntary contributions from its 73 members, or $57 million less than budgeted
for general programs. He said the agency also still lacked $17 million in its
emergency program for Africa, for a total shortfall of $74 million.

Commission officials said the United States, which provides about 30 percent of
the agency's annual budget needs, had already pledged nearly $18 million in
additional money, allowing the commission to scale back its original estimated
shortfall of $92 million. The officials put much of the blame for the shortfall
on an overvalued American dollar, which has driven down the value of
contributions in other Western currencies, as well as on the burden imposed on
contributing nations by the African drought situation.

''The crisis is not a result of a lack of good will or sympathy towards refugees
and their needs,'' Mr. Hartling said. ''The needs of refugees are considerable -
in Africa, Asia and Latin America - and I realize that the demands on donors
this year have been massive.''

'Critical Funding Situation'

''However, it is of absolute primary importance that U.N.H.C.R. be given the
resources to do the job which is expected, indeed, demanded of us,'' Mr.
Hartling said. ''U.N.H.C.R. is often called upon to undertake additional or
special programs - a good example is our African emergency programs -but in
essential terms, the general program must remain our first priority. It is for
that reason that the critical funding situation we face for the general programs
for both the remainder of the 1985 and for 1986 is so serious.''

Western diplomats said the executive committee, which meets annually here in
October to work on policy for the commission's development and administration,
was expected to discuss possible solutions to the commission's financial
troubles that could include changes in budgeting and planning. The diplomats
acknowledged, however, that no one could have foreseen how much aid would be
needed to deal with this year's crisis in Africa.

''There is a feeling that somehow, something should be done differently and
better, but there are no immediate answers,'' one diplomat said. ''It's very
hard to plan for a drought situation, or a Latin American or Afghan crisis. The
U.N.H.C.R. is indeed the U.N.'s fire brigade. And though there is a crisis
shaping up, it's too easy to say they just ought to do things better.'

Mr. Hartling, who is to retire at the end of this year, said the commission's
work is complicated not only by the growth in its financial needs, but also by
what he called a ''lack of a political solution to the problems'' that give rise
to refugees. In addition to the African drought victims, the commission must
annually deal with millions of Afghans fleeing the war in their country, as well
as the so-called boat people and other refugees still fleeing Vietnam, and
refugees in Latin America, Eastern Europe and the Middle East.

''It is not for me to say what those political solutions might be,'' Mr.
Hartling said. ''That belongs to the challenges the United Nations must face as
it moves into its fifth decade.''

''When we talk about the work of the United Nations, is this not one of its most
positive achievements?'' Mr. Hartling said, noting that his agency had helped an
estimated 30 million refugees in its history. ''Yet there are times when it is
indeed a depressing task. It is the task of the high commissioner to make the
reason of the heart prevail over the reason of states.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Poul Hartling (Victor Lusinchi)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 9, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Marines Disclaim Role In Burial of Fetuses

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 8


Marine Corps officials say they were duped into sending a color guard to a
burial service for more than 16,000 fetuses that was staged Sunday by an
organization opposed to abortion.

''No decision has been made on possible action.'' Maj. Bill Wood, public affairs
officer of the 4th Marine Division, said today. ''We just want to make it clear
we didn't do it deliberately.''

The nonreligious service, which included a eulogy from President Reagan, was
held Sunday.

Major Wood said the Marines were told three times by an organizer that a
military color guard was needed for the burial of a Vietnam combat veteran. A
three-man guard from a Marine Corps Reserve Center was provided.

''The noncommissioned officer in charge of the detail arrived and was faced with
a large crowd, high-ranking political figures and the media,'' Major Wood said.
''He knew he was not supposed to be involved, but decided to remain and not
cause a scene.''

Americans Committed to Loving the Unwanted organized the service. Jeanette
Dreisbach, coordinator of the service, denied that the Marines were told the
service was for a veteran.

The fetuses, which had been aborted at a hospital, were found three years ago. A
dispute over what to do with them was recently settled in the courts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOOTBALL SATURDAYS AT SERVICE ACADEMIES A JOY AGAIN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM N. WALLACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


Football at the service academies - Air Force, Army and Navy - is fashionable
this fall not only for the athletes who play the games but also for the
spectators who attend them.

''A social sports event,'' is how Carl Ullrich, the Army athletic director,
describes football Saturdays at West Point, which finds clusters of picnicking
fans on the hillsides above Michie Stadium. ''And now they have a winning
football team to root for.''

In addition to providing entertainment for taxpayers, football at the academies
is making a tidy profit, bonding disparate student bodies from 50 states and
advertising the Armed Forces in a positive way.

Decade of Renewal

Football Saturdays were not nearly so positive at the beginning of this decade
and in the one before. For example, the defense-industry companies that buy
blocks of tickets could not give them all away for the annual Army-Navy game in
Philadelphia.

ABC, the network televising college games exclusively then, considered but did
not dare to drop that contest. As for Air Force, it was just another team in the
Western Athletic Conference.

The three academies had more losing teams than winning ones and the best high
school players wanted no part of the ''free'' military education with its
five-year postgraduation commitment. The goals for many were a big-time college
program and then the riches of professional football.

Standing Room at Navy

Now consider this: At the Navy-Marine Corps Memorial Stadium in Annapolis, Md.,
tomorrow a record crowd of 34,000, some of whom must stand, will attend the game
between Navy and unbeaten Air Force. Navy is 1-3, having lost the three games by
a total of only 8 points.

Tailgating activities will overcrowd the parking fields, which must soon be
expanded, according to J. O. (Bo) Coppedge, the retired Navy captain who has
been athletic director since 1968.

Air Force (5-0), a team that has averaged 45.2 points a game, had a record
crowd, 52,123, at Colorado Springs last Saturday when it defeated Notre Dame for
the fourth consecutive season. Out there they open the parking lots at 10:30 in
the morning to accommodate the tailgate parties.

Army, which is also undefeated, in four games, plays Boston College at West
Point, N.Y., tomorrow, and Michie Stadium is sold out for the third time this
season.

No Party for One Fan

This will be a night game because of a television commitment, and some fans have
complained to Ullrich because they do not like to tailgate at night.

''One wrote he'd been coming to Army games for over 40 years and he wouldn't be
happy until I was gone,'' Ullrich said. Ullrich, the first civilian athletic
director Army has ever had, made the television commitment for the sake of
money. Sports at the three academies have to pay their way, and there is no
Federal subsidy.

Football, by far the most profitable, pays for the other intercollegiate sports
- Navy has 32, including 10 for women - in terms of coaches, equipment and
travel.

'Almost Bankrupt' in 1980

''When I first came here in 1980,'' Ullrich said, ''I found that the athletic
department was almost bankrupt. What were we going to do?'' The resurgence came
with last season's football team, which tied Tennessee in its second game and
won eight others, defeating Air Force and Navy for the first time in the same
season since 1977. Army then beat Michigan State in its first bowl game, the
Cherry Bowl at Pontiac, Mich., that paid the Military Academy $740,000, and
finished with an 8-3-1 record.

A November trip to Japan for the Mirage Bowl and four television appearances
brought the gross to more than $1 million and the athletic department had no
more money problems.

Both Army and Navy had record numbers of qualified candidates for admission last
spring. ''We had 14,014 apply,'' said Captain Coppedge, ''2,267 qualify, and we
admitted 1,375.''

Change in National Mood

Among the factors in the rise in interest are the discipline and stability of
academy life that appear more attractive these days to parents and students
alike following an antimilitary mood that declined after the Vietnam War.
Another is the rising costs at other colleges compared with the fully paid
education of the academies.

There are many more good athletes in the Brigade of Midshipmen than 10 or 20
years ago, Coppedge believes. ''But I think that's true everywhere because of
better diet, conditioning and coaching,'' he said.

An example would be Napoleon McCallum, a superior athlete and Navy's Heisman
Trophy candidate who could play halfback for any college team.

''Nap is a great example to others who might be considering the service
academies,'' said Mark Stevens, a former teammate who is now a graduate
assistant on the Navy coaching staff.

Stevens, after last season, was good enough to play in two all-star games, the
Hula Bowl and the Japan Bowl. He made friends with Doug Flutie; Freddie Nunn,
the linebacker from Mississippi who was the No. 1 draft pick of the St. Louis
Cardinals, and Reggie McKenzie, the linebacker from Tennessee who was a
10th-round pick of the Los Angeles Raiders, ''Football in college was their
life,'' he said. ''It was important at Navy but only one part of my life.''

Last June, Stevens received a bachelor of science degree in political science
and a commission in the Marine Corps. ''Going to Navy was the best move I ever
made,'' he said. ''Here I am making close to $20,000 a year and I can even look
forward to the Navy sending me to graduate school. I've got a career.''

From Hialeah in the heavily recruited south Florida area, he signed up out of
high school to go to South Carolina on a football scholarship with a close
friend, Skip Minton.

Then Stevens decided upon the Naval Academy, and in his second season there as a
tight end he played opposite his friend, Minton, a defensive end for the
Gamecocks.

But after that Minton was twice injured, gave up his scholarship and left
college, a dropout.

''That,'' Stevens said, ''could so easily have happened to me too.'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bill Byrne (NYT/Paul Hosefros); photo of Rob Healy (NYT/Alan
Zale); photo of Terry Maki (NYT/John Morgan)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 12, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NOBEL PEACE PRIZE GIVEN TO DOCTORS OPPOSED TO WAR

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 11


The 1985 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded today to the International Physicians for
the Prevention of Nuclear War, a five-year-old Boston-based group that was
jointly founded by American and Soviet doctors.

The physicians group has a membership of 135,000 people in 41 countries. One of
its co-founders, Dr. Yevgeny I. Chazov, has been the personal physician of the
top Soviet leadership and a member of the Communist Party Central Committee
since 1982. He has also been a Deputy Minister of Health since 1968.

After learning of the award today, Dr. Bernard Lown, the American co-founder of
the group, immediately urged President Reagan to stop all nuclear testing.

'Stop All Nuclear Explosions'

Speaking in Geneva with Dr. Chazov, Dr. Lown said their group was pleased that
Moscow began a five-month moratorium on nuclear tests last August and suggested
President Reagan could now halt the nuclear arms race ''with one stroke of the
pen.''

''We physicians have a medical prescription'' for how to avoid a nuclear
holocaust, said Dr. Lown, a professor of cardiology at the Harvard School of
Public Health. ''Stop all nuclear explosions.''

''Now the Americans have a wonderful opportunity and I hope my country takes
that initiative and makes nuclear testing stop forever,'' Dr. Lown told a press
conference in Geneva where he and Dr. Chazov had gone for a fifth anniversary
meeting of the group.

In August, Mikhail S. Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union was halting all
of its nuclear tests until the end of the year and invited the United States to
follow suit. American officials declined, characterizing the offer as
disingenuous because, they said, the Russians had just completed a round of
tests. Officials also said that in the absence of absolute verification, tests
are needed for maintaining a viable nuclear arsenal.

Group Created an Awareness

The Norwegian Nobel Committee, in announcing the choice of the physicians group,
said it had ''performed a considerable service to mankind by spreading
authoritative information and by creating an awareness of the catastrophic
consequences of atomic warfare.''

Egil Aarvik, the chairman of the prize committee, linked the decision to the
United States-Soviet arms talks in Geneva. ''If this award has any message, it
is for the two superpowers to come up with results of their negotiations,'' he
told journalists this morning.

It was only the second Nobel Peace prize that involved a Soviet citizen, the
earlier one having been given to Andre Sakharov, the dissident physicist and
human rights activist, in 1975. At the time, the Soviet press branded the award
to Mr. Sakharov a ''prize for anti-Sovietism'' and forbade him to go to Oslo to
collect it.

By contrast, the Soviet press reported the award to the doctors group today less
than two hours after it was announced in Oslo, suggesting official pleasure in
Moscow that Dr. Chazov had been honored.

Two years ago when Lech Walesa, the leader of the banned Polish trade union
Solidarity, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Russian press did not
immediately report it but later denounced Mr. Walsea as a money-grubbing,
foul-mouthed demagogue. #99 Nominees for Prize The award of the prize last year
to Desmond Tutu, the South African Anglican bishop and anti-apatheid campaigner,
also received little attention in the Soviet media.

The Norwegian prize committee does not make public the reasons for its choices,
and, in fact, does not even keep a record of its deliberations, according to a
Norwegian source close to the committee. This year it had to pick from a record
list of 99 nominees that included President Reagan and Elie Wiesel, the
chronicler of the holocaust.

The source said the choice of the physicians group was ''a safe one.'' ''You
don't get too much criticism for choosing a group, there is no personality you
can argue about,'' he explained.

The selection of the physicians organization was something of a surprise, he
added, because they were not well-known in Norway.

Dr. Lown, a distinguished cardiologist who developed several machines and drugs
to prevent sudden death by heart attacks, said today he hoped the award would
mean greater publicity for the International Physicians group.

Inspired by Another Winner

Dr. Lown has said he first became interested in the nuclear war issue in 1959
after he heard a talk in England by Sir Philip John Noel Baker, who had just won
the Nobel Peace prize himself, on the danger of atomic conflict. On his return
to Boston Dr. Lown called together a group of eight doctors in his living room,
out of which grew a group called Physicians for Social Responsibility and a
special issue of the New England Journal of Medicine devoted to the medical
effects of nuclear war. The articles in that issue are still considered one of
the best sources of information on the consequences of a nuclear war.

Dr. Lown's group lost its momentum in the late 1960's and 1970's, overwhelmed by
other causes like the Civil Rights movement and the Vietnam war. But in 1979 he
decided to try to resurrect it with two younger men, Eric Chivian, a
psychiatrist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was interested in
children's fear of nuclear war, and James Muller, an assistant professor of
cardiology at the Harvard Medical School who had studied in Russia.

Dr. Lown then arranged the 1980 meeting in Geneva with Dr. Chazov, whom he had
met earlier when he was invited to give lectures in Moscow on his medical
research.

The group's first international conference, held near Washington in 1981,
coincided with the beginning of a new wave of national concern about nuclear war
and attracted widespread attention because doctors had not previously been so
openly involved in the peace movement.

Although the group's leaders insist they have tried to keep a balanced approach,
not tilting toward either Moscow or Washington, there was criticism of the
group's naivete in 1982 when Dr. Muller appeared with Dr. Chazov on an hourlong
television program shown across the Soviet Union on the danger of nuclear war.
Mr. Muller stressed at the time that the action showed a new willingness by
Moscow to seriously debate the nuclear threat.

Propaganda Aspect Denied

At a press conference today in Boston, Dr. Muller rejected suggestions that the
doctors group has become a propaganda agent for the Soviet Union. ''We are a
medical organization,'' he said. ''We look at nuclear weapons and what they do
to an individual and a country. If the Soviet Goverment wants to endorse our
position, we're pleased,'' he added, referring to the group's call for a
moratorium on all nuclear explosions.

At the news conference, Dr. John O. Pastore, the group's secretary, said it had
28,000 members in the United States, with 60,000 in the Soviet Union.
''Physicians in both the Soviet Union and the United States will be very pumped
up and proud of receiving this,'' he said. ''What their governments do with this
is their business.''

The physicians group has proved that doctors around the world agree ''that a
nuclear war must not be fought and cannot be won,'' Dr. Pastore said. ''Modern
medicine will have nothing to offer the victims of a nuclear conflict.''

In addition to advocating a ban on nuclear explosions, the group has also called
for a verifiable freeze on the development and deployment of all nuclear weapons
and a declaration of no-first-use by the world's nuclear powers.

The Nobel Peace Prize carries an award of about $225,000, which will be
presented in December.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Egil Aarvik announcing winner of Peace Prize in Oslo;photo of
Dr. Bernard Lown and Dr. Yevgeny I. Chazov after hearing of award (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIGHTER PILOTS DISPLAY SKILLS IN A COMPETITION IN NEVADA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev., Oct. 12


The jet fighter planes crowd the sound barrier just 200 feet above the Nevada
desert as the pilots seek out tiny targets. It is a competitive test of bombing
and strafing skills.

''The pressure is absolutely intense - the stress is ultra-high,'' said Lieut.
Col. Bob Hardy of Dallas, a pilot of Muse Air who also flies with the Air
National Guard at Fort Smith, Ark.

''It's a different type of stress than combat, but there can be fatal mistakes
in this as well,'' said Colonel Hardy, who flew 225 missions in F-4 Phantom
airplanes in Vietnam and is flying one here. ''The bottom line out here is there
are not any bullets being shot at you.''

Colonel Hardy is one of 102 fliers on 17 teams competing at Nellis Air Force
Base in an exercise called Gunsmoke '85. The teams came from Air Force bases
throughout the United States, South Korea, West Germany and England and began
bombing and strafing competition Wednesday on the sprawling Nellis range 40
miles northwest of Las Vegas.

Best Guns Made It This Far

The pilots, winners of competitions among their various commands, took a preview
run at the range Tuesday, seeking out old M-47 Army tanks that will take
considerable abuse before the competition ends on Oct. 19.

''The tanks are 30 feet long and 11 feet wide, but the pilot has to hit the
center of the turret to get a bull's-eye,'' Lieut. Col. Jack Redmond said. The
winning team in Gunsmoke '83 hit 30 bull's-eyes in 96 passes.

The competing F-16 Falcon, F-4 Phantom, A-10 Thunderbolt and A-7 Corsair
aircraft circled nearby mountains last week and started their runs at the target
at 2,500 feet, descending to 300 feet to deliver their attack at speeds up to
550 miles an hour, then pulling back into the overcast sky.

A low cloud cover Tuesday kept pilots from performing one of the competition
maneuvers, in which the planes begin a 30-degree dive at 10,000 feet, release
the bomb at 300 feet, then pop up to 2,500 feet ''so we won't blow ourselves
up,'' one pilot explained.

In another maneuver, the planes whipped across the desert at 200 feet, a tactic
designed to avoid being detected by radar.

Judges in a control tower monitor the competition, and video cameras beam the
events to Nellis, where maintenance crews watch their planes perform.
Competition is also held in maintenance and weapons loading categories.

Gunsmoke began in 1949, was suspended in the Korean and Vietnam wars and was
revived in 1981. It is held every two years. Air-to-air competition is held in
Florida in opposite years.

''The pilots take this competition very seriously,'' said Maj. Eddie Foy, the
highest-scoring gunner in 1983. ''They consider it a heck of a challenge. I've
seen pilots actually get sick on the flight line before they go out to
compete.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLACK-ASIAN TENSION STUDIED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 83, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 12


Urban areas need to establish education and anticrime programs to ease tensions
between Asians and blacks and to help fearful immigrants shed their distrust,
according to a report by the Philadelphia Human Relations Commission.

''Many Asians fear any contact with blacks,'' said the Rev. James S. Allen Sr.,
the commission chairman, ''and believe all Americans are a threat to them - even
those who seek to help them.''

The commission said Wednesday that it focused on Philadelphia, where 38
confrontations between blacks and Asians were documented from January 1984 to
last July, but also studied San Francisco, New York and Los Angeles.

''Of the complaints involving commercial establishments, the conflicts ranged
from a firebombing and beatings to vandalism and ethnic intimidation,'' the
commission report said. ''Residential cases included assaults, beatings,
vandalism and harassment. School incidents consisted of fights and a beating by
several assailants.''

Citing bitterness over the Vietnam War as a factor in the tension, the report
said government agencies handling resettlement of the immigrants failed to
inform both sides of the cultural differences.

Philadelphia has more than 100,000 Asian residents, but the commission concluded
that the racial tensions centered primarily on the 20,000 recent immigrants from
Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING IS CLOSER TO BOSCOW, BUT ONLY BY A BIT

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: PEKING


A few years ago, a visiting American official asked Deng Xiaoping to name the
Soviet leader he liked most among those he met on his visits to Moscow in the
1950's. When Mr. Deng named Lazar M. Kaganovich, the American objected that he
had been one of the Soviet figures most intimately linked with Stalin's
consolidation of power. ''He did what he had to do,'' Mr. Deng replied.

Deng Xiaoping rarely fails to impress visitors with his unadorned practicality.
Westerners have watched with pleasure as China's 81-year-old leader has tossed
out Marxist shibboleths in his drive to build an economy that works. But some of
the same people who have applauded China's opening to foreign investment and
free enterprise have been slow to recognize the same hard-nosed, unemotional
quality at work on another front, the mending of fences with the Soviet Union.

Vice President George Bush arrives here today at the start of a six-day official
visit, and one thing he will be keen to learn is how matters lie between Peking
and Moscow. In Washington, the official line has been that the United States
welcomes any progress the two countries can make, the corollary being that the
United States's own relations with China are mature enough not to be affected by
an easing of tensions between the Communist powers.

Matters are not that simple. While the United States has achieved a breadth in
its relations here that no other nation can match, certainly not the Soviet
Union, Peking's gradual accommodation with Moscow has unavoidable implications
for American political and economic influence. While Chinese officials mock the
idea that they are ''playing the Russian card,'' they are no less aware than
President Nixon was in the 1970's of the rules of triangular diplomacy.

In one sense, Washington had little cause to worry about the progress the
''normalization'' talks that have been alternatigng between Peking and Moscow
since the fall of 1982. The seventh round of discussions, which began here 10
days ago, was discounted in advance by China's chief negotiator, Qian Qichen,
who said he expected the talks ''to go on for a long time to come without
progress.'' To Western reporters, Mr. Qian described his Soviet counterpart,
Leonid F. Ilyichev, as an exhausted old man who wasted most of the months of
negotiations explaining why he could not discuss the very things China has
described as the ''obstacles'' to normal ties.

In the order of importance the Chinese have attached to them, these
''obstacles'' are Soviet support for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, the
Soviet troop presence on China's borders and Soviet military intervention in
Afghanistan. Soviet accounts of the talks tally with Mr. Qian's version to the
extent of acknowledging that there has been no movement on any of the three
items. Yet in the estimate of many Western diplomats here, those who judge the
relationship between the two nations on the basis of whether they are able to
move toward a formally defined ''normalization'' are in danger of missing the
importance of what is occurring outside the talks.

On the political front, there has been a virtual cessation of skirmishing.
Routine denunciations of Soviet activity in Vietnam and Afghanistan continue,
but at a lower level of polemics.

Fewer Brickbats

For the rest, gracious tips of the cap have replaced the brickbats of the past.
Mr. Gorbachev is ''Comrade'' in official salutations, and the Chinese press has
found much to applaud in Soviet economic and social achievements. Just as Moscow
has come around to acknowledging some virtue in Mr. Deng's reforms, so the
Chinese have cast Mr. Gorbachev as a modern man intent on shaking off the
lethargy of the past. China has sided with Moscow on President Reagan's ''Star
Wars'' project, although it has taken an equidistant position on the Geneva
talks on nuclear arms.

In other instances, the Chinese have also seemed to lean to the Soviet side.
Commemorations of the 40th anniversary of the end of World War II included
references to the sacrifices made by the Russians in helping to defeat the
Japanese, while the American Army and Air Force, which fought for nearly four
years in China, earned only passing acknowledgment. It was Soviet war graves,
not American ones, that were manicured by groups of young pioneers.

When Westerners try to understand this, they often resort to speculation about
the wily tactics of Mr. Deng. He inherited from Mao Zedong an enmity toward the
West and has turned it to China's benefit. In doing so he has forfeited nothing
in his relations with the West, which remains as keen as ever to enjoy China's
friendship. At the same time, by improving relations with Moscow the Chinese
leader has been able to placate a powerful faction in the Communist Party that
retains a fondness for the Russians and what they accomplished here before the
split. In so doing, he has strengthened the coalition that sustains him as he
challenges the orthodoxies of Mao.

The limits to all this are fairly clear. By and large, politically literate
Chinese trust Russians far less than than they do Americans, and they see much
greater benefits - and fewer costs - in developing close ties with the United
States. Almost nobody wants a return to the intimacies of the 1950's, when Mao
believed that Nikita S. Khruschev, the Soviet leader, was treating him like a
coolie. Yet there are many in powerful places who, like Mr. Deng, believe that
there are dividends in better ties with Moscow, even if it means shading a
little on relations with the United States and other Western powers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOB POSSIBILITIES SOARING IN THE AVIATION INDUSTRY

BYLINE: By Ralph Blumenthal

SECTION: Section 12; Page 20, Column 1; Careers Supplement Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


YOU COULD be in your 40's or 50's and a college dropout, wear eyeglasses and
carry a paunch; but if you are a licensed pilot or yearn to fly, the airlines
may be looking for you. Threatened by a shortage of qualified pilots, airline
companies have been easing some of their criteria - though not safety
qualifications - to open opportunities for once-excluded candidates at salaries
that can reach $174,000 a year for a senior captain. This year, in fact, will
mark a record in the number of new airline pilots hired: about 8,000, nearly
double the previous high of 4,600 set 20 years ago.

Career openings at less munificent wages have also been expanding for other
aviation professionals from flight engineers in the cockpit to cabin flight
attendants, mechanics and other ground personnel. ''The window of opportunity
has broadened dramatically in recent months,'' said Kit Darby, vice president of
Future Aviation Professionals of America, a career-information service and
job-referral agency in Atlanta.

He said that many airlines had quietly dropped previous restrictions that
limited pilot candidates to licensed fliers aged 32 to 35, with at least 2,000
hours of flight time, four years of college and 20-20 vision without glasses.
Recently, Mr. Darby said, some carriers have even been hiring pilots in their
50's who are ''shorter, taller or fatter'' than the conventional profile. And,
he said, airlines are also taking on pilots with as few as 500 hours of flight
time, though the vast majority still have well over 2,000 hours. ''No one wants
to talk about it, but it's happening,'' he said.

According to figures compiled by the 12-year-old Future Aviation Professionals
group, more than 20,000 jobs for pilots and other flight crew members will
become available this year as the airline industry continues to spread its wings
after the deregulation doubts of the early 1980's.

Turning the Corner

Last year more than 345,000 people were working in the industry, arresting the
employment slippage that began in 1980, and this year should mark further
growth, according to Thomas M. Tripp, manager of technical information for the
Air Transport Association, representing the nation's major carriers. The major
airlines account for about 200,000 jobs of which roughly 50,000 are pilots,
100,000 flight attendants and 50,000 mechanics.

The most urgent need is for pilots, experts say. By the year 2000, more than
2,000 pilots a year will be retiring, the Future Aviation Professionals group
has estimated. In addition, it says, up to 30 percent of the current pilot force
will be medically grounded before reaching retirement age.

For years the military services were the main source of airline pilots, with
about three of every four pilots coming from the Air Force and Navy. Now, Mr.
Darby said, the proportion of former military pilots being hired to fill airline
slots has dropped to less than 30 percent, a consequence of the falloff in
numbers of military pilots available after the Vietnam War as well as more
strenuous efforts by the military to hold onto its pilots by offering cash
re-enlistment bonuses.

Unemployment among pilots is put at no more than 4 percent and the number of
those furloughed by hard-pressed airlines, once close to 5,000, is now below
1,300. As a measure of how the demand for pilots has soared, Mr. Darby said that
as recently as 1983 the industry was hiring no more than 800 a year. The
skittishness had largely to do with the unsettled climate that followed the end
of the nearly half-century of close Government economic regulation of the
airlines, which came last Jan. 1 when the Civil Aeronautics Board was disbanded.

This year, however, hiring is expected up be up tenfold, to more than 8,000. The
closest previous peaks, according to the Future Aviation Professionals group,
were 5,400 last year, 4,600 in 1966 and 3,600 in 1979.

The pilots hired by major airlines can expect to reap ample financial gains. But
it is a long runway to takeoff. Beginner student pilots, trained in flying
schools, need to meet Federal Aviation Administration requirements, including an
oral and written test and 40 hours of certified flight time, to obtain a private
pilot's license. After this, to be certified a commercial pilot an applicant
must pass other F.A.A. tests and have logged 250 hours of flight time. To
advance to an airline pilot, a commercial pilot must receive an F.A.A.
instrument rating, demonstrating skill at instrument takeoffs and landings, and
a multi-engine rating. Beyond this, a captain needs to have logged 1,500 hours
as a pilot, though a few flight engineers have recently been hired with 500
hours.

The cockpits of most large airliners hold three pilots. In command is the
captain, with four stripes on his tunic. His deputy is the co-pilot, with three
stripes. The other flier is the flight engineer, or first officer, with two
stripes.

For all this, at a cost for private flying instruction and air hours that can
easily mount into five figures, a beginning flight engineer can start out
earning a mere $1,000 or even less a month. But after about a year's probation
period, pay can rise to $3,000 or more a month. Pay for a captain with seniority
can climb to $100,000 a year and more. The highest regular salary listed by the
Future Aviation Professionals group is for a Boeing 747 senior captain at Flying
Tigers airlines, a cargo carrier, paying $174,000 a year. On the other hand, a
senior captain piloting a small, twin-engine BAC 111 for Florida Express will
make $36,000 a year.

Attendants in Demand

For every pilot or flight engineer, the airlines have been hiring approximately
two flight attendants, who are also called stewardesses and stewards. Nearly
13,000 were hired over the last year.

Living out of a suitcase and serving hundreds of meals to cranky passengers may
sometimes wear thin, but flight attendants gain extensive travel privileges and
commonly rise to salaries of $2,500 or more a month for senior employees. New
hires, however, undergo six months of probation at starting salaries as low as
$700 a month. There are schools that specialize in training flight attendants,
but they are not required; in fact, the airlines all run their own training
programs.

Applicants must have a high school or general diploma; those with some college
education improve their chances, as do candidates fluent in languages,
particularly Spanish, French and German. Airlines still prefer single flight
attendants but will consider married applicants.

The hiring of maintenance workers has also been on the rise; an estimated 5,000
such positions have been filled so far this year. Mechanics, who usually start
at $10 to $15 an hour, can eventually earn more than 30,000 a year. Anyone
involved in the maintenance and repair of aircraft must hold an F.A.A. license.
There are well over 100 private aviation institutes that offer such training.

In addition, the burgeoning aviation industry is providing a growing number of
slots for F.A.A. air-traffic controllers and airline dispatchers, reservation
clerks, sales representatives and ticket agents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of airline pilot hiring trends, 1945-85 (Source: Future Aviation
Professionals of America)

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 36, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


SIDEWALK FAIR IN NYACK More than 25,000 people are expected to stroll the
streets of Nyack, N.Y., today, the attraction being the merchandise-laden tables
set up by 300 crafts and antiques dealers for the town's semi-annual Street
Fair. The seven-hour event gets under way, rain or shine, at 10 A.M.

The items to be offered range from oak furniture and baseball cards to ivory
carvings, tin toys, antique jewelry, porcelain figurines, toy banks, vintage
clothing, deco graphics, oil paintings, dried flower arrangments and wicker
furniture.

Dealers will be on Main Street from Franklin Street to Broadway, and tables also
will occupy the Chemical Bank and Cinema parking lots. On Broadway, there will
be tables from Cedar Hill Avenue to Lydecker Street and in the Post Office
parking lot. Information: (914) 928-9494 or 9495.  MUSICAL 'FRONT PAGE' ''Windy
City,'' a new musical based on the Ben Hecht-Charles MacArthur comedy ''The
Front Page,'' is the current attraction at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn.

Starring Gary Sandy, Ronald Holgate and Judy Kaye, with music by Tony Macaulay
and lyrics by Dick Vosburgh, the show is about a raucous Chicago newsroom in the
1920's. It was directed and choreographed by David H. Bell.

Performances are Wednesday through Sunday at 8 P.M., with matinees on Saturday
and Sunday at 3 P.M. and Thursday at 2 P.M. Tickets are $14 to $28. Group rates
and student-rush tickets also are available. Information: (201) 376-4343.
MILITARY DISPLAYS A military air show featuring the hardware of the Army
National Guard, as well as that of the Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, Navy and
Coast Guard, will be held next Saturday at - and above - Mercer County Airport
in West Trenton.

The static displays will include combat helicopters and jet fighters, and there
will be flyovers by military aircraft. Armored vehicles also will be on view.

The host of the all-service show is the 150th Combat Aviation Battalion of the
New Jersey National Guard. The Guard will soon get the Army's latest tactical
utility helicopter, the UH-60A Blackhawk, one of which will be on display
Saturday.

Aircraft crews will be available to answer questions.

The show, ''Minuteman Aviation,'' will open at 8 A.M. at the airport's main
terminal building and continue until 4 P.M. Military policemen and Civil Air
Patrol cadets will direct visitors to the parking areas.

There is no admission charge. However, if you are the right age, don't be
surprised if you hear a recruiting pitch.

Information: (609) 292-0788.

* At Teterboro Airport today, the Navy plans to celebrate its 210th birthday
with a modern-aircraft exhibit. A Lamps (Light Airborne Multi-Purpose System)
Seasprite helicopter and a red, white and blue T-34 jet trainer can be viewed
adjacent to the National Distiller's hangar near the new control tower.

The helicopter, which operates from the decks of Navy frigates and destroyers,
is equipped with state-of-the-art sensors and weapons systems designed to track
and destroy submarines and surface vessels. It was introduced during the Vietnam
war and participated in military exercises in the Middle East.

The helicopter's Navy flight crew will be on hand to answer questions from 10
A.M. to 4 P.M.

Visitors also will receive a 25 percent discount for admission to the New Jersey
Aviation Hall of Fame. Regular admission is $2.50 for adults, $1.50 for children
and $2 for the elderly.

The airport is accessible from Route 46.

McCARTHY RECALLED

David M. Oshinsky's 1983 biography of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, ''A Conspiracy
So Immense,'' has been well received. In his New York Times review, Anatole
Broyard called it ''this very good biography.''

Dr. Oshinsky, a professor of history at Rutgers University, will lecture next
Sunday in Highland Park. His topic, appropriately enough, is ''Another Look at
Joe McCarthy.''

The lecture will take place at the Highland Park Library, 26 North Sixth Avenue,
at 3 P.M. Admission is $4. Information: (201) 572-2750.  ORGAN RECITAL Dr. John
Low Baldwin, an organist who has performed in Paris, Salzburg and Vienna, will
present a ''promenade organ concert'' today at the Crescent Avenue Presbyterian
Church in Plainfield.

The concert starts at 4 P.M. During it, guests are invited to stroll around the
church and visit the organ loft. The program will include works by J.S. Bach,
Franck, Vierne, Purcell and Handel.

Dr. Baldwin is a soloist with the Philadelphia Orchestra and a professor of
music at Fairleigh Dickinson University in Madison.

The concert is free and will be followed by a reception for Dr. Baldwin at Swain
Galleries, the concert's sponsor.

Information: (201) 756-1707.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART;
FORSS WORKS SHOW ARTFUL SINCERITY

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 32, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words


GEORGE FORSS speaks for artists and fantasists alike when he rounds off a
statement for his show at the Pelham Art Center by saying: ''I just want to be
accepted for myself and appreciated for my talent.'' A cry from the heart, it is
nevertheless voiced by one who has already been accepted and appreciated and in
the most romantic possible way.

An unknown photographer selling his wares on the streets of Manhattan, Mr. Forss
was ''discovered'' in 1981 by no less an authority than David Douglas Duncan,
who is best known as the former Life photographer who covered the Korean and
Vietnam Wars and as the photo-biographer of Picasso.

It can hardly be coincidental that, in the same year, the International Center
for Photography acquired work by Mr. Forss, that he was the subject of both a
BBC documentary and an article in Time magazine and appeared on the ''Today
Show.'' Since then there have been several solo shows in the museums and
galleries of both Manhattan and Brooklyn and still more coverage by television
and the press; and, last year, the photographer was the subject of a book by Mr.
Duncan.

Mr. Forss arrives at the center -at 151 Fifth Avenue in Pelham -fresh from his
first solo show on the West Coast and, perhaps more important, having fulfilled
a commission from Saks Fifth Avenue for mural-sized prints of its windows. It is
not clear whether the photographs of Saks displays in the show - multiple
exposures involving Manhattan street scenes - are smaller versions of the
murals, but they are in any case digressions from the photographer's main
subject, which is the city plain and straight and includes such tourist
attractions as the Brooklyn Bridge, the Statue of Liberty, the Empire State
Building and the World Trade Center. Seen against a dark cloudy sky, the
latter's two towers, turned silver by the sun, act as giant additional smoke
stacks for the QE2, which happens to be sailing by.

It is easy to understand how Mr. Duncan saw these subjects as cliches
transformed - for Mr. Forss, though no naive, seizes upon them with un-
self-conscious intensity and usually with an acute eye for design and pattern.

One of his best efforts focuses on Philip Johnson's new American Telephone and
Telegraph Building, on Madison Avenue, making it the center of an irregular
patchwork made by the black, gray and white buildings alongside and to the west.
Other major works are the long exposure made from above of a fireworks display
over the East River, in which the headlights of cars trickle along the streets
like incandescent lava, and the presumably twilight panorama of midtown
buildings with their lights on that looks like an all-over geometric abstraction
in petit point.

Mr. Forss has his ''Popular Photography'' moments, as in the study of ice
flowers on a window pane, but at the same time he's capable of oddities like the
vase of wilted roses placed on an artfully rumpled lace-edge cloth. Either way,
his intensity and sincerity see him through; so does the queer jumpiness of his
transitions from black to gray to white. A coruscating effect that slicker
photographers would take pains to avoid, it arrests the eye, especially in the
panorama of New York Harbor under clouds pierced, Albert Bierstadt-style, by
shafts of sunlight, as well as giving it a lot of work to do. (Through Nov. 16.)
Black-and-white photographs play a major part in the miscellany available at the
Hudson River Museum in Yonkers (through Nov. 3). The work of David Grossman and
Nancy Stout, these are raw, journalistic shots -seemingly deliberately so - of
boxers and boxing, taken in Mexico and at Gleason's Gym in New York City.
Celebrities such as Sugar Ray Leonard, Roberto Duran and Salvador Sanchez crop
up from time to time; there are also shots of actual fights. But mostly this is
an account of the essentially monastic profession that is boxing and the
commitment it involves as well as a certain loneliness.

An occupation that calls for a measure of poverty and the killer instinct, in
addition to physical attributes, prizefighting, needless to say, has
traditionally defined the underclass of the moment, hence the preponderance of
black and Hispanic contenders in these pictures and the corresponding absence of
''white hopes.'' Two notable prints are the portrait of a black club fighter,
his face beaded with sweat, and, reflecting that tenderness is also part of the
fight package, the study of an older man doing something to a boy's shoulder.
Though vast quantities of symbolism can be read into this show, 60 prints
strong, it remains essentially a documentary that will be primarily of interest
to fight fans.

Finally, notes on the 54 illustrations done by William Glackens (1870 to 1938)
in his New York years, and the 70th Hudson River Annual. A member of The Eight,
or Ashcan School, Glackens, as many other painters of the time, made his living
for years illustrating magazines and books. He was a talented but shallow
draftsman who evidently derived inspiration from various Punch luminaries and
whose drawings range from the dainty and incisive to the kind of vulgar ethnic
caricature that was acceptable at the time. Who would guess from these pictures,
charming though some are (or for that matter from the imitation Renoirs he began
producing around 1914), that Glackens, a school friend of Albert Barnes, was
largely responsible for the doctor's magnificent collection, or that he was
chairman for the Armory Show of 1913?

Consisting exclusively of work by member artists, the Hudson River Annual
presents a rather more conservative face than usual, as well as a generally high
standard of craftsmanship. The group's president, Alton Tobey, recently in the
news for his mural at the White Plains County Courthouse, is represented by
fragments of famous men - that is to say, paintings of Winston Churchill's mouth
and chin, of the brow, the nose and one eye of Albert Schweitzer, and so on.
Noteworthy, too, are the Roza Smithsi's incredibly smooth Surrealist works,
part-abstractions, part-interiors with objects and an occasional glimpse of a
nude. Most memorable is Sonia Sacoder Astor, who makes landscapes with collage
and paint that include a myriad of small images - missiles, astronauts, war
scenes, rural scenes - that add up to visions that look inspired by Hieronymous
Bosch.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by David Grossman; Photo of work by George Forss

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A KEYNESIAN WHO REFUSES TO QUIT

BYLINE: By MERYL GORDON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2666 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


When Nobel Prize-winning economist James Tobin was a sophomore at an Illinois
high school in 1932, his class took a straw poll for the Presidency. The
verdict: 30 votes for Herbert Hoover, one for the Socialist Norman Thomas and
one lone vote -young Mr. Tobin's - for the Democratic contender, Franklin Delano
Roosevelt.

For Mr. Tobin, now 67 and the much-honored Sterling Professor of Economics at
Yale University, youthful experience as a controversial liberal voice in a
conservative world presaged his current role. At a time when economic thought is
Meryl Gordon writes on economics from New York. dominated by free-market
conservatives who believe in shrinking government, when liberal politicians have
abandoned their traditional role as free-traders and embraced protectionism, Mr.
Tobin remains committed to Keynesian economic policies, free trade and a belief
that government has a moral responsibility to fight unemployment and help the
poor.

''I have lived long enough to see the revolution to which I was an eager recruit
50 years ago become in its turn a mainstream orthodoxy, and then the target of
counter-revolutionary attack,'' Mr. Tobin said recently. ''The tides of
political opinion and professional fashion have turned against me.''

The tides may have shifted, but the basic economic problems that Mr. Tobin has
devoted his career to exploring are still high on the nation's policy agenda. He
has worked for decades - as both theorist and pragmatist - on the riddles of
monetary policy, on the elusive relationship between budget deficits and
economic growth and on understanding the forces that help shape a merger wave,
such as the one transforming American industry today. Recently, the
Congressional Budget Office asked the professor to prepare a paper analyzing
when skyrocketing interest costs on the Federal debt will explode the Federal
budget.

While Mr. Tobin's work may not be familiar to the general public, it has had a
wide-ranging impact on his profession. ''I think he's the leading macroeconomist
of our generation,'' said Paul A. Samuelson, another Nobel Prize winner who is
Institute professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A
macroeconomist studies the way an overall economic system performs, with
particular attention to the vagaries of budgetary and monetary policies.

Even Milton Friedman, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution and one who has
spent most of his professional life disagreeing with Mr. Tobin on economic
policy, says he admires his adversary's originality and calls him ''very able,
intelligent and thoughtful.''

Mr. Tobin, a lanky energetic man who still dashes down three flights of stairs
when late for a class, has spent much of his career researching and elaborating
on the theories of John Maynard Keynes, the late British financier whose
theories provide much of the foundation for modern macroeconomics. In speeches,
interviews and published papers, he passionately reiterates his belief that
Keynesian theories are still valid: that the free market will not cure
unemployment and society's other ills, and that it is possible, through budget
and monetary policies, to stabilize the economy.

As a long-time advocate of a tight fiscal policy and a relatively loose monetary
policy, Mr. Tobin has harsh words for the Reagan Administrations's economic
policies - until quite recently, the Administration preferred the opposite mix
of large budget deficits and tight control over money growth. Says Mr. Tobin of
the Administration's 1981 tax cuts: They are ''one of the biggest mistakes in
economic policy in history.''

He says the painful legacy of the tax cuts is already visible. The enormous
budget deficits, a result of the cuts combined with a buildup of military
spending, raised interest rates, which in turn created a huge inflow of foreign
capital, pushing up the dollar and causing unprecedented foreign trade deficits.
The current political swing toward protectionism, he says, is a ''Band-Aid
approach'' that ignores the basic problem. In the longer term, Mr. Tobin is also
worried that large budget deficits will limit future economic growth here by
crowding out private investment. TO UNDO the damage, he says, the country needs
a tax increase - an oil tax, a temporary income-tax surcharge or a value-added
tax - as well as further budget cuts to bring down the Federal deficit. ''Some
programs are pretty wasteful,'' he said, citing maritime subsidies and
agricultural price supports as examples. ''There's a song in the Mikado about
the little list of society's offenders, that you could do without. But they
don't add up to a lot of money.''

Mr. Tobin, whose piercing eyes and austere manner have intimidated many a
student and colleague, has found himself at odds with the monetarists throughout
his career. He agrees with them that the size of the money supply is a critical
determinant of economic growth. But he rejects their basic tenets that the money
supply is the sole determinant of economic growth and that ''velocity'' - the
speed with which money moves through the economy - can be treated as a constant.

In his seminal work on portfolio theory - which was cited by the Nobel committee
- Mr. Tobin showed how investors altered their portfolios in response to changes
in the economic climate, such as new interest-rate levels, new risks or new
information about economic conditions. He further demonstrated that, by shifting
investments from, say, cash to real estate, or stocks to bonds, investors
profoundly affected the velocity at which money moves.

Mr. Tobin's finding, which dates back to 1947, still figures prominently in
economic policy debates. If, as seems to be happening now, people decide to
increase their holdings of cash, velocity would fall. And if the Federal Reserve
Board should not compensate for this by pushing more money and credit into the
economy, a drop in velocity could slow economic activity in the months ahead.

Today, a debate is under way over the recently rapid growth of a key monetary
policy target known as M-1 (the money supply figure that measures the total of
currency in circulation and money in checking accounts). Mr. Tobin and others
are not particularly concerned because they think velocity may be on the
slide.Moreover, they argue that because of changes in financial instruments in
the wake of deregulation, M-1 is not the indicator it once was.

Even the Fed's governors now admit that Mr. Tobin is probably right when he says
''the time has passed, if it ever existed, to rely on a steady relationship
between M-1'' and economic growth. The Fed has recently loosened the monetary
reins, allowing M-1 to grow at an annual rate of 11.7 percent in September.

One of Mr. Tobin's other major contributions to economic thought is a concept
called the ''Q factor,'' which represents the ratio of the market value of
assets to their replacement cost - such as the price of buying an existing home
versus the cost of building a new one.

The Q factor casts a clear light on the current merger mania: Corporations often
find it makes better financial sense to buy up the undervalued shares of another
company and take it over than to use the cash to expand their own facilities.
Mr. Tobin says he is not ''an alarmist'' about the large number of mergers and
takeover attempts. ''It's a reflection of the efficiency of the markets - even
if it takes a Boone Pickens to bring stock prices up to where they ought to
be,'' he said with a laugh, speaking of the Texas oil man whose many takeover
efforts have driven up the price of several oil company stocks.

His theoretical contributions to economics notwithstanding, Mr. Tobin is perhaps
best known for his passion for achieving full employment and greater social
equity. He is deeply disturbed that the Reagan Administration and the Federal
Reserve now assume that the natural unemployment rate - the rate below which
inflation heats up - is 7 percent. Mr. Tobin thinks the natural rate is closer
to 6 percent, and that the country, with unemployment today hovering around 7
percent - is losing enormous productive potential.

Since the 1970's, he notes, the unemployment rate has ratcheted up at the end of
each recession. If the Government accepts a 7 percent unemployment rate now, he
fears, it will wind up with an even higher rate down the road. So he favors an
easier monetary policy to stimulate the economy. ''The inflation rate is still
going down, there are no signs of shortages or bottlenecks, the unions are
behaving like tame dogs,'' he said. ''There's no reason to say there's a great
risk of reigniting inflation by lowering the unemployment rate.'' LONG-TIME
friends describe Mr. Tobin as unswerving in his vision of how the world should
work. ''I think that comes from integrity,'' said Mr. Samuelson, adding with a
laugh, ''People who disagree say it's stubbornness.'' The two economists have
been friends since their school days at Harvard more than 40 years ago.

Robert Solow, an Institute professor at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, says simply: ''He's the most straight-arrow person in the world. If
I ever have a moral dilemma, I just say to myself, 'What would James Tobin do?'
''

Mr. Tobin traces his strong sense of social conscience back to his childhood in
Champaign, Ill., where his mother, Margaret, a social worker, ran a relief
agency during the Depression and his father, Louis Michael, was the publicity
director for the University of Illinois sports department. ''My father was known
as a dissenter in a very conservative Republican community,'' he says.

Mr. Tobin took his liberal views off to Harvard University, as one of the
school's first scholarship students. Even though Harvard was populated by
wealthy preppies, Mr. Tobin says he found his own niche easily. ''Harvard had
price discrimination in its rents,'' he remembers with a smile. ''So all us
liberal Democrats were in the cheap rooms, and knew each other quite well.''

He intended to become a lawyer, but his plans changed as a sophomore when a
tutor suggested he tackle a controversial new book: Keynes's ''The General
Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.'' Won over by the idea that ''the
truth would make us free and fully employed too,'' Mr. Tobin plunged into the
study of economics.

After graduation in 1941, he went to Washington to work for the Office of Price
Administration's Civilian Supply division, then enlisted in the Navy after the
bombing of Pearl Harbor. A classmate at the Naval Reserve Officers Training
School, Herman Wouk, later created a thinly disguised character in his book
''The Caine Mutiny'' based on Mr. Tobin - a midshipman named Tobit, ''ahead of
his class by a spacious percentage'' with a ''mind like a sponge.''

When the war ended, Mr. Tobin finished his graduate training at Harvard, and
then accepted a teaching post at Yale in 1950, where he has been ever since with
just a few breaks. One came in 1961, when President John F. Kennedy invited Mr.
Tobin to join the Council of Economic Advisers, led by Walter Heller, now a
professor at the University of Minnesota. The call was a surprise: ''I'm afraid
you've got the wrong guy, Mr. President; I'm an ivory tower economist,'' Mr.
Tobin, who never has worked in the private sector, recalls saying. The
oft-quoted reply: ''That's the best kind. I'll be an ivory tower President.''

Mr. Tobin came to Washington at a political and intellectual turning point, when
the Democrats regained power after eight years in exile. President Kennedy
embraced Keynesian ideas, adopting in 1961 a package of stimulative measures to
cut unemployment, including the investment tax credit, which Mr. Tobin is
credited with helping to develop.

While numerous Democrats have since consulted Mr. Tobin on economic policy, his
only other major involvement in politics came in 1972, when he advised the
Democratic Presidential candidate, Senator George McGovern. Mr. Tobin figured
prominently in an early fiasco in the McGovern campaign -a welfare reform
provision that would guarantee everyone a minimum income of $1,000 a year, a
variation on an idea that Mr. Tobin has long espoused, the negative income tax.

Critics charged that the plan was poorly thought through. Mr. Tobin, drawn to
the campaign by his opposition to the Vietnam War, says the candidate and his
political advisers never understood his proposal for a negative income tax and
''got themselves into hot water.''

Mr. Tobin says he does not want to be characterized as ''a non-thinking, New
Deal liberal.'' But he has angry words for younger Democrats, whom he sees as
abandoning Keynesian ideas to placate middle-class voters.

''Reagan has scared the Democrats out of talking about macroeconomic policy,''
said Mr. Tobin, his voice rising. ''Again and again you hear new-wave Democrats
saying how we have to have new ideas, and not the discredited ideas of the past.
They're basically just buying the Republican conservative allegations that those
ideas that stabilized the economy are outmoded and counterproductive. That's
left the Democrats without any proposals.'' Instead of discussing ways to reduce
unemployment, Mr. Tobin says, the Democrats ''try to change the subject and talk
about tariffs, new ideas and tax reform.''

In reluctant recognition of the country's ideological shift to the right, Mr.
Tobin acknowledges that many of his policy prescriptions are ''out of fashion.''
But he thinks it is only a matter of time before the pendulum swings back, and
the Keynesian prescriptions about economic growth are more enthusiastically
received.

A NOBEL PRIZEMORALE BOOST

When James Tobin won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science four years ago
today, the honor brought him out of what colleagues at Yale describe as a period
of frustration and discouragement. Mr. Tobin apparently felt personally offended
in 1980 when President Reagan swept into office in a blaze of supply-side
pronouncements and Keynes bashing.

The prize gave Mr. Tobin's words great weight outside the academic community,
where he was already widely respected, and his speeches and articles attacking
Mr. Reagan's policies have since received greater attention. ''He has always
been busy, but since the prize, everyone wants him to give a lecture here and
there, and the man doesn't know how to say no,'' says his wife, Betty.

Mr. Tobin was cited by the Nobel committee for his work on portfolio theory, as
well as his contributions to the ongoing debate on ''monetary policy, the
implications of budget deficits and stabilization policy in general.''

Since winning the Nobel,away, Mr. Tobin's life has taken on a familiar rhythm.
He is teaching two graduate courses at Yale this semester - small classes,
because he does not like ''performing.'' Mrs. Tobin, trained as an economist,
tutors foreign graduate students in conversational English. Their summers are
spent at a cottage in Springbrook, Wis., where Mr. Tobin sets up shop in a
converted outhouse that his family calls ''The Ivory Tower.''

His routine is punctuated by frequent travels: two weeks in China late last
summer at a World Bank conference to help the Chinese revise their macroeconomic
policies; off a week ago to Washington to supervise a National Science
Foundation study on the progress of blacks in the United States.

On campus, he is known as a professor who encourages debate and dissent, but can
be thin-skinned when his own work is challenged. Though brusque at times, the
professor is generally accessible, students and junior faculty alike say.

While Mr. Tobin's great love is economics, he has a passion for playing tennis
and watching baseball, as well as going to the theater, caring for his huge
black Newfoundland dog, Lola, and reading widely (recent books include ''Uncivil
Liberties,'' by Calvin Trillin, ''Strike Two,'' by the former baseball umpire,
Ron Luciano, and ''Deadly Gambits,'' by Strobe Talbott).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Tobin (NYT/Rollin A. Riggs)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OVERBURDENED BY HIS VIRTUE

BYLINE: By A. R. Gurney; A. R. Gurney Jr.'s most recent works are ''The Snow
Ball,'' a novel, and ''The Golden Age,'' a play.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1645 words


HONORABLE MEN By Louis Auchincloss. 278 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
$15.95.

LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS is one of the few remaining heirs to what has been called the
''genteel tradition'' in American fiction, and no one is more aware of his
literary predecessors than Mr. Auchincloss himself. His latest novel,
''Honorable Men,'' resonates with echoes of his distinguished ancestors; it even
occasionally gives an explicit bow in their direction. Here is a young debutante
reviewing a winter of discontent:

''When I looked back over those months of futile activity, I had only a sense of
hundreds of bland young faces, of lips forming inane compliments or feeble
jokes, and of laughs, smiles, giggles, an endless bray of pointless jocosity.
Where was the heart of fools? Of course, in the House of Mirth!''

This is a heroine of Jamesian sensibilities reviewing her Fitzgeraldian
activities by invoking Edith Wharton's novel. ''The house of mirth'' is also
from a quotation from Ecclesiastes. Louis Auchincloss's novel seethes with
references to the Bible, Shakespeare, Milton, Keats, Shelley and even John
Bunyan. Its title, of course, is taken from Mark Antony's funeral speech in
''Julius Caesar,'' but there are further allusions to ''Macbeth,'' ''Hamlet''
and particularly ''Coriolanus.'' The Bible is present not only in some of the
sonorous rhythms of Mr. Auchincloss's prose, but also in recurring references to
the Garden of Eden, the War in Heaven and various incidents in the New
Testament. Three times, for example, in a relatively short book, different
characters talk about being able to chant their ''Nunc Dimittis.''

If the book seems a little overburdened with literary baggage, perhaps that is
because it is about being overburdened. Its hero, Chip Benedict, has been born
into a world of considerable wealth and defined moral responsibilities. The only
son of the owner of a prestigious glass manufacturing company, the only grandson
of a distinguished clergyman-headmaster of a first-rate boys' boarding school,
Chip finds himself predestined to behave with rectitude and righteousness all
the days of his life. ''People like us,'' his father tells him on a fishing trip
into the Canadian woods, are ''born with certain privileges and are therefore
bound to contribute more than the average to their fellow men.'' His grandfather
views him in more Calvinistic terms, as a member of God's elect, and therefore
incapable of those transgressions which seem inevitably to occur in the cubicles
of boys' dormitories.

How Chip (''off the old block'') manages to reconcile, or not to reconcile, his
private impulses and personal passions with the public Benedictions he was born
to receive is the burden of ''Honorable Men.'' In its obsessions with our
Puritan heritage and the psychological price paid for submitting to these
awesome demands, the book evokes still another American master, Nathaniel
Hawthorne, and here again Mr. Auchincloss demonstrates his debt to the brooding
New Englander by giving us black-suited tempters and precarious Edens, bounded
by the woods.

To Louis Auchincloss, who is a practicing lawyer as well as a novelist, as to
Mark Antony, ''honorable men'' for all the right reasons can do all the wrong
things. In the course of his ostensibly upright career, Chip Benedict manages to
betray a friend, destroy his father, sell out his family's company, ruin his
marriage and send his children reeling into desperately puritanical protests of
their own. As a naval officer in World War II, he temporarily finds a kind of
simplified moral universe where he can feel most in tune with himself; in the
heroic act of helping to rid his ship of an undischarged bomb, he feels a brief
relief from the explosive pressures within his own soul. Peacetime muddies the
moral waters again, but when, in his yearning for redemption, he offers his
services to the State Department in support of the Vietnam War, the grim legacy
of the Puritan heritage becomes apparent in all its perversity:

''Can't you take in that this is the first real moral challenge we've had since
Pearl Harbor? And that we've actually elected to meet it without using the bomb?
That we've chosen to fight not a war, but a duel, and with prescribed weapons?
We, who could annihilate Hanoi with a single blow! It's . . . well, it's
magnificent! It restores honor to a cynical globe.'' Here the rich old
Protestant terminology (''challenge,'' ''elected,'' ''chosen'') modulates into
the silly notion of an aristocratic duel. An internal sense of righteousness
dwindles into an external concern for reputation. As Chip's grandfather says
about the ''serious'' boys at St. Luke's School: ''They seem to have the rules
without the faith.'' Or as a cynical old bachelor comments soon after: ''When
God goes, Emily Post takes His place.''

In any case, Chip is commissioned ''Special Assistant to the Secretary of State,
with the particular mission of engendering support for the American cause in
Vietnam among the nations of Southeast Asia.'' He leases a house in Georgetown,
works hard, travels to Asia, separates from his wife, initiates an affair with
his secretary and ultimately resigns from his job with the same stoic setting of
his jaw that has carried him through the other grim decisions in his life. He
may have ''seen the light,'' but it is a pallid, godless flicker. Whatever guilt
or anguish he may feel about his participation in the Vietnam War is submerged
in his psyche like the unexploded bomb: ''Repentance is a sterile thing. I did
what I thought was best at the time. Now it's over. We go on. That's all.''

Oddly enough, in these latter sections of the novel, when his hero moves to
Washington and his Puritan convictions would seem to have the most serious and
destructive repercussions on the country at large, the author turns away as if
in distaste from the political arena to focus once again on the domestic and the
personal. Mr. Auchincloss knows more than most of us about the corridors of
power, but in this book he's not particularly interested in leading us down
them. T HERE are other problems with ''Honorable Men.'' Half the narrative
burden is in the hands of Chip's wife, Alida, who seems to lose shape and spine
as she tells her side of it. She admits as much, by describing herself as ''the
worn-out garment that I turned myself into for his adornment.'' The trouble is,
old clothes aren't terribly exciting, and Alida doesn't bring much life to the
story. Indeed, there is a tendency toward stuffiness in the writing that can
occasionally settle over the book like dust. People dwell too long on Yale's
secret societies and not long enough on their own children. Couples call each
other ''my dear'' or ''dearest,'' but only after they're engaged. Everybody
seems to have a strong-minded ''mummie'' who knows a lot about money and thinks
certain things are ''uncalled for.'' Occasionally the atmosphere becomes so
clubby that one longs for someone like Philip Roth to arrive and say, ''O.K.,
gang, break it up.''

But in his attempt to come to grips with a long-standing American obsession -
how the values, if not the beliefs, of our Puritan forefathers still permeate
some of their descendants, and what is won and lost by adhering to them - Mr.
Auchincloss adds a significant work to his long and considerable canon. Chip
Benedict's struggle to reconcile a Classical concern for public reputation with
his Christian thirst for personal righteousness is memorable. Moreover, it is a
struggle that could only occur in this country, under our special heritage, and
as such it illuminates our sense of ourselves as Americans. Finally, in its
descriptions of upper-class life, particularly boarding schools (''ringing bells
and barking masters'' and summers in Bar Harbor, Me., (''a Garden of Eden where
everybody's allowed to eat the apples''), ''Honorable Men'' ushers us into a
rare world in prose as smooth and burnished as well-oiled furniture. VIETNAM AND
YALE The conflict between generations about the Vietnam War echoes through the
pages of Louis Auchincloss's ''Honorable Men.'' Talking in his Wall Street law
office recently, the novelist explained the origins of the theme in this, his
28th work of fiction.

''I read David Halberstam's 'The Best and the Brightest' twice. It is a powerful
book. What he did in nonfiction, I have tried to do in this novel. I don't think
I came close,'' he said graciously. ''I've synthesized some of the 'best and
brightest' people who managed the Vietnam War and created a prototype in my
character Chip Benedict. I used to say to my father, 'Everything would be all
right if only my class at Yale ran the country.' Well, they did run the country
during the Vietnam War and look what happened!''

Of course, Mr. Auchincloss had his own life and writings to draw upon. Like Chip
Benedict, Louis Auchincloss went to Yale, class of '39, the University of
Virginia law school, and served on LST's during World War II. In his 1976 book,
''The Winthrop Covenant,'' the last story is titled ''The Penultimate Puritan.''
The character he created in that story, he said, resembles Chip Benedict, but he
has often taken a story with a character who had more to say and expanded it
into a book. ''This new novel,'' Mr. Auchincloss said, ''is my ultimate
explanation of the Puritan ethic in our time. To some people of my generation,
the war was a valid event. To young people, Vietnam was a complete disaster.''

Inevitably in the novelistic process, Mr. Auchincloss invented incidents and
attitudes. His own sons were too young to be eligible to serve in Vietnam, while
in the novel, the children of the protagonist break with their father about
service in that war. ''I myself was a good deal more opposed to the war,'' Mr.
Auchincloss said, ''than my main character.'' - Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Louis Auchinloss (NYT/Keith Meyers)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

15 MARINES DIE IN COPTER CRASH OFF NORTH CAROLINA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., Oct. 15


A helicopter carrying 19 marines plunged into the ocean while taking off from a
ship on maneuvers in pre-dawn darkness today, and officials said 15 marines were
killed and four rescued.

Gunnery Sgt. John Simmons of the Marine Corps said the twin-rotor CH-46D Sea
Knight helicopter, flown by a crew of four, crashed in 50 feet of water about
four miles off the North Carolina coast on takeoff from the U.S.S. Guadalcanal,
a carrier-like helicopter and troop ship.

The body of one marine was recovered shortly after the 6 A.M. accident, and four
survivors were pulled from the water near the ship, Sergeant Simmons said.

Navy and Marine divers conducted a search and rescue operation in Onslow Bay
much of the day for more survivors, but Sergeant Simmons said the effort was
called off in late afternoon and hope had been abandoned of finding anyone else
alive.

The dead men were not identified pending notification of relatives.

The cause of the accident was under investigation.

A Marine spokesman said that the four survivors were in good condition aboard
the ship.

Sergeant Simmons described the CH-46D as ''a very safe aircraft'' that has been
in use since the Vietnam War. He said he did not have any statistics on the
safety record of the helicopter.

The marines were based at Camp Lejeune and its New River Air Station, said Staff
Sgt. Terry Ruggles, of the Camp Lejeune public affairs office.

The accident occurred not far from a site that the marines use for practicing
beach landings, but Marine officials said the ship's exact location was not
determined.

The helicopter was assigned to a helicopter squadron at Cherry Point, N.C. The
CH-46 is the principal assault helicopter of the Marine Corps and also is used
extensively by the Navy to carry cargo and passengers between ships and shore
facilities.

The Guadalcanal, based in Norfolk, Va., carries a crew of 650 and up to 2,000
troops and was participating in amphibious operations with the an amphibious
unit from Camp Lejeune, Sergeant Simmons said.

Last November at Camp Lejeune a CH-53 helicopter, the Marines newest and largest
model, crashed, killing six servicemen. Last March at Fort Bragg, N.C., an Army
helicopter crashed, killing 12 men.

The death toll today was said to be the third highest involving a Marine
helicopter. Last May, 17 marines were killed when a CH-53 helicopter crashed in
the sea off Japan. In March 1984, 18 United States marines and 11 South Korean
marines were killed when a CH-53 crashed in South Korea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Working Profile: Edward P. Djerejian;
New Rose Among White House Press Thorns

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


''You couldn't get Hertz, you're getting Avis,'' Edward P. Djerejian remarked
with a laugh the other afternoon as he climbed up to the podium in the White
House press room.

Although he is No. 2 to the White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, on foreign
affairs, Mr. Djerejian has emerged as one of the more unusual figures at 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue.

The first career Foreign Service officer in years to serve as a White House
spokesman, he is a nonpolitical diplomat amid Republican appointees, a fairly
candid spokesman in a White House whose officials are often stonily
unresponsive, and a dapper dresser - he favors double-breasted blazers - among
charcoal grays.

Mr. Djerejian was hired by Mr. Speakes over the summer to replace Robert B.
Sims, the former chief foreign-policy expert in the White House press office who
moved to the Pentagon as chief spokesman.

Since then Mr. Speakes and Mr. Djerejian have more or less assumed control over
the Reagan Administration's foreign policy pronouncements. It was Mr. Speakes,
for example, rather than the State Department, who issued the White House
response to the hijacking of an Italian cruise liner in which an American was
slain.

But Mr. Speakes denies that he has deliberately sought to supersede the State
Department and its spokesman, Bernard Kalb.

'It Just Wouldn't Wash'

Noting that the first White House briefing of the day - at 9:15 - comes before
the State Department briefing at noon, Mr. Speakes said: ''If we try to defer
things to the State Department, it just wouldn't wash. An example is the Israeli
raid into Tunis. You can't duck those questions.''

Mr. Djerejian, who was No. 2 to Mr. Kalb at the State Department, had previously
served as a political officer in the Middle East, France and the Soviet Union.

So far, the chief complaint about him from White House correspondents is that he
is still learning the job and thus lacks the authority of Mr. Sims. There is
also the impression, not necessarily negative, that he is ambitious and moved to
the White House in hopes of eventually getting a plum foreign policy assignment.

But in the view of the soft-spoken Mr. Djerejian, if such a reward comes he will
earn it. In the current job, he arrives at the White House by 6:30 A.M. to
confer with officials on the National Security Council and the State Department
before preparing the morning ''guidance'' for Mr. Speakes. Throughout the day,
he fields scores of telephone inquiries before leaving the White House, often
after the evening news telecasts. On most evenings at home he gets still more
telephone inquiries, including one once from a correspondent at about 3 A.M.

Mr. Djerejian concedes that there are plenty of professional risks in ac-cepting
a highly public, often politically sensitive job. Most career Foreign Service
officers, in fact, seek to remain nameless and faceless. (Mr. Djerejian recently
added a second Foreign Service officer to the White House to serve as his
deputy, 27-year-old Michael Guest, an arms control specialist.) ''I think
basically some of my friends think I'm suicidal,'' said Mr. Djerejian, seated in
his spacious office in the Old Executive Office Building, overlooking the White
House West Wing. ''In this job, there's tremendously high potential for public
error. You have to maintain both substantive credibility and personal integrity
with the press corps and with colleagues.

''The public exposure is so great, the risks are so high,'' he added. ''Maybe I
just enjoy living on the razor's edge.''

As for the risk of jeopardizing his prospects in the Foreign Service by his
close identification with the Reagan White House, Mr. Djerejian said: ''I
discussed this with some of my closest friends and colleagues at the State
Department. There's always a political risk involved.''

Mr. Djerejian grew up in Jackson Heights and Elmhurst, Queens, the son of
Armenian political refugees who worked in the restaurant business in New York. A
talent for languages - he now speaks French, Russian, Armenian and Arabic - and
a yearning to travel led him to enter the Foreign Service in 1963, after
receiving a degree from Georgetown University and serving in the Army in Korea.
He lives in suburban Maryland with his wife, Francois, and two children.

At the White House, he said, the constant jousting between spokesmen and the
press surprised him. Moreover, he says, the dominance of television
personalities among the White House press, and the attention paid to them, lends
an aura of show business to news briefings there.

''I don't sense hostility on the part of the press, but excessive cynicism and,
at times, distrust,'' he said. ''There has been this rooting of distrust that I
trace to Vietnam. It causes what seems to be hostility, but it's really undue
cynicism. It's really much more evident here because of the political role of
the White House compared to the more institutional role of the State
Department.''

Mr. Djerejian also said he was unaccustomed to the White House's rapid
decision-making process, as compared to the more formal clearances required at
the State Department.

''You have to get used to making final decisions without clearing from as many
people as I had been used to,'' he said. ''I remember telling Larry Speakes,
'I'm not sure we can use this.' He looked at me and said, 'Ed, you're at the
White House.' The buck, indeed, stops here.''

On the range of foreign policy issues, he expressed surprise at ''the
interaction of domestic policy and politics and foreign policy.'' At the State
Department, he indicated, that interaction is often overlooked.

''Ultimately decisions are made here with both foreign policy and domestic
considerations in mind,'' he said. ''At the State Department you make the best
judgments on the foreign policy interests of the U.S. Here you have to be
abundantly aware, and put in the equation, domestic policy considerations.
That's new for me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edward P. Djerejian

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. ROLL-CALL VOTE ON EFFORT TO DENY CREDENTIALS TO ISRAEL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 16


Following is the roll-call vote of 80 to 41 by which the United Nations General
Assembly adopted a motion not to act on an amendment calling for the denial of
the credentials of Israel. A vote in favor of the motion supported a
Swedish-sponsored proposal that no action be taken on the amendment, which was
introduced by 18 Arab nations. A vote against the motion supported the Arab
amendment. There were 20 abstentions, and 18 nations did not participate.

In Favor - 80 Antigua & Barbuda Argentina Australia Austria Bahamas Barbados
Belgium Belize Bolivia Botswana Brazil Britain Burma Cameroon Canada Central Af.

Republic Chad Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cyprus Denmark Dominica Dominican
Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Fiji Finland France Gabon
Germany, West Greece Grenada Guatemala Honduras Iceland Ireland Israel Italy
Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Kenya Lesotho Liberia Luxembourg Malawi Mauritius
Mexico Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines
Portugal Rumania St. Christ. & Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent & Gren. Samoa
Seychelles Singapore Solomon Islands Spain Sri Lanka Swaziland Sweden Thailand
Togo Trinidad & Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Yugoslavia Zambia Against
- 41 Afghanistan Algeria Angola Bahrain Bangladesh Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso
Byelorussia Comoros Cuba Czechoslovakia Djibouti Germany, East Indonesia Iran
Iraq Kuwait Laos Lebanon Libya Malaysia Maldives Mali Mauritania Mongolia
Morocco Nicaragua Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Soviet Union Sudan Syria
Tunisia Ukraine U. Arab Emirates Vietnam Yemen Yemen, Southern Abstentions - 20
Benin Bhutan Burundi China Ethiopia Ghana Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti India
Madagascar Niger Nigeria Papua New Guinea Rwanda Sierra Leone Tanzania Turkey
Uganda Zimbabwe Absent or Not Voting - 18 Albania Cambodia Cape Verde Congo
Gambia Guinea Hungary Jordan Malta Mozambique Oman Poland Sao Tome & Principe
Senegal South Africa Suriname Vanuatu Zaire

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

UNIVERSITIES TAKE LEAD IN NEW VOLUNTEER EFFORTS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1609 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Oct. 16


Amid signs that a growing number of college students are quietly volunteering
for public service jobs, a group of 75 university presidents today announced the
creation of a major program to support student participation in community
activities.

The project, co-sponsored by the presidents of Brown, Georgetown and Stanford
Universities, will establish a campus network to match students seeking
volunteer work with agencies that need help.

College officials and faculty around the country say they have noted a surge in
student interest in volunteering, although educators at some large state and
city colleges caution that many of their students must work to help pay for
their schooling and have little time for volunteer service.

Harvard Charts a Rise

There are no national statistics available. At Harvard, however, since school
administrators began to chart the trend three years ago, the number of
graduating seniors who have devoted time to community service has risen from 35
percent to 51 percent of the class.

Vanderbilt University in Nashville has recently developed two programs in which
students assist in providing physical checkups and do environmental health
studies for poor communities in Appalachia. At the University of California at
Berkeley, a group of 9 sororities and 27 fraternities recently enrolled 1,000
members to spend at least one hour a week tutoring children or supervising
after-hours activities in Berkeley's public schools.

''I could have stood on the steps of Sproul Hall a few years ago shouting into a
microphone and nobody would have listened,'' said Martha Jones, a Berkeley
graduate who started the program. ''But these students are so enthusiastic.
Who's projecting that these kids are selfish?''

In a statement about the new project announced today, the Project for Public and
Community Service, the 75 college presidents acknowledged: ''Over the last
decade the interest of college students in their obligations to society appears
to have diminished. More and more of them have become preoccupied with personal
goals and career aspirations.''

Schools that ''overstress vocationalism and understress the responsibilities of
citizenship'' have reinforced these attitudes, the presidents said.

But Howard Swearer, the president of Brown, where the new project will have its
headquarters, added, ''There have been recent signs that there are more students
willing to take advantage of public service opportunities if they are presented
with opportunities to do so.''

That perception has been challenged by some educators. David Burns, an assistant
vice president at Rutgers University, said he was skeptical about whether there
was a real rise in student community activity. ''I think things tend to increase
when you pay attention to them,'' he said, citing increased concern about
alcoholism and sexual harassment on campus.

But Robert Coles, a professor of psychiatry at Harvard who is known for his work
with the poor, says, ''I think we've bottomed out of that period of narcissism
and indifference to moral issues.''

Reaction to the Times

Mr. Coles attributed the new interest in public service in part to a reaction by
naturally idealistic young people against the ''getting-rich-is-good ethos of
the Reagan Administration.''

At Columbia University, the Rev. William Starr, the Episcopal chaplain, said
that in contrast to the student political activism of the 1960's, which sought
radical change, ''students today are working within the system'' as part of ''a
people-to-people approach to human needs.''

But Mr. Starr, who worked with the movement opposing the Vietnam War, has doubts
about how effective the new activism might be. ''The Government uses
volunteerism as an excuse to substitute volunteers for resources,'' he said. ''I
think of it as a little like charity.

''I think students are learning a lot as volunteers, but there's frustration in
the soup kitchens,'' he added. ''Volunteerism doesn't address why so many people
are hungry.''

The trend coincides with the efforts by educators and politicians to introduce a
national program of public service or find other ways of encouraging
volunteerism. Last month testimony by Mayor Koch and Senator Gary Hart, Democrat
of Colorado, was submitted to a subcommittee of the House Education and Labor
Committee on two bills that would study and finance a national service program.

Last year, Mr. Koch established a New York City Volunteer Corps in which about
50 teen-agers were paid small stipends to work for a year at such tasks as
distributing food to the homebound, helping the elderly and staffing shelters
for the homeless.

The City of Atlanta last year started a more far-reaching program in which all
high school students are required to do 75 hours of volunteer service before
graduation.

In September a report by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
suggested creating a new Federal aid program under which students would receive
scholarships in return for community service.

The author of the report, Frank Newman, president of the Education Commission of
the States, said such a program would better prepare students for civic
responsibility and lessen the growing burden of student loans, which has driven
many undergraduates to choose careers on the basis of money. The commission will
help run the new project outlined today.

In a recent interview, Mr. Newman said he was particularly struck that, unlike
the 1960's, when President Kennedy's appeals to American idealism led many young
people to enroll in programs like the Peace Corps, the recent revival of
interest in public service has come without ''any call at all.''

But Mr. Newman said that support by some college administrators had been an
important catalyst.

Outreach Program at Brown

For example, Mr. Swearer of Brown University, obtained a $2 million endowment
for fellowships to undergraduates who spend a year away from school in public
service. Mr. Swearer, who headed an early Peace Corps training program, has also
provided an office and telephone for the Brown Community Outreach Program, the
student public service organization, which has become the largest undergraduate
group, with 1,000 members.

At Connecticut College, officials recently gave the school's public service
program, the Office of Volunteers for Community Service, a new office in the
college chapel and hired a professional director for it. Herbert Atherton, dean
of the college, said he expected the program to grow over the next five years,
but he cautioned that many studentswere not as ''high-minded'' as those of the
late 1960's.

At Harvard, Derek Bok, the university's president, used $1 million from a
special fund to finance a program that pairs each of Harvard's residential
houses with a Cambridge neighborhood for volunteer work.

His daughter spent a summer working in a low-income housing project in
Cambridge. The program was sponsored by Phillips Brooks House, a volunteer
organization run by Harvard students that was founded at the turn of the century
and counts Franklin D. Roosevelt among its alumni.

''The real initiative and most imagination comes from the students,'' Mr. Bok
said.

He cited Wayne Meisel, who graduated from Harvard in 1982 and has become a kind
of Johnny Appleseed of the movement, once walking for five months from Colby
College in Waterville, Me., to Washington, visiting 70 colleges to proselytize
his gospel of public service.

It was Mr. Meisel who started the program linking residential houses to
Cambridge neighborhoods after he was cut from the college soccer team and found
that Cambridge had no youth soccer league in which he might coach. In hopes of
finding 30 other students to help him coach and referee, he sat in front of his
dining hall for a day to enlist them and was overwhelmed by the response: 150
volunteers.

''What I found was that students hadn't lost their idealism but had gotten
caught up in what's around them, the fast-track environment of making money,''
he said. ''What they needed was some leadership to draw them out of their
apathy.''

Being 'With Real People'

Mr. Meisel has now embarked on a more ambitious quest: to establish a nationwide
public service group, the Campus Outreach Opportunity League.

Valerie Barton, student president of Phillips Brooks House at Harvard, offers a
more personal reason students are drawn to public service. Miss Barton, a senior
who grew up in a housing project in Harlem, said: ''I found I couldn't be happy
just going to class. The students around here are too competitive and money
conscious.''

After she became a youth counselor in a housing project in Roxbury, a
predominantly black section of Boston, she said, ''It enabled me to be with real
people, with kids and mothers who called me up to talk about their problems.''

At Columbia University, work in a free lunch program in the basement of a
Presbyterian church has helped Michael Skrebutenas channel his idealism. ''I
came from a small town in Connecticut, out in the woods, and never confronted
poverty,'' he said.

''I was paying $14,000 a year,'' he said of his tuition, ''and someone was
starving outside the campus gate.''

''Unfortunately, when people think of volunteers, they think of goody-two-
shoes,'' Mr. Skrebutenas, a senior, went on. ''It sounds like Miss America
pageant stuff. But it's the best kind of activism.''

Recalling his participation in a blockade to protest Columbia's investment in
companies doing business with South Africa, he said: ''I'm able to see
production at the kitchen. With a blockade, it's more difficult.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cynthia Sheinberg and Susan Cox (Jane Reed)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Left-Like Thunder on the Right

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 16


Sit-ins and vigils used to be the prerogative of the student left, but
apparently no more.

A conservative student organization based here is applying the politics of
confrontation to a national campaign for corporate divestment. The new target is
the Soviet Union.  The group, the Young Conservative Foundation, and its
president, David Finzer, demand that universities sell off any stocks they hold
in companies that do business with the Soviet Union. To underscore that demand,
they are marching and holding sit-ins at schools and colleges around the
country, essentially the protest tactics of the 1960's.

So far, the group reports little success in persuading universities to sell
stocks. But it says its campaign is growing and drawing national attention.

The group's leaders take pride in their merging of the politics of the right
with the tactics of the left, even though that has left some fellow
conservatives a bit uncomfortable. They say their project, Save The Oppressed
People, or STOP, has spread to 100 campuses.

The project began in Washington Sept. 27 when a member from the American
University chapter chained himself to a rail outside the office of the
university president, Richard Berendzen, and stayed for five hours. The
university has not divested, but Mr. Berendzen has turned over a copy of its
stock portfolio.

The student who chained himself to the rail, Vince Farhat, said he has used the
portfolio to identify four corporations that do business with the Soviet Union
and in which the university maintains an investment. Those companies, Mr. Farhat
said, are committing ''technological treason.''

The focus of the Young Conservative Foundation and its STOP campaign is on
grassroots organizing, with the national office here generating publicity and
providing some financing. A manual entitled ''Strategy for Anti-Soviet
Disinvestment'' contains detailed advice to organizers on things like buying
advertising, dis-tributing literature and soliciting petition signatures.

These activities all contribute to the group's ''Private Initiative War Against
Moscow,'' a campaign urging Americans to take independent action against the
Soviet Union. A flyer states: ''This battle must not set government against
government, but citizen against commissar.''

In the coming year, the foundation plans protests at Harvard University, Ohio
State University and Boston College, among others, and other activities at
dozens of other schools. Always confrontational, the foundation is even
preparing to take its case to the University of California at Berkeley, where it
looks forward to meeting the left on its own most hallowed turf.

In fact, STOP activists already have been hard at work in California, beginning
their anti-Soviet divestment campaign last spring in a confrontation with State
Assemblyman Tom Hayden, one of the state's leading advocates of South African
divestment who was well known for his radical student activism in the Vietnam
conflict.

Students from the STOP group at the University of California at Davis threatened
to camp out in Mr. Hayden's Sacramento office until he signed their petition
calling for anti-Soviet divestment. Mr. Hayden refused to sign, and the students
left two hours later.

One of the students, John Scanlon, said, ''South African human rights violations
pale in comparison to those of the Soviet Union.''

Neither the Young

Conservative Foundation nor its STOP project takes any public position on South
Africa.

Although the foundation's ideology places it squarely in the conservative camp,
its tactics bother some of its natural allies, according to Mr. Finzer. But, he
adds, his organization is willing to go it alone. ''I'm so sick of conservatives
avoiding moral issues,'' he said.

The project director, Jeff Pandin, echoed Mr. Finzer's endorsement of
confrontational tactics and his distaste for more traditional conservatives.

''We like to think of ourselves as radicals,'' he said. ''On campus, the tactics
don't change, the issues change.''

The division between the Young Conservative Foundation and other conservative
groups runs so deep that some members of the foundation even bristle at the use
of ''conservative'' in their organization's name. ''We're not button-down
collars and dark suits,'' Mr. Pandin said. ''We're much more willing to be
unconventional.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NAVAL ANALYST IS GUILTY OF ESPIONAGE

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Oct. 17


A former naval intelligence analyst was convicted today on charges of espionage
and theft for giving secret photographs to a British military journal and having
other secret information in his home.

The verdict was returned by a jury in Federal District Court here after it
deliberated six hours.

The analyst, Samuel Loring Morison, a civilian, was found guilty of all four
counts in the indictment. Mr. Morison, a grandson of the naval historian Samuel
Eliot Morison, faces a maximum sentence of 40 years in prison and $40,000 in
fines.

The case was widely watched because it marked only the second time the
Government had used the espionage laws to prosecute an official, or former
official, for disclosing secret information to the press.

Ellsberg Verdict Dismissed

In the other case, Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo, were found guilty of
copying the Government history of the Vietnam War that became famous as the
Pentagon Papers. The Ellsberg-Russo verdict was dismissed in 1973 on the ground
of Government misconduct.

Michael Schatzow, the prosecutor in the Morison case, said he hoped the new
verdict sent a message to other people with access to secret information. ''I
would hope that people who are tempted to give out, in an unauthorized fashion,
information relating to the national defense, stop doing it,'' he said.

Mr. Morison, who quietly paced a courthouse hall much of the day while the jury
deliberated, stood as the verdict was read. His face was flushed, but he
maintained composure. He was quickly ushered out by his lawyers.

An Appeal Is Planned

Mark Lynch of the American Civil Liberties Union, a lawyer for Mr. Morison,
declined to comment but said the decision would be appealed. He said his client
was disappointed.

Mr. Morison was convicted of violating an espionage law by giving three
photographs taken by satellite, classified as secret, to the British publication
Jane's Defence Weekly, in 1984.

The photographs showed a Soviet ship under construction at a Black Sea shipyard.
They were published by Jane's in August 1984 and reprinted widely.

He was also convicted of ''unauthorized possession'' of military information for
keeping secret documents in his home. Those documents were excerpts from weekly
intelligence reports, containing estimates of the damage the Soviet Union
suffered from a 1984 explosion.

Two Counts of Theft Involved

The prosecution argued that Mr. Morison used those documents to prepare a
memorandum for Jane's, which was later incorporated into an article. Mr. Morison
was also convicted on two counts of theft of Government property for removing
the photographs and government documents from the naval center where he worked.

His trial lasted six days. Mr. Morison was represented by Mr. Lynch and a
Washington lawyer, Robert Muse.

After the verdict, Mr. Schatzow had harsh words for the civil liberties union.
He accused it of an ''orchestrated effort'' to ''try this case in the
newspapers.''

At the time of his arrest in October 1984, Mr. Morison was a civilian analyst at
the Naval Intelligence Support Center in Suitland, Md. He had served with the
Navy in Vietnam and had worked at the center since 1974, he said.

Dual Role Countenanced

For some time, he had also held a part-time position as American editor of
Jane's Fighting Ships, an annual reference volume produced by the company that
publishes the magazine. The Navy knew about this and countenanced it, but it was
a source of friction with his immediate supervisor, the testimony indicated.

Prosecutors argued that Mr. Morison was eager to get a full-time job on the
British military weekly.

His lawyers portrayed Mr. Morison, 40 years old, as a man with a deep commitment
to the Navy and strong United States military forces. He is one of many
Government officials who disclose unauthorized information to news reporters,
the defense argued.

And, Mr. Muse said, he did so with high motives: to inform the public,
particularly about Soviet military power.

Focus on 2 Questions

The trial focused on two questions: Was the information conveyed by the
satellite photographs and the documents in Mr. Morison's home ''closely held''
by the Government? And could the photographs and documents ''potentially
damage'' the United States?

The prosecution presented witnesses from the Central Intelligence Agency who
testified that there had never been an authorized disclosure of photographs
taken by the satellite involved, KH-11, although there had been two unauthorized
releases earlier.

Similarly, a naval officer testifying for the prosecution said that the
documents in Mr. Morison's home could have given the Soviet Union ''a window on
the naval intelligence process.''

The defense countered with its own expert witnesses. A retired official of the
Central Intelligence Agency who was involved with the KH-11 satellite said he
could see nothing of value to the Soviet Union in the photographs.

That witness, Roland S. Inlow, also noted that the Soviet Union had already
obtained a copy of the technical manual for the KH-11 satellite.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a dispatch from Baltimore yesterday about an an
espionage conviction there incorrectly described the prosecution of Daniel
Ellsberg and Anthony Russo in 1973. Charges against the two men, who were
accused of espionage, theft and conspiracy in connection with Pentagon documents
dealing with the Vietnam war, were dismissed during trial on the ground of
prosecutorial misconduct.

GRAPHIC: photo of Samuel Loring Morison (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'CEASE FIRE'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


DON JOHNSON and the City of Miami appeared together in ''Cease Fire'' well
before either of them had developed a reputation for glamour. The release of
this film hasn't been speedy, and it undoubtedly would have been less so without
Mr. Johnson's current celebrity in his ''Miami Vice'' role. Since runaway
success has a way of coaxing cinematic skeletons out of the closet, ''Cease
Fire'' might be expected to be the usual pre-stardom embarrassment, but it's
not. Even in a middling and predictable drama, Mr. Johnson is affecting enough
to suggest that his new renown has at least as much to do with authentic acting
talent as with good looks.

In ''Cease Fire,'' which opens today at Loew's Astor Plaza, Mr. Johnson appears
in jeans, work shirts and a very unbecoming moustache, yet he still does a lot
to alleviate the drabness of the production. The film, adapted by George
Fernandez from his play ''Vietnam Trilogy'' and directed by David Nutter, tells
of a Vietnam veteran and his struggle to readjust to life at home. At first, Tim
(Mr. Johnson) is shown as a loving and devoted family man. But he soon begins to
manifest an all-too-familiar array of problems. The film's clumsiness is such
that Tim's affectionate scene with his family is followed very quickly by his
quarrelsome one, with virtually no transition at all.

In the process of manifesting his unhappiness, Tim grows irrationally angry at
his wife (played gently and sympathetically by Lisa Blount), and scares his
children when he crawls through the living room with a knife in his teeth,
reliving a wartime episode. He fights with a prospective employer, though he has
long been out of a job, after the man makes unflattering comparisons between
Vietnam and previous wars. He begins drinking and staying out late with another
veteran, and shares a greater kinship with this man than he does with anyone
else in the story. As played by Robert F. Lyons, the buddy is a thoroughly
grating presence, but Mr. Johnson manages to make the two men's fellowship seem
understandable and real.

The film itself amounts to little more than a catalogue of post-Vietnam distress
symptoms, systematically delivered; without a strong leading performance, it
would barely be watchable. But Mr. Johnson, who had a long and little-noted
career before ''Miami Vice'' came along, eschews any vanity or
self-consciousness in bringing the veteran's plight to life, and proves he
doesn't need the fast cars, fancy clothes and pet alligator of ''Miami Vice'' to
make a very strong impression. Distress Symptoms CEASE FIRE, directed by David
Nutter; written by George Fernandez; director of photography, Henning
Schellerup; edited by Julio Chavez; music by Gary Fry; produced by William
Grefe; released by Cineworld Enterprises Corporation. At Astor Plaza, Broadway
at 44th Street; Manhattan Twin, Third Avenue at 59th Street, and other theaters.
Running time: 95 minutes. This film is rated R. TimDon Johnson PaulaLisa Blount
LukeRobert F. Lyons BadmanRichard Chaves RobbsRick Richards WendyChris Noel
SanchezJorge Gil RaferJohn Archie HartzT.R. Durphy BennyBuddy Bolan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Don Johnson

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS REPORTED TO REJECT U.S. CALL TO CHANGE COURSE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines has rejected a plea by the
Reagan Administration for major political, economic and military changes to
avert further turmoil there, Administration officials said today.

President Reagan's personal envoy, Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of Nevada,
returned late Thursday night from Manila aboard a United States military plane
after a series of meetings with Mr. Marcos.

Mr. Laxalt requested a White House meeting with Mr. Reagan ''as soon as
possible,'' an aide to the Senator said. A White House official said President
Reagan would probably meet Mr. Laxalt on Monday or Tuesday.

Big Outlay on Bases Planned

Mr. Laxalt's mission to Manila was intended to underscore the Administration's
concern about the deteriorating situation in the Philippines, a longtime United
States ally and the site of two major American military bases. In sending Mr.
Laxalt, Mr. Reagan plainly sought to strengthen American pressure on the
Philippine leader as well as receive a first-hand report on the situation there.

An Administration official said that although the United States viewed the
Philippine situation as ''serious,'' no consideration had been given to
withdrawal from the two American bases on the archipelago. The Defense
Department plans to invest about $1.3 billion in Clark Air Base and Subic Bay
Naval Air Station in the Philippines; there has been increased Communist
guerrilla activity near the bases.

Mr. Laxalt, his staff and most United States officials declined to discuss the
details of the meeting with Mr. Marcos. But one Administration official said
that in essence, the Philippine leader brushed aside American concerns about the
growing insurgency of the Communist New People's Army.

Marcos Defends Government

At the same time, officials said, Mr. Marcos indicated that the Administration
was unduly concerned about the need to overhaul the military, end favoritism in
the officer corps and undertake economic and political changes to restore the
credibility of the Government among the middle class and other constituencies.
Tonight, on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' Mr. Marcos defended his policies
and said he had sent Mr. Reagan a 200-page report.

''He was very enthusiastic about his position and he tried to make the best case
for it,'' an Administration official said, referring to Mr. Marcos. The official
added, ''If you're asking, 'Did he agree to do anything?' no, he did not.'' The
official said that Mr. Marcos's reaction to United States concern was, ''Oh,
well, everything's great.''

Another official said that Mr. Marcos ''did a lot of serious listening.''

''Marcos is a leader who has his own point of view, he's been in power a long
time,'' the official said, ''but he seemed fully aware of the message we were
conveying.''

Because the Philippines remains a close ally ''and we're working with them,''
the official said, the Administration remained confident that Mr. Marcos would
eventually undertake changes sought by the United States in an effort to defuse
tensions in the nation and blunt the insurgency. ---- Marcos Responds to Reagan
In an interview last night on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' President
Marcos, speaking from Manila, said he had sent Mr. Reagan a 200-page memorandum
that showed that his Government's military and economic problems were on the
mend.

Insurgent forces, he said, were ''surrendering in droves,'' and both the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank had given the Philippines
favorable reports. ''We are not another South Vietnam,'' he said. ''One of our
weaknesses is public relations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 69 words


Because of an editing error, a dispatch from Baltimore yesterday about an an
espionage conviction there incorrectly described the prosecution of Daniel
Ellsberg and Anthony Russo in 1973. Charges against the two men, who were
accused of espionage, theft and conspiracy in connection with Pentagon documents
dealing with the Vietnam war, were dismissed during trial on the ground of
prosecutorial misconduct.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 19, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS REPORTED TO REJECT U.S. CALL TO CHANGE COURSE

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines has rejected a plea by the
Reagan Administration for major political, economic and military changes to
avert further turmoil there, Administration officials said today.

President Reagan's personal envoy, Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of Nevada,
returned late Thursday night from Manila aboard a United States military plane
after a series of meetings with Mr. Marcos.

Mr. Laxalt requested a White House meeting with Mr. Reagan ''as soon as
possible,'' an aide to the Senator said. A White House official said President
Reagan would probably meet Mr. Laxalt on Monday or Tuesday.

Big Outlay on Bases Planned

Mr. Laxalt's mission to Manila was intended to underscore the Administration's
concern about the deteriorating situation in the Philippines, a longtime United
States ally and the site of two major American military bases. In sending Mr.
Laxalt, Mr. Reagan plainly sought to strengthen American pressure on the
Philippine leader as well as receive a first-hand report on the situation there.

An Administration official said that although the United States viewed the
Philippine situation as ''serious,'' no consideration had been given to
withdrawal from the two American bases on the archipelago. The Defense
Department plans to invest about $1.3 billion in Clark Air Base and Subic Bay
Naval Air Station in the Philippines; there has been increased Communist
guerrilla activity near the bases.

Mr. Laxalt, his staff and most United States officials declined to discuss the
details of the meeting with Mr. Marcos. But one Administration official said
that in essence, the Philippine leader brushed aside American concerns about the
growing insurgency of the Communist New People's Army.

Marcos Defends Government

At the same time, officials said, Mr. Marcos indicated that the Administration
was unduly concerned about the need to overhaul the military, end favoritism in
the officer corps and undertake economic and political changes to restore the
credibility of the Government among the middle class and other constituencies.
Tonight, on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' Mr. Marcos defended his policies
and said he had sent Mr. Reagan a 200-page report.

''He was very enthusiastic about his position and he tried to make the best case
for it,'' an Administration official said, referring to Mr. Marcos. The official
added, ''If you're asking, 'Did he agree to do anything?' no, he did not.'' The
official said that Mr. Marcos's reaction to United States concern was, ''Oh,
well, everything's great.''

Another official said that Mr. Marcos ''did a lot of serious listening.''

''Marcos is a leader who has his own point of view, he's been in power a long
time,'' the official said, ''but he seemed fully aware of the message we were
conveying.''

Because the Philippines remains a close ally ''and we're working with them,''
the official said, the Administration remained confident that Mr. Marcos would
eventually undertake changes sought by the United States in an effort to defuse
tensions in the nation and blunt the insurgency. ---- Marcos Responds to Reagan
In an interview last night on the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' President
Marcos, speaking from Manila, said he had sent Mr. Reagan a 200-page memorandum
that showed that his Government's military and economic problems were on the
mend.

Insurgent forces, he said, were ''surrendering in droves,'' and both the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank had given the Philippines
favorable reports. ''We are not another South Vietnam,'' he said. ''One of our
weaknesses is public relations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS: NEW LOOK

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


Changes have not always come easily to the Council on Foreign Relations, which
after 64 years is probably still the pre-eminent American meeting place on
international affairs.

In 1970, the Council opened its membership rolls to women, after difficult
deliberations by its board of directors. ''The women won by one single vote,''
George S. Franklin, a former executive director of the Council, recalled the
other night. ''Every member under 65 voted for the women. Every member over 65
voted against.''

Mr. Franklin's recollection came at a dinner marking a different type of
personnel change: David Rockefeller has stepped down as board chairman after 15
years. Mr. Rockefeller, as Mr. Franklin told it, sided with the women.

These days a rare changing of the guard is under way at the Council headquarters
at 58 East 68th Street. Peter G. Peterson, a former Commerce Secretary and
former chairman of Lehman Brothers, has been selected by the board to replace
Mr. Rockefeller. Former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance has been named vice
chairman.

In another important transition, a committee is searching for a successor for
Winston Lord, who resigned as president of the Council in June after he was
nominated by President Reagan to be Ambassador to China.

The changes at the top have raised several questions for the Council's
membership. One is what Mr. Peterson's management style may mean for the
Council. Mr. Rockefeller took a strong interest in the organization but gave Mr.
Lord a lot of leeway. Mr. Peterson is expected to play a more aggressive role
with a higher profile.

Speculation on Presidency

Another subject of speculation is the identity of the new president, who will be
responsible for the day-to-day management of the organization. Mr. Lord, once a
protege of Henry A. Kissinger at the State Department, became Council president
in 1977 and is generally well-regarded by the members.

Names that have been discussed in Council circles include Peter Tarnoff, who was
an assistant to Mr. Vance at the State Department and is now executive director
of the World Affairs Council of Northern California; Stephen Stamas, vice
president for public affairs at the Exxon Corporation; Robert B. Oxnam,
president of the Asia Society; Arthur A. Hartman, Ambassador to the Soviet
Union; Donald F. McHenry, former chief United States delegate to the United
Nations, and Graham T. Allison and Joseph S. Nye Jr. of Harvard University.

An in-house candidate is the acting president, John Temple Swing, vice president
of the Council since 1972. William G. Hyland, editor of the Council's quarterly,
Foreign Affairs, and a former aide to Mr. Kissinger, has also been mentioned by
some members.

The list has recently been narrowed to ''several'' candidates, according to Mr.
Rockefeller.

Some Important Changes

Changes at the Council are best described in evolutionary terms, but important
changes have occurred. ''The Council that David Rockefeller took over was marked
by deep divisions, especially over the Vietnam War,'' Mr. Peterson said.
''Without David's leadership it could have lapsed into a kind of gentlemanly
irrelevance. Instead, it has reached out to new members.''

Council figures show that 769 of the 2,376 members live outside New York, Boston
and Washington, a larger proportion than in the past. There are 250 women in the
organization, and the Council has tried to attract younger professionals by
according them special five-year memberships.

The Eastern financial establishment is still heavily represented, as business
and banking representatives account for 649 of the Council's members and
outnumber scholars and other professional groups.

The membership is ideologically diverse. But this diversity of views, along with
the nonpartisan status of the Council and the collapse during the Vietnam War of
a consensus on foreign policy, has made it difficult to directly influence the
public debate.

Still, the Council has sought a somewhat more prominent role in recent years. It
recently sent 7,000 free copies of a collection of articles on European-American
issues to members of European parliaments, the press and others deemed
influential.

One immediate issue for the new leadership will be how to extend Council
activities beyond the Northeast. ''The big issue that we have to face is whether
to try to have broader national outreach,'' said Mr. Rockefeller.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter G. Peterson, John J. McCloy, David Rockefeller, Henry A.
Kissinger and Cyrus R. Vance at annual dinner

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI ASKS TO END AMERASIANS' ISSUE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Oct. 17 -

Vietnam, encouraged by progress being made in talks with the United States on
missing Americans, is now pressing for a resolution of another issue: the
thousands of Amerasian children still in Vietnam.

A decade after the Communist takeover of South Vietnam, Hanoi and Washington
continue to accuse each other of obstructing or delaying the movement of these
children, the offspring of Vietnamese mothers and Americans here during the war.

Many of the children are approaching the age of majority, 18 years in Vietnam.
If they are declared citizens, many would be subject to military service. A few
may have already been conscripted, an official said.

The authorities say that some of the teen-agers are causing social problems.
Called ''con lai'' or ''half-breeds'' in Vietnamese, the uncounted homeless
among them roam the streets of this city, formerly called Saigon, begging from
foreigners and clinging to Americans in the hope of a miraculous escape.

Private Action Favored

Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, meeting in Hanoi last week with a group of
American war veterans led by two New York State Assemblymen, said Vietnam would
be willing to discuss the emigration of the children with a private American
team instead of on a government-to-government basis if that would speed the
process.

''Submit a plan in one month,'' he said. ''Send the delegation here, and we will
talk. These are not refugees. These are your children. I would welcome anyone to
come and take them away.''

He repeated his Government's opposition to the system under which the children
now leave Vietnam under the Orderly Departure Program administered by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

American and Vietnamese officials estimate the number of children and their
immediate relatives - usually a mother left behind by a departing American and
sometimes brothers, sisters and a stepfather - at 8,000 to 20,000. The
Vietnamese say that the figure could be higher.

New Yorkers Are Urged to Act

The New Yorkers, on an eight-day visit to Vietnam, heard the same plea from all
the officials they have met: Get these children out of Vietnam.

The New York delegation visiting Vietnam was led by Assemblyman John L. Behan,
Republican of Montauk, and Dennis T. Gorski, Democrat of Buffalo. Also in the
group were Wayne P. Jackson, the sergeant-at-arms of the State Assembly, and
John Kilbride, a police officer and head of the Policemen's Benevolent
Association in Freeport, L.I.

Accompanying the delegation as private citizens were Leo Dorsey, a member of the
nongovernmental United States Committee for Refugees and the director of aid
programs in the former South Vietnam for the Unitarian Church, and Robert
Minnich, a former alternate-service volunteer in South Vietnam and now a
consultant on refugee matters in Washington. Both have been interviewers for the
Orderly Departure Program.

Dorsey to Try to Form Group

Mr. Dorsey said in an interview after the group met with Mr. Thach that he would
try to form a delegation to take up the Foreign Minister's offer of talks.

''The Vietnamese appear to want to resolve this issue even more quickly than the
M.I.A. issue,'' Mr. Dorsey said, referring to the missing in action.

Vietnam says 7,300 Amerasians and relatives have left in the last three years
since the United Nations-administered emigration process was devised. According
to Nguyen Phi Tuyen, head of the consular section of Ho Chi Minh City's External
Relations Service, 3,304 others have been given exit papers, but have not yet
been interviewed by United States authorities, whose bureaucratic procedures he
criticized.

United States records in Bangkok show 1,400 on the waiting list. Americans
involved in the program acknowledge that rigorous standards of proof and
Government-imposed refugee quotas have slowed entry.

American interviewers say there have been cases of abuse in the past involving
Vietnamese buying an Amerasian child as a ticket to emigration. They also say
Vietnamese authorities often hold up a departure by refusing to allow all family
members to go.

Eight Years at the Present Rate

Mr. Dorsey said that at the present rate of emigration, it would take at least
eight years to resettle the Amerasians.

He added that the Amerasian Act enacted by Congress to speed the process was
flawed in demanding unrealistic promises of support from sponsors. Because of
this, he said, no children from Vietnam entered the United States under the law
in 1984. The 80 who were admitted all came under a program paid for by American
Jesuits.

Under the present refugee system, which the State Department had to turn to when
it became clear the Amerasian Act would not help, the United States Government
provides a per-capita grant of $550 per child to resettlement agencies who
oversee a child's move.

Mr. Dorsey said that if donors in foundations, religious organizations or
corporations could be found to provide money for private resettlement efforts,
at least some children could be moved from Vietnam. But many refugee and
resettlement workers would prefer, they say, to see the law amended so it could
be more quickly applied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STORMS BATTER ASIAN COUNTRIES FROM INDIA TO THE PHILIPPINES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 19


Storms continued to batter countries in Asia today, with Typhoon Dot leaving 31
people dead and thousands homeless after hitting the Philippines' main island of
Luzon with heavy rains and winds of up to 70 miles an hour.

In India, flooding set off by storms killed 29 people, bringing India's two-day
death toll to 78.

Rescue operations were also going on in Bangladesh and Thailand, where typhoons
and lesser storms beginning Tuesday caused floods and mudslides, killing at
least 28 people and leaving many thousands homeless.

The Philippines' death toll was expected to climb as communications with
isolated areas were restored.

President Ferdinand E. Marcos said the typhoon, which later moved away from the
Philippines, had caused less damage and casualties than expected.

''A miracle has happened, and the typhoon spared Manila and environs,'' he said
on television. ''We should thank the Lord for this miracle.''

The typhoon was originally headed for Manila, with winds of up to 150 miles an
hour. But after hitting the east coast of Luzon at midnight, it veered northwest
and broke into two weaker storms as it crossed the Sierra Madre mountains.

The storms, one with winds of up to 70 miles an hour, later merged over the
South China Sea and moved toward Vietnam.

On the Indian subcontinent, the United News of India reported that seven people
were killed today in Uttar Pradesh state, where three months of monsoon rains
have killed 646 people, including 49 on Friday. Most victims were drowned or
died in house collapses and landslides.

The agency said 22 people died Saturday in Orissa and West Bengal in flooding
caused by a storm on Wednesday. Officials have said 4.5 million people had been
evacuated and more than 150,000 people had lost their homes as a result of the
storm.

Bangladesh officials said 12 people were killed in successive typhoons Wednesday
and Thursday, and Thai officials said 16 people died when two other typhoons
triggered flash floods.

Officials in the Philippines said scattered flooding and power outages were
reported and many roads were blocked by landslides and fallen trees.

Luz Reyes of the Office of Civil Defense said nearly 50,000 people were
transferred to evacuation centers in four provinces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS DENIES REBUFFING U.S. ON HIS POLICIES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 19


President Ferdinand E. Marcos denied today that he had rejected an American plea
for changes in his policies.

He said on American television that reports of a deteriorating situation were
exaggerated, and added, ''We are not another South Vietnam.''

Speaking after a visit here by Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of Nevada, a
personal envoy of President Reagan, Mr. Marcos said:

''There were no definite proposals. Senator Laxalt wanted to know if I had any
information I could convey to them on these matters, and I did.''

American officials in Washington said Friday that Mr. Marcos had rejected a plea
by Mr. Laxalt that he introduce changes to avert further turmoil. The sources
said the United States viewed the situation in the Philippines as ''serious.''

They said Mr. Marcos had brushed aside President Reagan's concerns about a
Communist insurgency and the need to institute economic and political changes to
restore the credibility ofthe Philippine Government.

Speaking on the the ABC News program ''Nightline,'' Mr. Marcos blamed American
doomsayers and exaggerated news reports for the concern.

''Of course, they should be concerned,'' he said, ''because the controversial
reports have confused everybody. There are some who find it in their interests
to report that the Philippines are about to go down. We are not another South
Vietnam.''

Mr. Marcos said that his Government was winning the battle against the
insurgency and that the economy was on the upswing.

He said he had presented Mr. Laxalt with ''a very thick memorandum containing
all the facts.''

''It is not true, for instance, that the rebels, Communist rebels, are winning
the war,'' Mr. Marcos said. ''They are surrendering all over the place. They are
surrendering in droves. How can you say they are winning the war?''

His assessment runs counter to those of American and Philippine analysts who say
the insurgency has been growing and is now reported to have spread to nearly all
73 provinces.

Mr. Marcos also denied that the insurgents numbered 15,000 or more, setting an
estimate of ''10,000 at most,'' which is lower than the estimates of some of his
military officers.

On political matters, he said he was ruling out the possibility of holding
presidential elections before his six-year term ends in 1987.

''What will a snap election give me?'' he said. ''I already have the mandate of
the people.''

He said that the economy was improving and that the inflation rate had been
dropping, and he referred to reports by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund that he said gave the Philippines ''good marks.''

Mr. Marcos, who reportedly suffers from a kidney ailment, said his problems
stemmed from shrapnel wounds sustained in World War II.

Thanks to the skill of American doctors, he said, ''now I am better than a
normal person with two kidneys.''

Mr. Marcos also repeated a standing rhetorical offer to step down if anyone else
could come forward with a better plan to defeat the insurgency and speed the
recovery.

''I want out,'' he said. ''If there is anybody or any group of leaders who can
promise to fight the Communist Party with a coherent, acceptable and wise
program of economic recovery, he can come in. I will talk to him.''

He denied that the Philippines holds political prisoners, saying there was
nobody confined in jail who was not charged with a criminal offense. ----#6 Die
in Rebel Ambush DAVAO, the Philippines, Oct. 19 (Reuters) - Six people,
including a town police chief, were killed in an ambush by suspected rebels in
the southern Philippines, a military report said today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Tigger Montague Becomes a Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 64, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 194 words


Cynthia Cresap Montague, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Theodore Giles Montague Jr.
of Granville, Ohio, was married yesterday to John J. Parziale, a son of Mrs.
Charles Parziale and the late Colonel Parziale, U.S.A., of Fairfield Glade,
Tenn. The Rev. Stephen Tischendorf performed the ceremony at the First
Presbyterian Church in Granville.

Mrs. Parziale, who is known as Tigger, is the director of nutritional seminars
for Nature's Plus, a manufacturer and distributor of vitamins in Farmingdale,
L.I. She graduated from Choate Rosemary Hall, Bradford Junior College and
Dennison University. Her father, the president of the Peerless Saw Company in
Columbus, Ohio, was formerly president of the foods division of Borden Inc. Her
grandfather, the late Mr. Montague of Greenwich, Conn., was president and later
chairman of Borden. He was also a director of the American Sugar Refining
Company.

Mr. Parziale is a senior captain at Damin Aviation Inc. in Weehauken, N.J. He is
an alumnus of the University of Florida at Gainesville and served as an Army
helicopter pilot with the rank of captain in Vietnam, where he was awarded the
Distinguished Flying Cross.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW WELL PREPARED?

BYLINE: By Philip A. Odeen; Philip A. Odeen, a managing partner in the
Washington office of the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand, is a former Defense
Department and National Security Council official.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 890 words


MILITARY INCOMPETENCE Why the American Military Doesn't Win. By Richard A.
Gabriel. Illustrated. 208 pp. New York: Hill & Wang/Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$16.95.

THIS is a curious book. It addresses a critical problem. It contains many useful
ideas and insights on the failures that have plagued recent efforts to use
United States military power. Yet it contains numerous factual errors, and the
suggested solutions seem weak, given the magnitude of the problems the author
claims undermine the effectiveness of our military establishment.

Richard A. Gabriel, a major in the Army Reserves and an occasional Pentagon
consultant, reviews the results of five military campaigns: the raid on Sontay
prison (in North Vietnam), the Mayaguez incident with Cambodia, the attempted
rescue of the hostages in Iran, the recent Marine deployment in Lebanon and the
invasion of Grenada. Each is described in considerable detail, drawing largely
on published sources but supplemented with personal interviews.

Military operations always have problems, and the examples Mr. Gabriel cites
were clearly not successes (except Grenada). But the author's characterizations
are often unfair and in some cases wrong. For example, he makes a point of the
poor planning for the Ranger assault on the Point Salines airfield in Grenada.
He says the military planned to land aircraft and in mid-flight had to re-rig
the troops for an air drop once it was discovered the airfield was closed. This
delayed the assault and forced the Rangers to drop without reserve chutes. In
fact, a senior military officer directly involved in the operation explained to
this reviewer that the military was prepared from the beginning to use an air
drop for the assault and the only re-rigging was to leave the reserve chutes
behind because the Rangers had to jump from 500 feet, given the volume of
hostile fire. At that altitude, a reserve chute is of no value, and the Rangers
did not want to carry the extra weight.

At the end of each chapter is a brief discussion of the causes of the failures
and other serious problems that the author believes plague our military. Drawing
on these five campaigns, he lists several primary causes, ranging from an
excessively large officer corps to a failure to develop officer expertise
because of poorly focused training and too many and varied assignments. Many
observers in and out of uniform would agree with most of Mr. Gabriel's
criticisms (though they might differ sharply on their importance).

Unfortunately, the discussion of weaknesses in our military posture is
undermined by a number of errors. For example, Mr. Gabriel says that we have
inadequate airlift capacity to reinforce Europe in a crisis. At best, he states,
we are only able to deploy two divisions during the early period of a crisis,
and these divisions would be forced to leave critical equipment behind. In fact,
according to the Defense Department's annual report to the Congress for fiscal
year 1986, the first four divisions would deploy by air to pick up equipment
that has already been sent to Europe - so only troop-lift aircraft are needed,
which we have in ample supply (for example, commercial 747's can do this task in
a crisis). Mr. Gabriel also criticizes the quality of the all-volunteer force,
yet most observers agree that quality today is much higher than under the draft
since, among other things, the military can screen out those with lower
intelligence scores and non-high school graduates.

The longest section of the book, criticizing the lack of readiness and combat
effectiveness of our forces, is almost entirely based on a House Appropriations
Committee report released in 1983, which in turn primarily used data from
1980-81, the period before the positive impact of the Reagan defense budgets was
felt. I am not arguing that all of the charges are false or that major problems
still do not exist, but the discussion is clearly based on wrong data in some
cases and outdated information in others. A strong case can and should be made
for inadequacies in our readiness, training and sustaining capability. But it
should not be done using such a weak and outdated source. T HE final chapter
suggests a program to remedy the problems cited. Mr. Gabriel's principal
recommendations center on upgrading the officer corps. He proposes better
training, longer assignments and slower promotions. He also advocates a revival
of the traditional values of the military profession to include greater concern
for the welfare of the soldiers, acceptance of personal responsibility for
results and a stronger ethical basis. Few would quarrel with these ideas, yet I
was not persuaded that such steps would dramatically enhance the combat
effectiveness of our forces or solve the long litany of problems the author
cites.

Finally, Mr. Gabriel pleads for the return of the draft, arguing that
conscription would reduce the costs of the military, improve the quality of our
troops and better distribute the burden of military service among the various
classes and racial groups in our society. These views are not uncommon, yet if
space permitted, all can be seriously questioned. Most observers who have looked
at these problems in detail would be likely to reject Mr. Gabriel's solutions to
them. Despite these flaws, this is a valuable book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
A BUSY CHARACTER ACTOR

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 19, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


IN the theater world, ''an actor's actor'' is a consummate professional who
evokes admiration in his colleagues.

If there were a term, ''a character actor's character actor,'' Tom Aldredge of
Stamford could come to mind.

''I knew at the beginning I was nobody's leading man,'' said Mr. Aldredge during
a break in rehearsing Moliere's ''Imaginary Invalid'' at the Hartman Theater at
the Stamford Center for the Arts. The play will run through Nov. 3. Mr.
Aldredge, who is 57 years old, plays the title role.

Before becoming an actor, Mr. Aldredge studied pre-law at the University of
Dayton in his hometown in Ohio. When he was 21 years old, he visited Manhattan.
Wandering about ''looking for a movie,'' he said, he came upon a theater
instead. Two men who looked like workmen were standing in the alley leading to
the stage door of the Ethel Barrymore Theater on West 47th Street. They told the
young tourist that there was a Broadway show inside. Assuming that they were
stagehands, he naively asked whether he could go in and see the show.

''Buy a ticket,'' they replied. He did, for $1.80, and was astonished when the
two men appeared on stage. They were Marlon Brando and Karl Malden. The play was
''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' And Mr. Aldredge was hooked.

He went to see as many plays as he could during his brief stay in New York -
''Mister Roberts'' with Henry Fonda and ''As the Girls Go'' with Bobby Clark
were among them. He returned to Dayton, but not to the university.

Determined to be a director, Mr. Aldredge enrolled in Chicago's Goodman School
of Drama, which included Geraldine Page and Mr. Malden among its alumni. There
he met Ismene Athanasios Vachliotis, a design student.

During their final year, they joined the faculty - he as a teacher of makeup,
she as an instructor of costume design. The young man from Ohio and the young
woman from Greece married.

The couple recently gave up a Manhattan condominium and a farm in Dutchess
County, N.Y., in favor of what Mr. Aldredge described as a ''gigantic Tudor
house'' in Stamford.

''We kept passing each other like ships in the night, so we decided to forgo
both places and have just one to pass each other in - and still be in commutable
distance to Manhattan,'' Mr. Aldredge said.  While he is appearing in his new
city, Mrs. Aldredge, otherwise known as Theoni V. Aldredge, is in Providence,
R.I., supervising the costumes for the touring company of ''Dreamgirls,'' which
she created for the original Broadway production. The show will be coming to New
Haven's Shubert Performing Arts Center in April.

Mrs. Aldredge, who won Tony Awards for her costumes in ''Annie'' and ''Barnum''
and an Oscar for her elaborate creations in the remake of ''The Great Gatsby,''
with Robert Redford and Mia Farrow, has become one of the country's premier
costume designers. ''A Chorus Line,'' ''42nd Street'' and ''La Cage aux Folles''
are her current Broadway credits, with the new Michael Bennett musical,
''Chess,'' coming up.

In Mr. Aldredge's Broadway debut - in the 1959 musical, ''The Nervous Set'' -
his wife designed the costumes, as she did for numerous New York Shakespeare
Festival productions in which he has appeared.

''She just buys my clothes,'' he said. ''I have terrible taste and wear things
'til they fall apart.''

Mr. and Mrs. Aldredge will celebrate their 33d anniversary in December. They
have no children.

Mr. Aldredge has had his share of triumphs on Broadway and Off Broadway,
including winning a Drama Desk award and a Tony nomination for his performance
as the father of a Vietnam veteran in ''Sticks and Bones.'' On the occasion of
Elizabeth Taylor's stage debut as the conniving Regina Gidden, in ''The Little
Foxes'' in 1981, he played Horace, the man she marries and destroys.

''I was one of Elizabeth Taylor's husbands,'' he declared, speaking glowingly of
the ''generosity and class'' of that star. Last season, he also appeared in the
revival of ''Strange Interlude'' on Broadway.

Mr. Aldredge, whose track record of continuous employment must be as enviable to
his fellow actors as are his characterizations, has become an established
presence on the Connecticut theater scene. Last year, he had a season of what he
calls his ''road plays'' in New Haven, where he acted in the world premiere of
Athol Fugard's ''Road to Mecca'' at the Yale Repertory Company, and at the Long
Wharf Theater in ''Tobacco Road.''

His appeared at the Hartman as the 80-year-old actor in the Neil Simon double
bill, ''Actors and Actresses,'' two years ago.

For a character actor, playing an octogenarian comes with the territory. That
was Mr. Aldredge's age in ''On Golden Pond,'' the play in which he originated
the part of the crochety Norman Thayer Jr. He got the part, he said, because
''everyone they wanted of the right age said, 'I'll never remember the lines.'
''

As for the movies, Mr. Aldredge conceded that that is a medium he ''can't be
successful in. Hollywood categorizes actors and they don't know what to do with
me.''

Not so for television. He received an Emmy Award for his performance in ''Henry
Winkler Meets Shakespeare,'' played in a cable television production of George
Bernard Shaw's ''Heartbreak House'' with Rex Harrison and recently acted in a
public-television production of Saul Bellow's ''Seize the Day,'' in which he
played a 90-year-old man. That is not a record, though. Once, he recalled, he
was 100 years old - as Teiresias in ''Oedipus, the King.'' Argan, the
hypochondriac in ''Imaginary Invalid'' is, according to Mr. Aldredge's
estimation, his own age.

The actor has no fear that he will run out of roles.

''Twenty years from now, I'll be ready to revive 'On Golden Pond' -for real,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Aldredge

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
A LEADING CHARACTER ACTOR

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 13, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words


IN the theater world, ''the actor's actor'' refers to the consummate
professional who evokes admiration and awe in his colleagues.

If there were a term, ''the character actor's character actor,'' Tom Aldredge
could come to mind as one of its exemplars.

''I knew at the beginning I was nobody's leading man,'' the 57-year-old Mr.
Aldredge said after a recent break in rehearsals of Moliere's ''The Imaginary
Invalid'' in which he plays the title role at the Hartman Theater at the
Stamford Center for the Arts. The inaugural play of the Hartman season had its
press opening last Wednesday and runs through Nov. 3.

Before his acting ''beginning,'' Mr. Aldredge was a prelaw student at the
University of Dayton in his native Ohio town. When he was 21 years old, he
visited Manhattan. Wandering about ''looking for a movie,'' he came upon a
legitimate theater instead. Two men who looked like tough laborers were hanging
about the alley leading to the stage door of the Ethel Barrymore Theater on West
47th Street. They told the young tourist that there was a Broadway show inside.
Assuming they were ''stage hands,'' he naively asked whether he could go in and
see the show.

''Buy a ticket,'' one of them replied. He did - for $1.80 - and was astonished
when the two ''stage hands'' appeared on stage. They were Marlon Brando and Karl
Malden. The play was ''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' And Mr. Aldredge was hooked.
He went to see as many plays as he could during his brief stay in New York -
''Mister Roberts'' with Henry Fonda and ''As The Girls Go'' with Bobby Clark
were among them. - before returning to Dayton, but not to the university.

Determined to be a director, Mr. Aldredge enrolled in Chicago's Goodman School
of Drama, which included Geraldine Page and Mr. Malden among its alumni. There
he met Ismene Athanasios Vachliotis, a design student.

During their final year, they joined the faculty - he as a teacher of makeup;
she as a costume-designing instructor. Afterward, the young man from Ohio and
the young woman from Greece married.

The couple recently gave up a Manhattan condominium and a Dutchess County farm
in favor of what Mr. Aldredge describes as a ''gigantic Tudor house'' in
Stamford. They bought it in June. ''We kept passing each other like ships in the
night, so we decided to forgo both places and have just one to pass each other
in -and still be in commutable distance to Manhattan,'' Mr. Aldredge explained.

While he is appearing in his new home town, Mrs. Aldredge, otherwise known as
Theoni V. Aldredge, is currently in Providence, R.I., supervising the costumes
for the touring company of ''Dreamgirls,'' which she created for the original
Broadway production. The traveling version of ''Dreamgirls'' will be stopping
over at New Haven's Shubert Performing Arts Center in April.

Mrs. Aldredge - who won Tony awards for her ''Annie'' and ''Barnum'' costumes
and an Oscar for her elaborate creations in the remake of ''The Great Gatsby,''
with Robert Redford and Mia Farrow - has become one of the American theater's
premiere costume designers. ''A Chorus Line,'' ''42d Street,'' and ''La Cage aux
Folles'' are her current Broadway credits, with the new Michael Bennett musical,
''Chess'' coming up.

For Mr. Aldredge's Broadway debut - in the 1959 musical, ''The Nervous Set'' -
Mrs. Aldredge designed the costumes, as she did for numerous New York
Shakespeare Festival productions in which the actor has appeared. Offstage,
''she just buys my clothes - I have terrible taste and wear things until they
fall apart,'' he said.

The Aldredges will celebrate their 33d anniversary in December. They have no
children but Mrs. Aldredge's relatives keep popping in from Greece, Mr. Aldredge
said. Her niece is attending the State University of New York at Purchase.

In his own fashion, Mr. Aldredge has had his share of Broadway and Off-Broadway
triumphs, including winning a Drama Desk award and a Tony nomination for his
performance as the father of a Vietnam veteran in ''Sticks and Bones.'' On the
occasion of Elizabeth Taylor's stage debut as the conniving Regina Gidden (in
''The Little Foxes'' in 1981), he played Horace, the man she marries and
destroys.

''I was one of Elizabeth Taylor's husbands,'' he declared proudly, speaking
glowingly of the ''generosity and class'' of that star.

He has worked with all manner of stars in plays spanning all styles -from
Sophocles and Shakespeare to Sam Shepard. But until now, not Moliere.

Mr. Aldredge, whose record of continuous employment must be as enviable to his
fellow actors as his characterizations are artistically endorsed, has become an
established presence on the Connecticut theater scene. Last year, he had a
season of what he calls his ''road plays'' in New Haven, where he acted in the
world premiere of Athol Fugard's ''Road to Mecca'' at the Yale Repertory Company
and, at the Long Wharf Theater, as Jeeter in ''Tobacco Road.''

His last - and first - appearance at the Hartman was as the 80-year-old actor in
the Neil Simon double bill, ''Actors and Actresses'' two years ago.

For a ''character actor,'' playing an octogenarian comes with the territory.
That was Mr. Aldredge's age in ''On Golden Pond.'' He originated the part of the
crochety Norman Thayer Jr. on stage, getting it because, he said, ''everyone
they wanted of the right age said, 'I'll never remember the lines.' It was in
that role that Mr. Fonda gave his final performance in the movies - a medium
that Mr. Aldredge concedes he ''can't be successful in: Hollywood categorizes
actors and they don't know what to do with me.''

Not so for television. He received an Emmy award for appearing in ''Henry
Winkler Meets Shakespeare,'' played in a cable television production of George
Bernard Shaw's ''Heartbreak House'' with Rex Harrison and recently acted in a
Public Television production of the not-yet-shown Saul Bellow's ''Seize the
Day,'' in which his age reached 90. That is not a record, though. Once, he
recalled, he was 100 years old - as Teiresias in ''Oedipus, the King.''

Argan, the hypochondriac in ''Imaginary Invalid,'' is, according to Mr.
Aldredge's estimation, his own age, though he could be a decade older.

No fear he'll run out of roles. ''Twenty years from now, I'll be ready to revive
'On Golden Pond' -for real.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Aldredge

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL OPENING IN ARIZONA IN ALIEN SANCTUARY CASE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1518 words

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz., Oct. 20


It started obscurely with a chance encounter on a hot, dusty day in July 1981
when a friend of Jim Corbett's picked up a hitchhiker on the outskirts of
Nogales, just north of the border.

The hitchhiker, young, tired and frightened, said he was a refugee from El
Salvador. As the car rolled through the Great Sonoran desert, he told of death
and torture in his homeland, of how several of his relatives had fallen victim
to death squads that killed seemingly at random, and of how he had been lucky to
escape with his life.

When the driver reached a Border Patrol checkpoint, the young Salvadoran was
discovered, taken into custody, put in a detention camp and ultimately deported.

Moved by the encounter, the man discussed it with Mr. Corbett, a graying,
retired goat rancher and Harvard philosophy graduate who had been active in the
antiwar movement.

Religious Community Involved

Equally moved, Mr. Corbett, a Quaker with wide contacts in the religious
community, quietly and at first surreptitiously formed a fledgling ''underground
railroad'' to smuggle Central American refugees into this country and hide them
from the immigration authorities, acts the Government has viewed as in defiance
of immigration law.

On Tuesday, James A. Corbett, 52 years old, will go on trial, as will the Rev.
John A. Fife, 45, pastor of Tucson Southside Presbyterian Church, two Roman
Catholic priests, a nun and six church lay workers. They face a total of 67
felony counts involving smuggling, transporting and concealing illegal aliens.
Although they admit their role in bringing the aliens into the United States,
the defendants say they acted properly under the provisions of immigration law
that provides for political asylum for refugees.

Charges against two other nuns, one of whom was suffering from a degenerative
disease, were dropped by the Government, and three other women have pleaded
guilty to reduced misdemeanor charges in the case. They are awaiting sentencing.

Those awaiting trial, if convicted, face possible prison sentences of up to five
years on each count against them.

Anger Was First Motive

At first, Mr. Corbett recalled, he acted out of neither religion nor reason but
out of anger.

He thought he could simply call the immigration authorities and ask that Central
Americans facing violence be allowed to stay in the United States.

He soon learned that the United States usually regarded Central Americans here
as economic refugees, not political ones. No more than 3 percent of Salvadorans
applying for asylum are granted it. The rest are sent home. It was then, Mr.
Corbett says, that his anger blended with what he calls a basic conviction
common to almost all religions.

''The protection of people threated by murder and torture is fundamental to the
faith of many denominations,'' he said in a recent interview in Tucson.

Within months Mr. Corbett and others had formed the church-based movement to
give sanctuary to illegal aliens, and had planted the seeds of the most serious
confrontation between church and state since some churches counseled and
harbored draft resisters in the Vietnam War era.

Seeking Aid From Church

In the beginning, Mr. Corbett and the other defendants readily admit, they
worked secretly, bringing Central Americans into this country through Mexican
contacts, mostly in the Catholic Church, and hiding them in their homes.

By fall 1981, Mr. Corbett, his own house overflowing with more than a score of
refugees, went to Mr. Fife and asked if the church would take in some of the
aliens.

Mr. Fife agreed and decided to declare that the church, by an overwhelming vote
of the congregation, had chosen to invoke the concept of religious sanctuary.

''The faith leads to an acute awareness of the need to care for those whose
lives hang in the balance,'' he said later in an interview. ''What we're doing
is simply what the faith compels us to do.''

On March 24, 1982, less than nine months after Mr. Corbett decided to form the
underground railroad, Southside Presbyterian and seven churches in California
that had earlier joined the movement announced publicly that they would help
transport and house Central Americans fleeing their homelands.

Initially, the Government's response was to ignore the churches' defiance.

In a pointed memorandum following the declaration, now a part of the court
record, Thomas Martin, a Border Patrol agent, wrote his superiors, ''A ploy is
going to be Border Patrol 'baiting' in order to demonstrate to the public that
the U.S. Government thinks nothing of breaking down the doors of their churches
to drag Jesus Christ out to be tortured and murdered.''

The memo suggested that ''all politcal implications should be considered before
any further action is taken toward this group.''

In a similar memorandum in January 1983, also in the court record, an
immigration service intelligence officer suggested that any damage to
immigration control caused by the sanctuary movement was minor compared to the
''merits of achieving martyrdom'' the movement would gain if its members were
arrested.

But by April 1984, the Government had decided to begin an undercover operation
in which two investigators of the immigration service's antismuggling unit in
Phoenix and three paid informers infiltrated the sanctuary movement posing as
sympathetic volunteers. Two of the informers had themselves been implicated in
transporting illegal alien farmworkers.

In the course of nine months, the Government obtained nearly 100 hours of tape
recordings, most of them made by the two informers using recorders hidden in
their clothing.

Mr. Fife, whose Southside Presbyterian Church was the primary site of the
tapings, said he was ''shocked'' and ''baffled'' by the Government's actions.

''We had been completely open and public about all our activities for three
years,'' he said. ''I realized their purpose was not to investigate, but to
intimidate the movement by spying within congregations.''

For its part, the Government, with ample precedent in law, has maintained that
the sanctity of the church does not extend to protection of illegal acts.

A. Melvin McDonald, the United States Attorney who signed the original
indictments in January, said in announcing them that ''merely because they wear
the garb of the clergy, they have no greater or no lesser rights than anyone
else.''

Donald M. Reno Jr., the assistant United States Attorney who is the lead
prosecutor in the case, also dismissed the suggestion that there were any
religious or political overtones to the prosecution.

''The Government is virtually blind as far as those factors are concerned,'' he
said. ''These are aliens to us. This is an alien smuggling conspiracy.''

Despite the Government's statements defending the tapings, it announced last
week that none of the 91 tape recordings made by the informers and agents would
be introduced as evidence. Defense lawyers expressed surprise.

Mr. Reno had earlier said that he would not call as a witness one of the
informers, Salomon Delgado Graham, who has served a prison term for transporting
illegal aliens. He became the subject of controversy after officials of the
United Farm Workers and an admitted prostitute filed affidavits saying that Mr.
Graham had brought prostitutes to the fields.

Mr. Graham, in an affidavit filed by Mr. Reno, denied the allegations, and the
presiding judge, Earl Carroll, barred any reference to the allegations in
testimony.

Judge Bans Some Testimony

The judge has also barred any testimony about possible religious motivation,
international law, United States foreign policy or conditions in Central
America.

The defendants say those decisons effectively cut the heart out of any defense
they might offer.

In another development, one of the defendants, Sister Darlene Nicgorski, said
her lawyer had told her that the prosecution had offered the defendants a deal
in which they could plead guilty to lesser charges in exchange for lenient
sentences.

''If we were willing to plead guilty to a misdemeanor, we would get six-month
suspended sentences and probation,'' she said. ''I did not accept that offer.''

''There were some efforts on the Government's part to coerce me into accepting
that,'' she said, ''because of the fact the Government particularly wanted John
Fife and me - that if we refused this plea offer, that we would get a
three-to-five-year sentence. 'Hard time' was I think the word used.''

Mr. Reno said in court that the defendants had been discussing confidential
negotiations, and he asked the judge to bar parties to the case from speaking to
reporters.

Judge Carroll denied the motion but said he would keep it under advisement.

Meanwhile, the sanctuary workers say they will continue to bring in and give
shelter to Central Americans.

Philip Willis-Conger, one of the defendants, said that ''there are even more
people that have come forward to assist people fleeing persecution'' and that
sanctuary members would continue assisting aliens ''regardless of what happens
during the trial or later.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of members of the sanctuary movement in Arizona (AP); photo of
the Rev. John Fife (NYT/Suzi Moore)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, OCTOBER 21, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words




International

Egypt said Tunisia had helped the United States intercept the Egyptian plane
carrying the four hijackers of the Achille Lauro. President Hosni Mubarak said
he was certian that there had been such collusion. A White House spokesman
strongly denied it. [Page A1, Column 6.]

Leon Klinghoffer's body was ceremoniously returned to New York, his native city.
An Army guard of honor saluted when his coffin arrived at Kennedy International
Airport. A message of sympathy from President Reagan was read and he was
eulogized by New York legislators. Mr. Klinghoffer's body arrived from Rome
where it had been taken after washing up on Syria's coast. It had been thrown
overboard after he had been killed by the hijackers of the Achille Lauro.
[A1:4.]

Bettino Craxi rebounded from last week's fierce polemics between Italy and the
United States and was considered virtually certain to be called upon to form a
new government. He was politically strenghtened by a warm letter of conciliation
from President Reagan. [A6:1.]

The Adminstration's strongest effort to convince world opinion of the need for a
realistic but positive approaching to dealing with the Soviet Union will be set
forth this week by President Reagan during his visit to the United Nations,
White House officials said. They said Mr. Reagan, in a major speech to the
General Assembly Thursday, would set the stage for the coming meeting with the
Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, by providing a ''realistic assessment'' of
the state of relations between the two superpowers. [A1:5.]

Defeat of the anti-Sandinistas was predicted by President Daniel Ortega Saavedra
of Nicaragua. He said the military situation had swung sharply in favor of the
Sandinista Army, and that the army would decisively defeat the anti-Government
rebels ''in the next few months.'' He also said that the imminence of a
''strategic victory'' over the United States-supported rebels had been behind
his announcement of the suspension of Nicaragua's civil liberties last week.
[A3:4.]

National

Smaller pay rises face Americans in 1986, the fifth consecutive year that the
typical American worker will get a raise less than in the previous year. Scores
of corporations are planning smaller raises - if they are raising pay at all.
Economists say this is very unusual at such an advanced stage in an economic
recovery. [A1:1.]

Chrysler's Canadian employees won their union's principal economic demand, which
was to bring their wages and benefits up to levels at General Motors and Ford in
Canada. The Canadian United Automobile Workers tentatively agreed to settle its
strike that began Thursday over the wage and benefits issue. [A1:1.]

Office buildings and hotels are rising in record numbers in cities across the
country although vacancy rates in existing structures are exceptionally high. At
the same time, millions of moderate-income people are unaable to afford adequate
housing despite increased home construction and improved economic conditions
since the 1982 recession. Experts say the trends are the result of major changes
in Federal policy and in financial institutions since the 1970's. [A1:2.]

Scrutiny of immigration lawyers by Federal officials is part of a wide-ranging
investigation into what the officials say are widespread fraudulent schemes to
obtain visas, work permits and other benefits for aliens. Immigration lawyers
say the investigations are designed to discourage lawyers from vigorous
representation of aliens. [A1:3.]

Leaders of the sanctuary movement that has sheltered Central American refugees
will go on trial Tuesday in Tucson, Ariz. What some see as an act of conscience
the Government has called defiance of the immigration law. It has also led to
the most serious confrontation between church and state since some churches
counseled and harbored draft resisters in the Vietnam war. On trial will be a
Quaker, a Presbyterian minister, two Roman Catholic priests, a nun and six
church lay workers. [A10:2.]

At 81, Erskine Caldwell is being recognized as one of the South's great writers.
The Georgia Endowment for the Humanities has organized a program in his honor.
[A10:2.]

Metropolitan

World leaders gathered in New York for the observance of the 40th anniversary of
the United Nations. Kings and princes, presidents and prime ministers and
generals arrived in a maze of motorcades. Many spent the day sightseeing.
[A1:2.]

A New York State program to require welfare recipients to take jobs or job
training is scheduled to begin next month on a modest scale that will affect
only new applicants for aid in New York City. State officials say a requirement
that recipients take a job or job training or have their benefits reduced will
initially affect only new applicants for assistance in New York City. The job
requirement excludes mothers with children under 6 years old. [B1:5.]

John Cardinal O'Connor appealed to a Jewish audience, gathered to to mark a
milestone in Roman Catholic-Jewish relations, to understand that Catholics too
have suffered and have been victims of oppression. [B3:1.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PEN EVENT STARS BUCKLEY AND IRVING

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


William F. Buckley Jr. and John Irving offered pages from their novels and their
lives, sprinkled with a few political musings, to an audience at the Royale
Theater last night in the third PEN Celebration - two separate talks by the
authors that illustrated the different ways in which their fiction evolves.

Mr. Buckley, the editor of the National Review, syndicated columnist and author
of a series of novels, described the conscious intellectual process involved in
the genesis of Blackford Oakes, the protagonist of his novels. In many ways, Mr.
Buckley said, his fiction stemmed from the ''iconoclastic'' literary idea that a
novel could have good guys and bad guys and that the good guys could be
American.

Mr. Irving, by contrast, said his fiction comes to life in the following way:
After he completes a novel, he always begins to write his autobiography. Soon he
finds that he has begun to lie, and, a short time later, he said, he realizes
that instead of his autobiography, he is working on another novel. Mr. Irving
then read to the audience from what he described as a work ''on its way to a
lie.''

The appearance of the two authors last night was one of eight Sunday evenings
sponsored by the PEN American Center, the largest of 83 centers devoted to
bringing together poets, playwrights, essayists, novelists, translators and
editors worldwide.

The evening was introduced by Norman Mailer, the president of the American
branch of PEN, who helped put together what may be the most ambitious literary
event of the season.

'Best Writers in America'

The money raised from the PEN Celebrations will be used to finance a weeklong
48th International PEN Congress next January in New York. The organizers say
that 774 subscribers paid $1,000 each in a sellout of a series that was
described as talks by ''16 of the best writers in America.'' The speakers on the
last two readings were Saul Bellow, Eudora Welty, Arthur Miller and Alice
Walker, and upcoming events are scheduled to include Susan Sontag, Kurt
Vonnegut, Joan Didion, Tom Wolfe, Woody Allen and John Updike, among others.

Mr. Buckley, in his talk, said that after agreeing to write his first novel in
November 1974, he came to the conclusion that his spy fiction would run against
the current of the time, which portrayed a gray world, in which both sides in
cold-war battlefields demonstrated amorality and ignobility.

''In the novels of the recent past, novels by Graham Greene and John le Carre
and Len Deighton, for instance, the point really is that there is little to
choose from in a contest between the K.G.B. and the C.I.A.,'' Mr. Buckley said.
''The point I sought to make, and continue to do in the Blackford Oakes novels,
is that the C.I.A., whatever its failures, seeks to advance the honorable
alternative in the struggle for the world.''

On the Side of Good

In writing his first novel, ''Saving the Queen,'' the author said that his
personal experience with the C.I.A., in which he served for nine months, and the
history of that organization made it easy to write fiction in which a C.I.A. was
on the side of good.

Next, he said, he constructed a painfully handsome main character, in contrast
to the paunchy, over-the-hill agents so much in vogue.

Mr. Buckley said he then added ''characteristically'' American brushstrokes,
such as a sarcastic sense of humor and an underlying belief in the possibilities
of Judeo-Christian ideals.

Once that character was alive, Mr. Buckley said, he was free to construct
fiction that posed some of the moral dilemmas of contemporary world politics.

Fact to Fantasy

For Mr. Irving, the process of writing fiction is a less conscious, more organic
process. The growth of an Irving novel, he indicated, starts with facts that
sprout into fantasy, which, in turn, grow into entire fictional worlds.

After being introduced by Glenn Close and Robin Williams, the stars of the movie
version of his novel ''The World According to Garp,'' Mr. Irving demonstrated
this process by reading a work, part way on the road from fact to fiction. To
the audience, it was impossible to tell where fact ended and the novel began.

Mr. Irving recounted his childhood in Exeter, N.H., and the story of Russell
Meany, a character so small that the favorite game in Mr. Irving's Sunday school
class was to pass this petite classmate over their heads.

''We were very careful,'' Mr. Irving said. ''We never dropped him.''

Russell was, in fact, ''the color of gravestone, translucent at times,'' Mr.
Irving said, ''and to be heard at all, he had to shout through his nose.''

The boy's ''Disneyland'' voice was so disagreeable, Mr. Irving's grandmother
remarked that it could raise from the dead all the mice killed in mousetraps in
town. Russell was so short that years later, he had to lie about his height to
get into the Army.

Russell Meany was allowed to play baseball by other boys because, when he stood
at home plate with bat in hand, ''he had such a small strike zone,'' he was
never struck out. Russell was not allowed to swing at the ball, but he was
valued as a ''pinch walker.''

Mr. Irving, wearing a gray pinstripe suit and well-worn loafers, repeatedly fell
into a shrill squeaky whine to reproduce the voice of his classmate. Toward the
end of his reading, Mr. Irving disclosed that Russell died a hero in Vietnam.

''You let me die,'' Mr. Irving squealed in the voice of his character.

Falling back into his own deep baritone he said, ''How could they let that voice
go to Vietnam?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Irving and William F. Buckley Jr.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Crusades Against Markets

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Oct. 17


Vietnam is embarking on a series of substantial economic changes intended not
only to relieve chronic shortages in goods and resources but also to speed up
the collapse of the resilient free-enterprise sector in the South.

''We want to tackle the problem of people who use their resources to manipulate
the economy,'' Le Chi Tiet, a Communist Party leader in Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon, said in a recent interview with American reporters. ''Larger
traders with private resources are trying to destabilize this city.''

Among the changes taking place are the replacement of the old currency with a
devalued one to reduce undeclared wealth, the elimination of many Government
subsidies, and the introduction of welfare benefits.

Vietnam, debt-ridden and with virtually no hard-currency reserves, is for the
first time asking the United Nations Center on Transnational Corporations to
help it build trade with Western countries, according to diplomats and regional
economists.

Later this month Vietnam will welcome a delegation of more than 50 top
executives of large American corporations who are traveling through Asia on a
tour sponsored by the publishers of Time and Life magazines.

Officials here and in Hanoi say they do not expect any immediate concrete
results from the visit. The country has too many serious structural weaknesses
to attract or absorb large-scale investment, and the United States, which has no
diplomatic relations with Vietnam, is leading an effective trade embargo.

Hotel Being Repaired

Nevertheless, a sizable staff of Foreign Ministry officials is working full time
on the two-day visit, and crews in Hanoi are busy sprucing up the lakeside Thang
Loi hotel, where the delegation will spend one night.

Economists and diplomats in Hanoi and other Southeast Asian capitals say they
believe Vietnam has been carefully watching Peking's economic experiments.
''They may be moving toward the Chinese model,'' one expert said, ''but of
course they will not talk about it in those terms.''

China has been a traditional enemy and relations are tense. If Hanoi is seeking
to expand international trade and investment activities, it is - unlike China -
concurrently attempting to gain tighter control over the domestic economy.

Economists and diplomats in the region say there is a need to marshal the
country's slim resources. Despite economic incentives that have benefited rural
people in particular, untold amounts of money and goods are being diverted from
Government coffers through black marketeering and corruption. And these problems
are not confined to the uncooperative South.

Mr. Tiet said subsidized commodities such as petroleum and basic foodstuffs were
being collected by ration-coupon holders for resale or other private business
uses. He said that in some cases people entitled to food for their families at
prices that represented a substantial loss to the Government were fattening
livestock with it for sale on the private market. Government gasoline, he said,
was running free-enterprise jitneys.

The rationing system has now been abandoned and workers are beginning to get
additional pay or bonuses instead of subsidized goods. This has the added
advantage of putting more money into the hands of Government workers and
soldiers who were falling well behind farmers in income.

Here in Ho Chi Minh City a visitor returning six months after the celebrations
marking the fall of South Vietnam to the armies of the North sees changes almost
immediately.

Several street markets have shrunk. More shops and small businesses have been
collectivized or forced into joint ventures with the Government. Formerly
friendly shopkeepers, now working side-by-side with Government-assigned
partners, are reluctant to talk to foreigners. Several took Western visitors
aside to warn them they were being followed.

One craftsman told a visitor that he felt as if he were ''the last private
trader in the city.''

Vendors and Pawn Brokers

Mr. Tiet, who is the head of the City Council Secretariat and leader of the
Communist Party unit on the council, said ''only about twenty to thirty thousand
people or households'' in a metropolitan area of about four million remain in
private trade. Most, he said, were food and beverage vendors or pawn brokers.

''How long these activities should last, we don't know,'' he said. ''They will
go on until we can provide people with better facilities and services.'' He
added that about 70 percent of the city's renascent handicrafts industry was now
also collectivized.

Recent visitors to Ho Chi Minh City got a firsthand look at the sabotage tactics
Mr. Tiet cited in his criticism of private traders and ''rich people.'' Shops
and restaurants, including those under Government control, have been hoarding
small denominations of currency, refusing to produce change for customers who
pay with larger notes. This has in effect made larger notes unusable and kept
them out of circulation, leading to rumors that they would be recalled.

The new Vietnamese dong was introduced in September at the rate of 10 units of
old currency for one new one. Security procedures were tight; the country was
sealed off for several days, with international flights canceled. The official
exchange rate for old currency was 100 dong to the dollar. No new rate was
announced in September but it is now known to be 15 new dong. The black market
in new currency is already paying four to six times that rate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PERES, AT THE U.N., PROPOSES TO VISIT JORDAN FOR TALKS

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1623 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 21


Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel, addressing the General Assembly as it
began the second week of its 40th anniversary commemoration, offered today to
travel to Jordan before the end of the year to participate in a Middle East
peace conference.

''I hereby proclaim: The state of war between Israel and and Jordan should be
terminated immediately,'' Mr. Peres said. ''Israel declares this readily in the
hope that King Hussein is willing to reciprocate this step.''

In his announcement, which he referred to as a ''new diplomatic initiative,''
Mr. Peres recalled the 1977 visit of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt to
Jerusalem, a historic trip that paved the way for an Israeli-Egyptian peace
agreement.

'Before End of the Year'

''This gathering can take place before the end of the year, in Jordan, Israel or
any location, as mutually agreed upon,'' Mr. Peres said. ''We will be pleased to
attend an opening meeting in Amman.''

The Jordanian Government had no immediate reaction to Mr. Peres's offer. The
state radio did not mention the Peres speech, and senior Jordanian officials
said they had no comment.

At the United Nations, Jordan's chief delegate, Abdullah Salah, said in a
telephone interview that Mr. Peres's speech ''is still under study back home,
where it is being given careful consideration,''

''It may carry with it many things,'' he said, ''or very few.''

Says Palestinians Can Take Part

In his speech, Mr. Peres repeated Israel's position that negotiations would be
conducted directly, between nations, by an Israeli delegation on the one side
and a Jordanian or a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation on the other. But Israeli
officials noted that Mr. Peres did not mention the Palestine Liberation
Organization by name when he said that both delegations must represent ''peace,
not terror.''

Israeli officials characterized Mr. Peres's remarks as a direct response to King
Hussein's speech in the Assembly last month, which American officials saw as
intended to break the deadlock in Middle East diplomacy and advance the prospect
of direct talks between Israel and a Jordanian-Palestinian group.

In that speech, King Hussein publicly announced for the first time that he and a
Palestinian group were prepared to negotiate ''promptly and directly'' under the
proper auspices. The King said then that an international conference sponsored
by the United Nations was the proper forum for negotiations.

''The next step is to see what King Hussein will answer,'' an Israeli official
said today.

All delegates from the 21-member ''Arab group'' except for Egypt walked out of
the session as Mr. Peres stepped to the podium to speak. They were joined by
Iran, Vietnam, Afghanistan and Nicaragua. Several African and Asian delegations,
among them those of Burkina Faso, Zimbabwe, Mauritania, the Seychelles, Malaysia
and India, either walked out or were not present during the speech.

The 40th anniversary commemoration, which moved into high gear today with
speeches from one king, seven presidents, five prime ministers, two vice
presidents and five foreign ministers, was led off by President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra of Nicaragua.

Mr. Ortega told the Assembly that his country would lift a state of emergency,
under which civil rights have been suspended, when the United States ends what
he called its policy of ''state terrorism.''

Wants Meeting With Reagan

Before his speech, Mr. Ortega asked Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to
help arrange a meeting for him with President Reagan, according to a United
Nations spokesman, Mario Zamorano.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar agreed to pass on the request to Vernon A. Walters, the
chief American delegate, according to Mr. Zamorano, who gave no indication why
Mr. Ortega requested the meeting.

Mr. Peres's remarks today included a comment marking a departure from Israel's
long-held opposition to an international peace conference on the Middle East.
Mr. Peres suggested that such a conference might play a role in the peace
process. ''If deemed necessary,'' he said, ''these negotiations may be initiated
with the support of an international conference, as agreed upon by the
negotiating states.''

In carefully worded language, Mr. Peres continued, ''The permanent members of
the Security Council may be invited to support the initiation of these
negotiations.''

Then, without mentioning either the Soviet Union or China, neither of whom
recognizes Israel, Mr. Peres said that ''those who confine their diplomatic
relations to one side of the conflict exclude themselves from such a role.''

It was unclear from his speech if he meant that the participation of the Soviet
Union and China was negotiable. Israel has consistently rejected the idea of an
international conference as too time-consuming and as allowing the Russians into
the peace process.

Participation Not Ruled Out

But although the opposition Likud bloc in Israel has steadfastly held to the
view that the Soviet Union could never be included in the peace process, even if
the two countries established diplomatic relations, Mr. Peres did not rule out
that possibility, Israeli officials at the United Nations said.

King Hussein has called for the participation of all parties concerned,
including the Soviet Union, in negotiations. No Mention of P.L.O. Mr. Peres
invited the Palestinian people, rather than the P.L.O. specifically, to
participate.

''From this rostrum,'' he said, his voice filled with emotion, ''I call upon the
Palestinian people to put an end to rejectionism and belligerency. Let us talk.
Come forth and recognize the reality of the state of Israel - our wish to live
in peace and our need for security.''

These were among the aspects of what Mr. Peres characterized as ''a possible
blueprint'' for talks:

* Negotiations, he said, ''may produce intermediate as well as permanent
arrangements'' and ''may deal with the demarcation of boundaries as well as the
resolution of the Palestinian problem.'' He said the Camp David Accords
''provided a possible basis for the attainment of these objectives.'' Some
observers found it important that Mr. Peres did not call Camp David the only
basis for negotiations, the position of the previous Israeli Government.

* An international forum, he said, although not a substitute for direct
negotiations, ''can offer support for them.''

* The ''agenda, procedure and international support for negotiations can be
discussed and agreed upon at a meeting of small working teams to be convened
within 30 days'' in order to expedite the process, Mr. Peres said.

Arab Reaction Is Negative

Other immediate Arab reaction to Mr. Peres's initiative was negative.

''This is a form of gimmickry, which is usually put forward by the Israelis as a
kind of sugarcoating of their hard-line position,'' said Clovis Maksoud, chief
of the United Nations observer mission of the League of Arab States.

Burham Hammad, political adviser at the mission of the United Arab Emirates,
said: ''The P.L.O. is still the representative of the Palestinian people. How
can one achieve a settlement without their representation?''

In his speech earlier today, Mr. Ortega, the Nicaraguan President, denounced
''four years of a war of aggression, organized and financed by the U.S.
Administration against Nicaragua, in violation of international law and
morality.''

Mr. Ortega called on Mr. Reagan to normalize relations with Nicaragua when he
addresses the Assembly on Thursday, ''as homage to the 40th anniversary'' of the
United Nations.

''Nothing in our revolutionary project is incompatible with normal and friendly
relations with the United States,'' he said.

'Nicaragua Shall Never Kneel'

But Mr. Ortega, 39 years old, who shed the military uniform he wore for his
United Nations address last year for a conservative gray suit, vowed that
''Nicaragua shall never kneel before the policy of state terrorism being
practiced by U.S. rulers.''

Listing what he said were American actions against his country, he added, ''We
on our part will suspend the state of emergency we have been forced to impose
due to the aggressions, as of the very moment when the aggressions effectively
cease.''

Speech by Swedish Premier

Only a few of the speakers today fulfilled the goal assigned to them for the
commemorative session: to address ways to strengthen the organization in a
15-minute message. Notable among those who did was Prime Minister Olof Palme of
Sweden.

Admitting that the veto had prevented the Security Council from taking action in
all but a few cases, Mr. Palme called for the ''creation of an international
climate in which the leading powers recognize the necessity, also in their own
interests, to reduce tensions between themselves and to take collective action
against disturbances of the peace.''

He said the Security Council should give the Secretary General a more active
role in conflict prevention, and he urged the consideration of the creation of
peacekeeping operations not only to prevent but also to contain conflicts.

Without mentioning any country by name, Mr. Palme criticized the selective
withholding of contributions by member countries.

Other speakers also used the Assembly forum today to draw attention to national
concerns. In his remarks, President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon praised the work of
the United Nations peacekeeping troops in his country as ''a living example of
solidarity among the nations of the world.''

He called on the United Nations to put into effect its own resolutions calling
for full Israeli withdrawal and to ''discover a formula that can insure the full
participation of all parties concerned towards the creation of a just and
enduring peace.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DAN WHITE, KILLER OF SAN FRANCISCO MAYOR, A SUICIDE

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 21


Dan White, the man convicted of shooting to death Mayor George Moscone of San
Francisco and fellow Supervisor Harvey Milk in 1978, committed suicide today,
the police said.

Mr. White, who was 39 years old, was found in a car in the garage of a house
owned by his wife in San Francisco's middle-class Excelsior district.

Officers investigating Mr. White's death said his brother, Tom, found his body
about 2 P.M. A rubber hose, they said, had been used to pipe lethal carbon
monoxide into the car.

'This Was a Sick Man'

''We've said all along there were three victims in this,'' Douglas R. Schmidt,
Mr. White's lawyer, said. ''Today Dan White became the third victim.''

Mr. White, who had been released from prison Jan. 6, 1984, after serving five
years, one month and nine days in jail for the killings, had been troubled since
his release, his lawyer said.

''His family life was less than satisfactory because he was so devastated by
having created this situation,'' Mr. Schmidt said. ''This was a sick man,''

He said Mr. White's suicide vindicated his controversial plea of ''diminished
capacity'' at the 1979 trial.

Mr. White admitted to the police shortly after the shootings on Nov. 28, 1978,
that he had killed the two officials because he believed they would not let him
rescind adecision to resign from the Board of Supervisors.

Controversial Plea at Trial

Mr. Milk was one of the nation's first acknowledged homosexuals to be elected to
major public office, and many homosexuals said that was a factor in his death.

Mr. White's lawyer argued that his client was mentally unstable and had a
''diminished capacity'' at the time of the shooting, in part, he argued, because
Mr. White had an addiction for sugary junk foods.

Although critics deplored what they called the ''Twinkie defense,'' it succeeded
with jurors.

When they convicted Mr. White of voluntary manslaughter rather than murder,
thousands of protesters, including many members of the homosexual community
here, marched to City Hall where they met the police in a violent confrontation.

In San Francisco, Mr. Milk came to be revered among many homosexuals as a kind
of martyr whose death encouraged them to become more agressive in seeking
political power.

Mr. White, after entering San Francisco's domed City Hall through a basement to
avoid a metal detector, shot Mr. Moscone and Mr. Milk.

Mr. White never expressed public remorse for the murders and apparently died
without doing so.

Police Capt. Michael Lennon, speaking to reporters at the house where Mr.
White's body was found, said Mr. White wrote several notes before he died, but
that none referred to the shootings.

Captain Lennon said that the notes ''apologized for all for all the trouble his
death would cause.''

Spent Time in Ireland

For the first year after his release from the Soledad State Prison, Mr. White
was required to live in the Los Angeles area where he reported weekly to a
parole officer. After the parole expired, Mr. Schmidt said, Mr. White had lived
at his home here and had spent several months in Ireland.

Mr. White, a San Francisco native and the second of nine children, was often
referred to as ''an all-American boy'' in news accounts after the shootings. He
was a star athlete in high school and spent a year in the Vietnam War as a
paratrooper, then returned home to work first as a policeman and then as a
fireman.

In 1977, with strong support from the city's police union, whose leaders were
angry over what they perceived as growing official tolerance of crime and of
overt homosexuality and prostitution, he was elected to the Board of Supervisors
on a conservative platform.

Turned Down by Mayor

But a year later he resigned, saying that his salary, $9,600 a year, was not
enough to support his family, and that he was unhappy with the ethics he found
in the political world.

After his police supporters advised him to change his mind, Mr. White asked Mr.
Moscone to let him rescind the resignation. The Mayor turned him down. Several
days later, he killed the Mayor and Mr. Milk.

In a long, rambling confession to a detective who had been one of his friends,
Mr. White, weeping, said, ''I saw the city as going kind of downhill.''

A play based on the trial of Mr. White is scheduled to be presented on Broadway
in New York in February.

The play, ''Execution of Justice,'' written by Emily Mann, drew critical praise
and full houses when it was produced at the Arena Stage in Washington last
spring.

Mr. White is survived by his wife, Mary Ann; two sons, Charlie, 7 years old and
Rory, 4, and an infant daughter, Laura.

''I hope it's the last chapter,'' Police Chief Cornelius Murphy told an
interviewer after Mr. White's suicide was confirmed. ''I don't think that this
is the kind of book that's been written that needs an epilogue. It's time to
close the book on Dan White. Let the White family and the City and County of San
Francisco get on with its business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dan White (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N.'S ANNIVERSARY;
ARE BLOCS AT THE U.N. CRUMBLING OR AS MONOLITHIC AS EVER?

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 22


It is said that more brokering is done at the United Nations than on the floor
of the New York Stock Exchange, with various groups of nations trading votes on
one issue for support on another.

The centerpiece of this elaborate system of trade, according to some diplomats
and other observers, is the division of the 159 United Nations members into
blocs that vote predictably and uniformly.

But there are many people here who say that the power and dependability of bloc
voting is eroding, and that the concept of guaranteed bloc votes is as
ill-founded as the idea that nations exchange their votes like blue chip stock
certificates.

''The sense that the place works by rigid divisions of blocks of votes is not
borne out,'' said Canada's chief delegate, Stephen Lewis, whose country belongs
to the 22-member Western Eurepean and Others Group. ''People conjure up bloc
voting as if some specter. It is true that groups of countries often demonstrate
a community of interest on given subjects. But from time to time, often enough
to give the place value, the blocs split up.''

In simplest terms, blocs are groups of nations that join together based on
regional or political interests, with the membership of one bloc often
overlapping the membership of another. What's in a Name?  The United Nations
does not consider ''bloc'' a technical, organizational term. It officially
recognizes six ''regional groups'' - African, Arab, Asian, Eastern European,
Latin American and Western European and Other.

Most of the member states, however, belong to other groups outside the official
United Nations structure. All the delegations in the Arab Group, for example,
are members of the League of Arab States, the Islamic Conference and the
Nonaligned Movement.

Often the definition of a bloc is imprecise. Although Yugoslavia and Albania
belong to the regional Eastern European group, they do not belong to the Eastern
bloc, which is headed by the Soviet Union and includes Poland, Czechoslovakia
and East Germany. And there are Communist countries outside Eastern Europe, such
as Vietnam and Cuba, that are considered members of the Eastern bloc.

The mechanics and definitions of blocs can be so confusing that the longtime
chief Soviet delegate, Oleg A. Troyanovsky, demurs from any discussion of the
subject.

''The Ambassador,'' said Valentin Karymov, a spokesman for Mr. Troyanovksy,
''does not like to speak to this subject of blocs.'' A Bloc or a Blocker?  Some
delegates said that they recognized the division of the United Nations into
groups bound by common ideologies, but that they hesitated to apply the word
''bloc'' to their alliances.

''There are very many political entities, but it is not appropriate to refer to
all of them as blocs,'' said the chief delegate of Iran, Said Rajaie-Khorassani.
''A bloc must be able to block. The Islamic Conference can coordinate and unify,
but it is not capable of blocking a decisive, important political decision in
the U.N. It doesn't have that intention.''

The United States and Israel are the only two countries in the United Nations
that are not members of any bloc or group, but that has hardly excluded either
from the impact of bloc actions and decisions. Both countries, in fact, have
frequently said they are the victims of bloc voting.

''Blocs function in the United Nations very much like political parties in a
legislature,'' Jeane J. Kirkpatrick told an audience at Georgetown University in
1982 when she was the chief delegate of the United States. ''In this system, the
United States is like a country without a party.''

When asked how blocs function at the United Nations, the current deputy chief
delegate of the United States, Herbert S. Okun, replied simply, ''Too
effectively for our good.''

On Crumbling Coalitions

Many diplomats and observers, however, have said that there were growing
indications that blocs no longer cleaved on all issues, and that the trend
within the United Nations was toward individual rather than group voting. ''You
can see a trend emerging in which blocs are beginning to crumble,'' said Edward
C. Luck, the president of the United Nations Association, a private research
group. ''As early as the late 70's, you began to see fissures, which are now
turning into gulfs. Countries are increasingly voting for national interest.''

Mr. Luck pointed to the recent test of Israel's credentials. Kuwait, on behalf
of a group of 18 Arab delegations, raised what had become an annual call to
eject Israel from the General Assembly. Sweden then introduced a motion calling
on the Assembly not to consider such an ammendment.

Jordan and Oman, who belong to the 21-member Arab Group, were not co-sponsors
and were absent when the vote was taken. Egypt, which had been suspended from
the Arab Group since the Camp David peace accord with Israel, actually voted for
the Swedish proposal.

Hungary and Poland, members of the traditionally anti-Israel Eastern bloc, were
absent during the voting. Rumania, another member, supported the Swedish
proposal, which was approved 81 to 41, with 20 abstentions and 18 absences or
decisions not to vote.

To the Israeli chief delegate, Benjamin Netanyahu, such subtle shifting is an
indication that blocs may no longer wield the kind of power that produced the
1975 resolution equating Zionism and racism.

''The bloc system has reached its saturation point,'' Mr. Netanyahu said.
''There is an awareness among members of the U.N. that there are certain
excesses that result from bloc politics which have to be curbed if the U.N. is
not to antagonize public opinion.''

Clovis Maksoud, the permanent observer of the League of Arab States, said,
however, that the recent Israeli credentials vote had shown no real movement in
bloc voting patterns or in the influence of the Arab Group.

''We have great solidarity,'' Mr. Maksoud said. ''But that doesn't mean that
every time we want something we are going to get it.''

An Enigmatic Movement

The most enigmatic bloc is the 101-member Nonaligned Movement, which because of
its size and diversity elicits considerable speculation about its influence, and
whether or not the group is in fact nonaligned.

''Nonalignment as a term is an oximoron,'' Mr. Netanyahu said. ''The very
concept of true nonalignment presumes independence. I think the importance of
the so-called Nonaligned Movement is diminished by its predictability.''

Many nations in the group, however, including its chairman, India, deny such
prearranged complicity. ''We are a movement, not a bloc,'' said an Indian
delegate. ''We are so many different countries, with different economic levels,
different social and political systems and ideologies. On a lot of matters,
those diversities join together in a single opinion. That is how the United
Nations should be.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Sharp Tongue in Trouble

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


Representative Bob Dornan of California, a former Los Angeles talk show host and
one-time film actor, has probably the sharpest tongue in Congress. His personal
attacks over nearly 10 years have succeeded in angering a legion of House
Democrats, from Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. on down, as well as a number of
Mr. Dornan's fellow Republicans, not least among them Senator Barry Goldwater.

But Democratic leaders believe they have found a way to retire Mr. Dornan in the
formerly Democratic district in Orange County, southeast of Los Angeles. They
are grooming David O. Carter, a 41-year-old judge of the Superior Court who is a
decorated Marine Corps veteran of Vietnam, to challenge him next year.

Mr. Carter has been given heady recruiting lectures and promises of generous
financing in Washington by the Democratic national chairman, Paul G. Kirk Jr.,
and a number of prestigious senators and representatives. He is said to be
clearing his possible House race with Jerry M. Patterson, the Democrat whom Mr.
Dornan defeated in 1984, and is likely to make a final decision soon.

Mr. Dornan did not run for re-election to the House in 1982. Instead, he sought
the Republican nomination to the Senate, which ultimately was won by Pete
Wilson. Mr. Dornan's attacks on Barry Goldwater Jr., another primary competitor,
provoked his father, Senator Goldwater, and Mr. Dornan said that later cost him
several White House appointments while he was waiting to run for the House again
in 1984. Senator Goldwater's office refused to comment at the time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Q&A

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 4; Living Desk

LENGTH: 561 words


Q.

I have recently read of a condiment used in ancient Roman kitchens called garum.
What is it? A. A great deal has been written about the sauce known as garum and
much of it is speculative. It is reasonably assumed, however, that it was a
liquid derived from salted fish, made by squeezing the fish to extract as much
flavor as possible from the solids.

It may have resembled, to some degree, the liquid widely used in Vietnamese and
Thai cookery. In Vietnam this is called nuoc mam and in Thailand nam pla. It is
made by curing anchovies in salt in wooden barrels. The liquid is drained off
and used both in the kitchen and at table.

The ancient Romans had garum made with an oil base known as oleogarum, with a
vinegar base known as oenogarum, with a water base known as hydrogarum and with
a spicy pepper base known as garum piperatum. Q. I am curious about two cooking
terms, macerating and marinating. Are they the same thing? A. To macerate means
to soften by soaking or infusing in a liquid; this also includes the process of
soaking foods in brine. To marinate means to soak for hours or days specifically
in a marinade.

A marinade for pickling meats -corned beef, for example - might be made with
water, salt, saltpeter and brown sugar. Another marinade would be used to
marinate wild boar. Yet another, made with spices, vinegar and salt, might be
for ceviche, and so on. Q. The late Waverley Root wrote about a dish called
pochouse de Verdun-sur-le-Doubs. How is this made? A. A pochouse is a kind of
fish stew that is very popular in Burgundy, although it is found elsewhere in
France. It is always made of freshwater fish. Verdun-sur -le-Doubs is the name
of a town in Burgundy whose pochouse is made with freshwater fish from the Doubs
River, such fish as eel, carp and bream. The pieces are cooked with a
considerable amount of garlic, bits of bacon, thyme and bay leaf. This is
moistened with white Burgundy wine and thickened at the end with a blend of
butter kneaded with flour. Q. Is the kind of lettuce called corn salad new to
the American market? A. Corn salad has been available in this country for
decades, but it has recently become vastly more popular, thanks in part to the
new American cuisine. The lettuce has a rounded leaf (I am told that in Italy
the leaf is also serrated) with a fine, well-rounded flavor.

It is also referred to in this country as lamb's lettuce. It is used in a
classic French salad called salade lorette, which is a blend of the salad greens
plus sliced cooked beets served with an oil and vinegar dressing. Q. Several
years ago my wife and I dined on a potato dish made with sliced potatoes
interlarded with truffle slices and baked. What is it? A. The dish was
undoubtedly what is known in classic French cuisine as potatoes Sarladaise. To
prepare it, make layers of thinly sliced potatoes and thinly sliced black
truffles. Brush between each layer a good deal of melted butter and bake. Unmold
the dish and serve it hot. Perigord is the most celebrated truffle region of
France and the dish is named for the picturesque town of Sarlat, which is in
Perigord.

Readers are invited to send questions about food and cooking techniques to Craig
Claiborne, Food Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N. Y.
10036. Unfortunately, unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NEW U.S. TROOP HELMETS TERMED DEFECTIVE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


The Defense Department said today that more than half of the new German-style
Army and Marine Corps helmets were defective and thus jeopardized the lives of
soldiers and marines wearing them.

The Pentagon said that 461,000 of the helmets made by the Gentex Corporation of
Carbondale, Pa., did not meet the specifications of a production contract signed
in February 1983. Each of the helmets cost $82.

Officials said that the helmets had been made improperly, that materials not
specified in the contract had been used, and that the crown of the helmet was
therefore defective. A Pentagon statement said that the possibility of fraud was
being investigated.

The officials said the flanged helmet had been designed to stop a piece of
shrapnel or other projectile moving at the speed of 2,000 feet per second. But
they said tests of the helmet showed that it would stop shrapnel moving at only
1,800 feet per second.

Helmets Were Used in Grenada

The helmets were worn by soldiers and marines who took part in the invasion of
Grenada two years ago, officials said. But they said they had no way of knowing
whether that resulted in the death or wounding of any of the troops in that
invasion.

The purported lack of proper quality in the helmet is the latest in a series of
disclosures, some made by the Pentagon, others by members of Congress, and still
others by critics of the military, about arms and equipment that failed to meet
specifications and thus endangered lives.

Many allegations of poor quality have been directed at the largest corporations
in the military industry, including General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft,
McDonnell-Douglas, Northrop, General Electric, Pratt & Whitney, Martin Marietta,
and Texas Instruments. But abuses by small companies have also been charged in a
torrent of press releases by the Pentagon in recent years.

A security guard answering the telephone at the headquarters of the Gentex
Corporation tonight - the Pentagon announcement was made about 5:15 P.M. - said
that no officer of the company was available for comment. He would not give a
home telephone number of an official spokesman.

Later the president of Gentex, L. Peter Frieder, was quoted by The Associated
Press as denying any wrongdoing by his concern. He described the dispute as a
controversy ''over interpretation'' and ''poorly defined specifications.'' He
was quoted as saying the helmets ''fully meet specifications'' and were tested
and approved by Government agencies.

''What we are dealing with here is a specification interpretation issue, not a
product performance issue,'' he said.

Until recently, American soldiers and marines wore the steel helmet, perhaps
better known as the ''steel pot'' of World War II, the Korean War and the
Vietnam War. It was designed, officials said, to stop a projectile moving at
1,300 feet per second.

The new helmet, more rounded and shaped to come down over the ears like helmets
worn by German soldiers in World War II, is made of Kevlar, a composite material
that is not only harder but lighter than a comparable amount of steel. Pentagon
officials said the Gentex Corporation had cut pieces of Kevlar and then
assembled them into a helmet instead of making the helmet from one piece. At the
crown of the headgear where the pieces were joined, they said, Gentex had added
a piece of material.

But that did not bring hardness up to the specified standard, the officials
said. Altogether, the new helmet calls for 17 layers of Kevlar to be fused so
that the specified resistance is achieved.

Findings of Lab Tests

Army officers said that an Army laboratory in Natick, Mass., had discovered the
defect during tests in May.

Why it had taken so long to discover the defects and why the announcement had
been held up until today were not immediately clear.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

A Washington dispatch on Oct. 24, 1985, reported a Pentagon announcement that
more than half on the new Army and Marine Corps helmets made by the Gentex
Corporation of Carbondale, Pa., were defective.

Later the company and the Pentagon resolved their differences. On Aug. 8, 1986,
the Defense Logistics Agency prepared a ''statement for release in response to
anticipated inquiries'' exonerating Gentex and declaring that after ''detailed
examination and testing'' the helmets had been accepted, but no announcement was
made.

The Times learned of the outcome only last month, when it received a letter
dated Jan. 30, 1987, from L. P. Frieder Jr., president of Gentex. He asked that
the 1986 statement be reported, and the Times is noting it now in fairness to
the company.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOMOSEXUAL VETERANS SUE ON PARADE

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


An organization of homosexual veterans sued the American Legion, Mayor Koch and
Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward yesterday, contending that its members had
been improperly barred from marching in next month's Veterans Day parade.

The organization, the Gay Veterans Association, was denied permission by the
American Legion to march Nov. 11 under an association banner. In court papers
filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the association asserted
that the decision violated free-speech rights and city anti-discrimination laws.

The association asked the court either to order the American Legion to permit
participation or to revoke the legion's parade permit.

Mayor Koch, who has expressed disapproval of the legion's decision, said
yesterday that he was powerless to reverse it. The homosexual veterans, he said,
are free to organize their own parade, either behind the legion's parade down
Fifth Avenue or on a parallel avenue.

Official City Observance

Lawyers for the homosexual veterans are arguing that the American Legion march
is, in effect, the official city observance of Veterans Day. The city issues the
parade permit, they note, and the official legion program last year said the
parade was held ''under the auspices of the City of New York.''

The lawyers argue further that even though it lets the legion run the parade,
the city is responsible for making sure there is no discrimination.

''This is not like Gimbels' asking Macy's for permission to march in the
Thanksgiving Day parade,'' said William Hibsher, a lawyer for the Gay Veterans
Association. ''This is an official Veterans Day observance, and all veterans,
regardless of race, origin or sexual orientation, should be able to march.''

Freedom of Association

Last month, at the request of the homosexual veterans group, Mayor Koch asked
the American Legion to reverse its decision, which he called ''manifestly
unfair.''

''All of those who served and sacrificed in defense of the nation deserve to be
honored,'' he wrote to the legion.

But given constitutional guarantees of freedom of association, he said
yesterday, the legion cannot be forced to invite anyone.

''There's no question that in every war there have been soldiers who are gay,
and it's regrettable to deny them the opportunity to participate in a patriotic
act,'' the Mayor said. ''But the Constitution is supreme in this area, and its
says the city can't tell a committee who to allow and who to exclude.''

'Sexual Perversion'

Last July, the American Legion applied to the city for permission to conduct a
parade of ''all veterans organizations.'' The New York City Police Department,
which handles such requests, issued the permit a month later.

Many other veterans groups, including the Federation of French War Veterans, the
Catholic War Veterans, the Vietnam Veterans of America and the Women Marines
Association, usually march in the parade, which commemorates the 1918 signing of
the armistice ending World War I. But in a letter to the homosexual veterans
group, the adjutant of the New York County American Legion, Anthony F. Tuccillo,
''categorically denied'' the request last month. He gave no explanation for his
decision.

A lawyer for the American Legion and a member of the group since 1946, Casimir
F. Sojka, said the homosexuals were excluded from marching under their own
banner because ''all they're looking for is recognition of their own sexual
perversion.''

''There's nothing in their incorporation papers to show that it's a patriotic
organization, that it's for Americanism, that it has anything to do with the
armed forces, war or veterans,'' he said.

Sought to March in 1984

The homosexual veterans group, which has 1,000 members in 27 states and three
countries abroad, first sought to march in the 1984 parade, without success.
According to court papers, members wrote to Mr. Tuccillo twice but never
received a response. They then asked Mayor Koch to revoke the permit or to
boycott the 1984 event, also without receiving a response.

Last January, the association itself applied to the Police Department for a
permit to run this year's parade, but was turned down.

Two months ago, John Paine, president of the group, again sought the legion's
permission. ''As participants in the parade we would be guided by whatever
standards of dress and conduct you wish to establish,'' Mr. Paine wrote. ''We do
however insist on being allowed to carry our banner, which clearly identifies us
as gay veterans.''

L.I. Case Is Cited

Six years ago, the association noted in court papers, a Federal judge in
Brooklyn ruled that the American Legion in Manhasset, L.I., could not keep a
local Right to Life group from marching in the Memorial Day parade. In that
case, Judge Jack Weinstein held that the legion was ''not acting privately, but
as a fiduciary for local governments and residents.''

In addition to the association, the plaintiffs include two of its officers, John
Paine and Robert Walden. Mr. Walden, who served in the Marines from 1967 to
1969, said the march afforded the chance for members to express pride in
themselves and their country, and to recruit more Vietnam-era veterans, who are
now outnumbered in the organization by World War II veterans.

In addition to Mr. Hibsher, the plaintiffs are represented in the case by the
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a homosexual rights group, and by three
lawyers from Sullivan & Cromwell, one of New York's largest corporate law firms.

A hearing in the case was to be held tomorrow before Judge Constance Baker
Motley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Advertising;
Magazine On Black Culture

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 29, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


''AMERICAN VISIONS: The Magazine of Afro-American Culture'' is the brainchild of
a black historian that will make its official debut on a most historic occasion,
Jan. 15, the first national holiday marking the birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. Through the good offices of the Washington-based Martin Luther
King Federal Holiday Commission, which will pay for production, the magazine
will be mailed free to at least 1.5 million people, mostly upscale blacks. And
that is the group that Gary Puckrein, 31-year-old publisher and editor in chief,
would like to see making up most of his permanent subscriber list. So, in
effect, the January mailing will be a giant sampling.

American Visions is being published by the Visions Foundation, and is benefiting
from the cooperation and financial support of the Smithsonian Institution, the
Philip Graham Fund of the Washington Post Company and Rutgers University, where
Dr. Puckrein is on the history faculty. And it will have a six-a-year frequency.
For its second issue, March-April, it will be dropping back to the start-up rate
base it originally planned to have, 100,000, a respectable circulation for a
newborn ''thought'' magazine, especially if they have a median household income
of $30,000 to $32,000.

Cecil R. Forster Jr., 41, former general manager of Radio Station WINS, has
joined the professor and is in charge of advertising sales. He is working out of
Smithsonian magazine's New York office, while Dr. Puckrein works out of its
Washington office.

They have retained Modular Marketing, a New York specialist in sales promotion
and direct marketing. And all are at work refining various mailing lists to
produce the 1.5 million prospects.

The magazine has already had a mailing of 150,000, which was used to test two
direct-mail subscription-solicitation packages and 15 to 20 different lists.

For its debut issue, American Visions would like 34 advertising pages but so far
has 17 from the likes of Tiffany, Chrysler, General Motors, Philip Morris and
Delta Air Lines. The charge is $45,000 for a four-color page and the issue
closes the end of this month.

The rates for the 100,000 issues will be $4,500 for four color and $3,800 for
black and white.

Dr. Puckrein sees American Visions as the ''financial engine'' that will allow
the Visions Foundation, established in 1983, to sponsor symposiums and other
events.

''The toughest part is raising money philanthropically,'' he said, 'There is an
incorrect assumption that if you are doing something Afro-American and it's
needed, the money will just rain down. That isn't so.''

Both he and Mr. Forster are New Yorkers. He went to Forest Hills High School and
played football briefly at West Texas State before he traveled out to California
State at Los Angeles. From there he went to Brown and got his doctorate in
history.

He is now an associate professor at Rutgers, a position he plans to continue to
fill, just as his associate will continue to teach communications law at Pace
University here. Mr. Forster, a graduate of Middlebury College and St. John's
Law School, also studied at the New York University School of Business. And
before joining the law staff at Pepsico, he served as a Marine Corps captain in
Vietnam. Later he was a vice president of Westinghouse Broadcasting before
getting the WINS job and finally worked for the Unity Broadcasting Network,
where he got the company into cellular modular phones.

The two men were put together by Leo Scullin, a senior vice president of Young &
Rubicam, where his duties include being director of print media.

Mr. Forster made the point that he doesn't work so much for organizations as for
what they represent. And, he added, ''I work for people, and Gary is a very
special person.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Puckrein and Cecil Forster Jr. (Pach Bros.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT URGES SOVIET TO RESOLVE WARS IN 5 NATIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 24


President Reagan, proposing ''a fresh start'' in United States-Soviet relations,
called on Moscow today to help resolve conflicts in five countries as a major
step toward easing tensions with Washington.

Addressing a packed General Assembly chamber in a session marking the 40th
anniversary of the United Nations, Mr. Reagan linked progress in East-West
relations to the resolution of fighting in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia,
Ethiopia and Nicaragua.

''All of these conflicts,'' he said, ''are the consequence of an ideology
imposed from without, dividing nations and creating regimes that are, almost
from the day they take power, at war with their own people.

Aide Cites Geneva Meeting

''And in each case, Marxism-Leninism's war with the people becomes war with
their neighbors,'' he said.

In an immediate reaction to Mr. Reagan's speech, Nicaragua's President, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, spoke angrily, saying, ''It's a slap in the face to the U.N. on
its 40th birthday.'' Alluding to American aid to anti-Sandinista rebels, Mr.
Ortega added, ''Let him stop his dirty war in Nicaragua.'' [Page A10.] A ranking
White House official, referring to the President's meeting in Geneva next month
with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, said the speech today was ''a
deliberate attempt to shift the world's focus that Geneva was merely an arms
control meeting to the fact that there are lots of other things that the United
States and the Soviet Union should be discussing.''

Called Opening of Campaign

The official added: ''The Soviets have tried to keep the focus on arms
reduction. There's more to Geneva than just arms reduction.''

White House officials described the speech as the opening of a major campaign by
Mr. Reagan and the Administration to gather support, especially in Europe, for
American policies as the Geneva meeting nears. Mr. Reagan is said to be uneasy
about the generally positive publicity generated by Mr. Gorbachev in recent
months.

The five countries the President cited all have governments that have received
military assistance from the Soviet Union or Soviet-bloc nations. In
Afghanistan, Moslem rebels are fighting Soviet troops and the Soviet-backed
Government. In Cambodia, a rebel coalition of Communists and non-Communists is
fighting a Government installed by Vietnam, a Soviet ally.

In Ethiopia, secessionist rebels are fighting Soviet-backed Government forces.
In Angola, South African-backed rebels are fighting Cuban-backed Government
forces. And in Nicaragua, United States-backed rebels are fighting to overthrow
the Sandinista Government, whose military allies include Soviet bloc countries.

In his speech, Mr. Reagan said, ''This is an extraordinary opportunity for the
Soviet side to make a contribution to regional peace which in turn can promote
future dialogue and negotiations on other critical issues.''

Earlier in the speech, Mr. Reagan said, ''I come offering from my own country a
new commitment, a fresh start.''

The President welcomed ''the interest of the new Soviet leadership'' in
reductions in strategic nuclear arsenals. He urged Mr. Gorbachev to seize the
''opportunity'' of the Geneva summit meeting to commit himself ''to a world with
fewer nuclear weapons -and some day with none.''

Mr. Reagan said he would make new proposals before he leaves for Geneva.

To Seek More Exchanges

''Walls of partition and distrust must give way to greater communication for an
open world,'' he said. ''Before leaving for Geneva, I shall make new proposals
to achieve this goal.''

White House officials said the proposals involve measures to increase exchanges
between East and West, as well improving communications links between Eastern
Europe and the West.

But the dominant tone of Mr. Reagan's speech - his fourth to the United Nations
- was tough on the Soviet Union. He accused Moscow of treaty violations,
deplored the use of Soviet troops and advisers in such countries as Afghanistan
and Ethiopia, criticized Soviet repression and controls over ''every facet of
people's lives'' and quoted ''the simple eloquence'' of the Soviet dissident,
Andrei D. Sakharov.

Mr. Reagan was not interrupted by applause today, in contrast to last year, when
his address spoke of the need to reach an arms agreement.

The 29-minute speech drew applause from many of the delegates when it ended. But
the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, sat stonily in his seat
without clapping.

Later in the day, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Shevardnadze met privately to discuss the
Geneva meeting, set for Nov. 19-20.

Called 'Base-Touching' Meeting

The President's afternoon meeting with Mr. Shevardnadze at the Waldorf-Astoria
was described by Secretary of State George P. Shultz as a 30-minute
''base-touching'' session.

''We didn't get into a discussion of the President's speech,'' said Mr. Shultz,
who is to meet the Foreign Minister for two hours on Friday.

On the second day of his visit to New York, Mr. Reagan also discussed the summit
session at a long meeting with allied leaders at the United States mission to
the United Nations. Tonight, the President was host at a dinner for the allied
leaders in his suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. He also held separate talks
with Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of
Canada.

Mr. Reagan is tentatively scheduled to be interviewed in the next few weeks over
British, French, West German, Italian and Swiss television, and the White House
is considering a proposal that he face an interviewer from Tass, the Soviet
press agency. He is also scheduled to focus one of his weekly radio speeches on
a message to the Soviet people, replete with Russian phrases, officials said.

Differences 'Deep and Abiding'

In his speech today, the President described American-Soviet differences as
''deep and abiding,'' while inviting Moscow to undertake major changes in the
Soviet-supported Governments of the five countries.

The five countries were selected, an Administration official said, because
''these are areas in which people are dying and active warfare in under way
today.'' El Salvador, among other countries, was not selected, the official
said, because ''the trends toward pluralism and dialogue are fairly
well-along.''

Mr. Reagan said today there were more than 118,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan,
140,000 Soviet-backed Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia and Soviet or Soviet-bloc
military involvement in Ethiopia, Angola and Nicaragua.

Under his proposal, the two superpowers would initially encourage ''the warring
parties in each country'' to engage in talks aimed at ''an end to violence, the
withdrawal of foreign troops and national reconciliation.''

Suggests Separate Talks

Once progress has been made, he said, the United States and the Soviet Union
would hold separate talks to explore ways of assuring peace, eliminating any
foreign military presence and restraining the flow of arms to the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan (page A10); map of the world

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Moscow Reported to Expand Naval Base at Cam Ranh Bay

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 24


The Soviet Union has expanded its installations at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam,
making the former United States base its biggest overseas naval installation,
Thailand's leading security official said in an interview published today.

Prasong Soonsiri, secretary general of the Thai National Security Council, told
the newspaper The Nation that construction crews recently added a sixth floating
dock and a new storage tank for fuel for bombers.

''Cam Ranh Bay has turned into the biggest Soviet overseas base over the past
five years,'' he said.

He said about 30 Soviet warships called each month at the base, which was built
by United States forces during the Vietnam War, and eight ships were docked
there at any given time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N.'S ANNIVERSARY;
ARMS CUTS URGED BY SOVIET MINISTER

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 24


Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, used his speech
commemorating the 40th anniversary of the United Nations today to appeal for
nuclear disarmament and to review recent Soviet arms control proposals.

''The heaviest burden on mankind's shoulders is the arms race, which is
inexorably bringing us closer to the edge of an abyss,'' he said. ''It is our
duty to stop and then to reverse it, to prevent it from spreading to space.''

Addressing the General Assembly, he said the greatest achievement of the United
Nations over the last 40 years was ''no world war.''

The Foreign Minister read a letter from Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader,
who said the greatest failure of the United Nations was the persistence of the
nuclear threat.

''The main task formulated in the United Nations Charter has not yet been
accomplished: A lasting, guaranteed peace has not become a reality,'' Mr.
Gorbachev wrote. ''Today, as never before, joint efforts by nations and peoples
are needed to save mankind from the threat of a nuclear catastrophe.''

The Effect of 'Small' Wars

Telling the delegates that ''there is a great deal more in life which unites
people than divides them,'' Mr. Shevardnadze outlined Soviet proposals for
nuclear arms reduction, freezes on nuclear weapons testing and on the
development of new weapons, and a ban on antisatellite systems.

Although the United Nations has been successful in preventing a big war, he
said, it has been unable to contain so-called small wars.

''The sufferings these inflict on people and countries are not small, but
enormous,'' he said. ''This can be seen in Vietnam, where neither the people nor
the environment have been able even now to recover from the consequences of the
barbarous aggression that has maimed the entire country with napalm and chemical
agents.''

''This can be witnessed in Afghanistan and Nicaragua, where the bullets of hired
assassins, the 'dushmans' and the 'contras,' are killing thousands of people,''
he said, referring to guerrillas fighting against the leftist governments in the
two countries. Unfinished Tasks for the U.N.  ''Until the Palestinian people are
given a possibility to establish a state of their own, until the people of
Namibia gain independence, the United Nations cannot escape the bitter feeling
of an unfulfilled duty,'' he said.

On the foreign debts of third-world nations, an issue often raised by speakers,
Mr. Shevardnadze said the problem ''must become a matter for thorough
consideration by the United Nations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N.'S ANNIVERSARY;
EXCERPTS FROM SHEVARDNADZE TALK

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 24


Following are excerpts from a speech by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze
of the Soviet Union to the General Assembly today, as translated by the Soviet
Mission to the United Nations: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 24 - Following are
excerpts from a speech by Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet
Union to the General Assembly today, as translated by the Soviet Mission to the
United Nations:

The main task formulated in the United Nations Charter has not yet been
accomplished: a lasting guaranteed peace has not become a reality. Today, as
never before, joint efforts by nations and peoples are needed to save mankind
from the threat of a nuclear catastrophe.

In practical terms this requires above all ending the arms race on earth and
preventing it in space.

The establishment of our organization brings to mind one folk custom: when a man
starts to build a house the whole community helps him. This custom exists in
many countries, carrying a great humanistic meaning that proves a simple truth,
namely, that there is a great deal more in life which unites people than divides
them.

The United Nations was built by people who had gone through the unbearable
trials of the most brutal war. The present generations, to whom that war has
also caused grief and sufferings, have an obligation to hand over to their
descendants a world free from the charges of universal self-destruction.

'The Edge of an Abyss'

But the heaviest burden on mankind's shoulders is the arms race, which is
inexorably bringing us closer to the edge of an abyss. It is our duty to stop
and then to reverse it, to prevent it from spreading to space.

The Soviet Union has countered the concept of ''Star Wars'' with the concept of
''Star Peace'' and of a lasting peace on earth.

The Soviet Union is proposing a world without weapons in space.

The Soviet Union is proposing a world where nuclear arms would be radically
reduced and then eliminated altogether.

The Soviet Union is proposing a world where the U.S.S.R. and the United States
would set an example for other nuclear powers by stopping any nuclear
explosions.

The Soviet Union is proposing a world where the U.S.S.R. and the United States
would renounce the development of new nuclear weapons, freeze their arsenals,
and ban and destroy antisatellite systems.

Medium-Range Nuclear Arms

We have proposed a far-reaching solution regarding medium-range nuclear weapons
in Europe and have removed from operational duty some of our medium-range
missiles in the European zone. If an appropriate agreement is reached, we shall
not increase the number of such missiles in the Asian part of our country as
well, provided there is no substantial change in the strategic situation there.

We say that radical steps in the field of nuclear disarmament should be combined
with a wide-ranging set of concrete measures aimed at easing military tensions
and building confidence.

All this should be done under strict and reliable control. Where verification
wih national technical means may be inadequate to provide the necessary degree
of confidence, we are ready to supplement it with additional mutually agreed
procedures.

We state this very emphatically, because there are those who would like to make
world public opinion believe that the Soviet Union is against verification.

Agreeing on Verification

This is being said by those who, while contemplating new technologically
sophisticated types of weapons, are deliberately concealing the truth that the
more weapons exist in the world the more difficult it is to carry out
verification; this is being said by those who are developing new weapons,
designed from the very beginning to make verification more difficult. We ask
them in return: are you ready, as we are, to scrap hundreds of missiles and
aircraft, thousands of nuclear charges? Say ''yes,'' and we shall certainly be
able to agree on verification.

Yes, we have succeeded so far in saving the world from the scourge of a ''big''
war, which is in itself a great accomplishment. But can this alleviate the
sufferings caused to the nations by the so-called small wars? Indeed, the
sufferings they inflict upon people and countries are not small but enormous.

This can be seen in Vietnam, where neither people nor the environment have been
able even now to recover from the consequences of the barbarous aggression which
has maimed the entire country with napalm and chemical agents.

This can also be seen in the Middle East and in southern Africa, where Israeli
and South African terror has becme a harsh everyday reality for several
generations. This can be witnessed in Afghanistan and Nicaragua, where the
bullets of hired assassins, the ''dushmans'' and the ''contras,'' are killing
thousands of people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Eduard Shevardnadze (NYT/Neal Boenzi)

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH AFRICA'S VIOLENCE AND MEMORIES OF SELMA

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1587 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Oct. 24


Across this country, the graying leaders of the American civil rights movement
watch in frustration as new violence unfolds 8,500 miles away in South Africa.
Nearly every day brings reports and pictures of fresh violence, of more funeral
marches to stir memories of Birmingham and Selma, Ala., and Jackson, Miss.

Troubled by the bloodshed, the disciples of nonviolence here are divided about
whether anything but violence can prevail there. And, cut off from any direct
role in South African affairs, they are struggling to figure out what, if
anything, they can do to combat the South African Government's official policy
of racial segregation.

Eventually, they believe, by sheer numbers, the 22 million blacks in South
Africa will enforce their will against the white minority Government.

They believe the main hope for the early achievement of equal rights in South
Africa relies on the pragmatic effort of the business community to bring about
change. So they grope for ways to awaken feeling against apartheid in this and
other countries, and to translate that feeling into the pressure of economic
sanctions against the South African Government. As a part of that, they strive
to rouse the younger generation to protest.

Ties Are Many and Deep

''The fact of the matter is that you've got to build public opinion,'' said the
Rev. Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People.

The philosophical and personal ties between the leaders here and the leaders of
African independence are many and deep. The nonviolent movement in this country
that came to be led by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. took early
instruction from the black South African experience in nonviolence. And black
freedom organizations there, like the African National Congress, were influenced
by civil rights groups here.

From his office on Auburn Street here in Atlanta, a block or so from the
Ebenezer Baptist Church where Mr. King and his father both preached, the Rev.
Joseph E. Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, is
trying to develop a boycott of the Winn-Dixie grocery chain, which sells South
African peaches and pears from its 1,260 stores in the South.

Although Winn-Dixie refuses to throw out the fruit on hand, the boycott has won
the future. ''There is a limited supply on the shelves until they're gone,''
said Robert Davis, chairman of the board. ''We are not buying any more.''

'The Beginning of the End'

What gives Mr. Lowery real hope for change in South Africa comes from a news
account he recently read about some of South Africa's other most influential
business executives going across the border to Zambia to meet with the exiled
leaders of the banned African National Congress.

''I think that's the beginning of the end,'' Mr. Lowery said. ''I really do.''

The pressures of the financial crisis there, brought about by fading
international confidence in the adaptability of the South African Government,
Mr. Lowery said, may produce the accommodations that nonviolent protests have
failed to acheive.

In the struggle against segregation in the American South, as the civil rights
leaders recall, the business community was often the first to recognize the need
for change. But the political leadership did not always follow that lead.

Mr. Hooks recalled the role of business leaders in Montgomery, Ala., in 1955,
when Rosa Parks refused to take a back seat on a bus. Her defiance inspired an
organized black boycott of the bus system.

''The company that owned the Montgomery buses yielded very quickly,'' Mr. Hooks
said. ''Were it left to the business community, it would be over early. It's the
government that maintains the policy.''

Young Sees No Role

In Atlanta, as a result of the campaign to register blacks to vote, the
government is now controlled by elected black officials. The office of Mayor
Andrew Young, a former aide to Dr. King, is hung with memorabilia of the
movement and with African art.

But like some others who have gathered power after leading the civil rights
movement here, Mayor Young sees no role for himself in South Africa. ''I don't
believe in looking for trouble,'' he says. ''I have enough problems here.'' Nor
does he assume he could get into South Africa now. The last time he went there,
in 1978, Mr. Young said, he was the chief United States representative at the
United Nations under President Carter. And, he said, ''I had a hard time then.''

''It was so much like the rural South,'' Mr. Young added. ''It even looked like
the rural South.'' And Johannesburg, he said, ''was sort of like Birmingham in
the 1950's. Only in a Southern American city then would you see that many black
people in a subservient state.''

John Lewis, now a member of the Atlanta City Council, was chairman of the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in the 1960's. Like some other civil
rights leaders drawn by the struggle of black against white in South Africa, he
feels a sense of thwarted responsibility. ''I do think we have a obligation, but
what can you do from so many thousands of miles away?'' he asked. ''Some of us,
I think, would like to go there. I have tried on more than one occasion, but I
was never successful in getting a visa.''

Mr. Lowery of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference is proposing a trip
by black American churchmen this fall, in hopes of meeting with nationalist
leaders in South Africa or some nearby country.

But for now, the civil rights figures watch events unfold among a people whose
leaders they know. Many of the black nationalist figures of South Africa and
nearby countries attended college here, or have visited here or have children
who now live here, and the two sets of leaders have studied one another's
methods.

The Rev. Allan Boesak, a leading anti-apartheid clergyman in South Africa who is
president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, came to Atlanta on a tour
of the United States last spring. He met with civil rights leaders here and
elsewhere.

The Rev. Dr. James M. Lawson Jr., pastor of the Holman United Methodist Church
in Los Angeles, recalled Chief Albert Luthuli, another anti-apartheid leader, as
''one of the people who taught me about nonviolence.''

''His writing,'' Mr Lawson said, ''His speeches. He came to the United States
and toured, and I met him.''

Inspired by what he had learned, Mr. Lawson organized the black boycott of
white-owned stores in downtown Nashville in 1960, while a divinity student at
Vanderbilt University. Vanderbilt expelled him for it, but the economic boycott
became a model for black action across the South.

It was in that same year that the South African police fired on a crowd of
nonviolent black protesters in Sharpeville, killing 61 people. In response to
that the African National Congress, an organization founded along the lines of
the N.A.A.C.P., renounced nonviolence, embracing the strategy of armed
resistance.

As nonviolence tactics began to succeed here, they turned to violence there.
''There is a story - and I don't know if it's true, but it makes the point,''
Mr. Hooks says, ''that some black South Africans came over here in Dr. King's
lifetime. And after staying a few days, they said, 'There's really no point in
our being here, because you are able to use your Constitution, to use your court
system to get change. You have the attention of newspapers and television, and a
national conscience. And we don't have any of those things working for us.' ''

''I talked with Allan Boesak when he was here,'' said Mr. Lowery. ''They just
don't see a conscience at work in South Africa. When they have nonviolent
demonstrations, even funeral marches are assaulted. They're losing confidence.''

None of the civil rights leaders rushed to condemn black violence in South
Africa. Not all of them, State Senator Julian Bond said, believe that
nonviolence is the only way. ''I don't think so. I didn't think so here. You
certainly hate to see all these people getting killed, but. . .'' and he
shrugged.

''What you're seeing now is a handful of hostile and alienated young folks
throwing bricks at the police,'' said Mayor Young. ''And to me, that's not
violence. That's stupidity. Suicidal frustration.''

The energy of protest, he said, has yet to settle on a strategy. ''You've not
had even a handful of sand in a machine,'' said Mr. Young. ''Or sugar in a gas
tank. So to me, there's no evidence of an organized commitment to violence among
these students.''

In fact, said Mr. Lawson, the organizer of the Nashville boycotts 25 years ago,
there is ample evidence - in the form of the mass funerals, the school boycotts
by young students, and the calls for strikes and economic boycotts - of
nonviolent strategy at work in South Africa. ''To me, the tragic thing is that
they don't realize they can build on that,'' he said.

Toward a nonviolent end, the N.A.A.C.P. president came here from New York last
month to lead an anti-apartheid march and rally. Mayor Young, Senator Bond,
Councilman Lewis and several elected black officials and leading preachers
turned out for the event, and the local N.A.A.C.P. worked to bring college and
high school students into the march.

As was true in the civil rights and anti-Vietnam War movements, ''you've got to
have a large coalition, particularly of students in the colleges,'' Mr. Hooks
said. But like the civil rights leaders themselves, most of the 700 to 800
marchers were middle-aged.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Atlanta leaders marching against aprartheid (NYT/Alan S.
Weiner)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

What the President Left Out

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


To a world eager for progress toward peace at Geneva, President Reagan yesterday
offered a combative sermon. He spoke of the innate goodness of Americans and the
sanctity of freedom. He called on the Soviet Union to join with the United
States in resolving regional conflicts - but only in those regions where Moscow
stands to lose. Mr. Reagan seemed less interested in diplomacy than in scoring
debating points off Mikhail Gorbachev.

Thus the President had little to say to the United Nations on its 40th
anniversary about disarmament. He discerned ''seeds which we should nurture'' in
the Soviet proposal calling for deep cuts in strategic arsenals. But he followed
with an unabashed sales pitch for ''Star Wars,'' his Strategic Defensive
Initative, and bolstered it with an 18-year-old Soviet testimonial for defensive
systems long rejected by American Presidents.

Mr. Reagan's approach surely was meant as a response to successful Soviet
propaganda initiatives, and it has undoubted appeal to some domestic audiences.
The pity is that he threw away a precious chance to bid for the high ground with
his global audience. Detecting threats to peace, freedom and sovereignty only in
the other fellow's corner did little to enhance his credibility.

''Freedom is not the sole prerogative of the chosen few,'' declared Mr. Reagan,
''but the universal right of all God's children.'' But some of God's children
live in South Africa. Not once in a long address did the President find occasion
even to mention apartheid. Neither did he give voice to the concern that even
his own Administration feels about the lack of political liberty in Chile, South
Korea and the Philippines.

He castigated the Soviet Union for its intervention in Afghanistan, its support
of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia and its military assistance to leftist regimes
in Ethiopia, Angola and Nicaragua. To rub it in, he added to his advance text
explicit and belligerent comments on Marxist-Leninist governments and figures
for Soviet-bloc troops in five countries.

By contrast, he described the American-aided ''contra'' rebels in Nicaragua as
''struggling democratic resistance forces.'' The distinction will be lost on
many people, particularly most Latin Americans.

Mr. Reagan asks the Soviet Union to assume joint responsibility for peacemaking
in regional conflicts. In theory, that's a fine idea, worthy of consideration at
the summit conference. There's no reason for the Geneva meetings to be
restricted to issues of strategic arms control. But neither peacemaking nor
peace can be so selective. A sermon vulnerable to such easy challenge can
persuade only the converted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Angola Is No Place To Test U.S. Resolve

BYLINE: By Robert H. Johnson; Robert H. Johnson is a visiting fellow at the
Overseas Development Council, a public-policy organization.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Reagan Administration is seriously considering financial support for the
Angolan guerrilla faction led by Jonas Savimbi and backed by South Africa.
Because the Marxist Government of Angola is supported by Soviet military
advisers and Cuban forces, such action is seen as a way of demonstrating the
credibility of American resolve on the eve of the summit meeting. The argument
is not a new one. When Henry A. Kissinger decided to intervene in the Angolan
civil war in 1975, he was also preoccupied with demonstrating American
credibility. Then as now, it was a seriously mistaken view.

The need to demonstrate the United States' credibility has been the all-purpose
rationale for our engagement in third world conflicts since at least the early
1960's in Vietnam. Thus, insignificant parts of the globe acquire strategic
significance whenever the Russians intervene because each such intervention
supposedly tests the United States' resolve to respond to Soviet threats
elsewhere - in Western Europe or Japan or in possible future nuclear
confrontations. Every American interest and commitment is thereby linked to
every other.

The problem with the credibility argument is that it prevents the United States
from carefully defining its interests in a particular situation. Moreover, since
it is based on estimated foreign perceptions of other American behavior, it is a
wholly subjective argument that is almost impossible to prove or disprove.

What are America's real interests in Angola? As Mr. Kissinger recognized in
1975, the country has almost no independent strategic significance for us. True,
Mr. Kissinger did argue at the time that the American failure to respond to the
Soviet-Cuban challenge would set off a domino-like effect. But in fact no
dominoes have fallen to the Russians in southern Africa in the decade since
Congress prevented intervention in Angola.

The continuing war in Angola is one part of the much larger conflict over the
future of southern Africa. That conflict is not primarily between East and West
but between South Africa and black sub-Saharan Africa. If it ultimately affects
the East-West balance adversely - which is far from certain - it will be because
American policies leave the United States on the South African side at the end
of the conflict. Intervention in support of Jonas Savimbi could contribute
importantly to just such a result.

Intervention would be self-defeating. It has been our primary goal in Angola to
obtain removal of Cuban troops and Soviet advisers. Those troops and advisers
were invited originally, in the mid-1970's, as the Angolan leadership sought to
defend itself against intervention by South Africa, Zaire, China and the United
States, and they remain primarily to deal with continuing attacks by South
Africa and by Mr. Savimbi's guerrillas. To intervene on his side now would only
further reduce the prospects for Soviet and Cuban withdrawal.

Moreover, if we make the Angolan conflict a test of American resolve, we are
almost certain to weaken rather than enhance our credibility. The Russians and
Cubans have regularly demonstrated their willingness to respond to others'
intervention by upping the ante - and Congress is most unlikely to go along with
a continuous escalation of American involvement in Angola, notwithstanding its
foolish decision in July to remove the prohibition on intervention there. Once
more, then, we will be forced to back down.

It is a central purpose of all third world regimes to maximize their autonomy
and independence. When even Marxist regimes are no longer dependent on the
Soviet Union for protection against internal and external enemies, they
typically seek to balance their international relationships by an opening to the
West. The regime in Angola has demonstrated such tendencies, but is incapable of
moving further because of its continuing dependence on the Russians and Cubans
and because we have been unwilling to change our policies as long as the
Russians and Cubans stay. The route to more favorable Angolan policies therefore
lies not in increasing external pressures but in reducing them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COAST KILLER OF 2 IS BURIED

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 70 words

DATELINE: SAN BRUNO, Calif., Oct. 24


Dan White, who, seven years ago, killed Mayor George Moscone of San Francisco
and Harvey Milk, a member of the Board of Supervisors, was buried today at
Golden Gate National Cemetery. On Monday Mr. White killed himself. He was a a
veteran of the Vietnam War and was was buried next to his father's grave in the
military cemetery. He had served five years in prison for the killings, which
occurred Nov. 27, 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ORTEGA FACES THE PEOPLE BUT MOST ARE FRIENDS

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


He entered to a standing ovation and shouts in Spanish of ''They shall not
pass!''

He departed three hours later to a standing ovation and chants of ''You can feel
it, you can feel it, Commander Ortega is here!''

In between, the President of Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, fielded
questions yesterday from American supporters of the Sandinista Government in
what the Nicaraguan Embassy and Mission to the United Nations billed as an
attempt to transplant to New York the ''Face the People'' forums he regularly
conducts in his homeland.

The moderator, Digna Sanchez, a New Yorker, said in her opening remarks that
such forums offer the Nicaraguan people ''a real coming together with their
leadership for a real exchange of problems and concerns.''

Nicaraguan officials described the forums as ''similar to a town meeting'' found
in small American communities.

The appearance, at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street
in Manhattan, was one of several Mr. Ortega has made before American audiences
while in New York for the 40th anniversary of the United Nations. He appeared on
the television program ''Donahue'' earlier in the week, and last night he spoke
to the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.

By Invitation Only

Mr. Ortega, who spoke through an interpreter, said he had hoped to hold similar
sessions in other cities around the country, but had been prevented from doing
so when the State Department delayed approval of his visa. He said charges he
had canceled the tour to avoid questions about a recent decree suspending
political rights were ''disinformation'' and held up his passport as proof.

In welcoming Mr. Ortega, Ruth W. Messinger, a City Council member, said she was
looking forward to the kind of ''hard questions, thoughtful answers and useful
dialogue'' that characterize the traditional New England town meeting. But for
the most part, Mr. Ortega was spared that kind of sharp debate.

Admission was by invitation only. And the audience, which included the poet
Allen Ginsberg, Ron Kovic, a Vietnam veterans' activist, and a host of
representatives from groups around the country that support the Sandinistas,
made it clear from the start that it admired Mr. Ortega.

''Many of us have long demonstrated against presidents,'' Kenneth Grossinger, a
member of the Committee for Nonintervention in Central America, told Mr. Ortega.
''It's refreshing to be here in support of a president.''

Mr. Grossinger then presented Mr. Ortega with a check for $2,500, which he
described as ''reparations'' for damages Reagan Administration policy has
inflicted on Nicaragua.

'A Revolution of Concern'

Several speakers stepped up to the microphone to assure Mr. Ortega that they
understood that the reimposition of a state of emergency in Nicaragua was a
''necessary'' measure. That action, announced last week, suspended habeas corpus
and the rights of public assembly, travel, press and strikes.

Others told the Nicaraguan delegation, which included Mr. Ortega, his wife,
Rosario, several members of his Cabinet and the ambassadors to the United States
and the United Nations, that they would do everything in their power to halt the
Reagan Administration's support for anti-Sandinista rebels and prevent a
possible American military intervention in Central America.

''What my Government did, paralyzing me and wounding a generation, we will not
allow ever to happen again,'' Mr. Kovic said. ''We know your revolution is a
revolution of concern, of caring, of sensitivity.''

Richard Streb, a professor at Teachers College at Columbia University, asked why
the Nicaraguan Government was not doing more to ''counter the obviously
distorted information we are getting.''

''The problem,'' replied Foreign Minister Miguel d'Escoto Brockman, ''is that we
can't really control what gets printed and aired.''

He urged Sandinista supporters here to press Nicaragua's case to try ''to change
that situation'' since ''this is a free and democratic country,'' a remark that
drew hoots from some of those present.

One Question Draws Hisses

The most pointed question of the session came from Lisel Burns of the Ethical
Culture Society, who asked about the ''ethical'' criteria by which the
Sandinista Front governs and wondered about the propriety of Mr. Ortega's
purchase of more than $3,500 in designer eyeglasses while in New York. Her
question drew scattered hisses from the audience.

A moderator promised that Mr. Ortega would answer the question in final remarks
summarizing the meeting. But the Nicaraguan leader did not do so in his
45-minute closing speech, which touched on subjects from the impact of the
United States economic embargo to the similarities and differences between the
Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutions.

Mr. Ortega explained the imposition of a state of emergency by saying that he
could either ''make our friends happy and deliver a dead revolution'' by taking
no steps against what he called sabotage and terrorism on the part of the armed
opposition, or protect the revolution ''and have some misunderstandings with our
friends.''

He also defended his trip to Moscow earlier this year and said he would like to
have good relations with the United States. But he was critical of Mr. Reagan's
speech to the United Nations on Thursday, noting the President's reference to a
baby saved from the wreckage of the recent Mexican earthquake.

''That child was rescued by Mexicans,'' Mr. Ortega said. ''President Reagan
could rescue thousands of children if he stopped arming mercenaries in
Nicaragua.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra with his wife, Rosario, and
Foreign Minister Miguel d'Escoto Brockman at the New York Society for Ethical
Culture (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 26, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Vietnam Agree On Search of Crash Site

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


The United States said today that Hanoi had agreed to the first joint
American-Vietnamese search of a B-52 crash site in a move toward settling the
issue of 2,446 Americans missing in Southeast Asia since the Vietnam War.

A Navy spokesman, Comdr. James Cossey, also released the identities of the
remains of 10 Americans turned over by Hanoi on Aug. 14, one of them a civilian
who died in captivity in a ''re-education'' camp in 1976.

Commander Cossey said Hanoi's first such agreement to allow joint
American-Vietnamese excavation of a crash site near Hanoi was ''a positive
step'' and a sign that Vietnam wanted to fulfill its promise to settle the
missing in action issue within two years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHILIPPINE COMMUNIST INSURGENTS ARE GAINING, U.S. OFFICIALS WARN

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1503 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26


The Communist insurgency in the Philippines has grown steadily larger and more
violent, despite assertions by the Government of President Ferdinand E. Marcos
that the situation is being contained, according to officials familiar with the
most recent reports of American intelligence agencies.

The officials said that although President Marcos had taken some small steps
toward introducing changes into the armed forces, the Philippine military
remained severely hampered in its anti-insurgent efforts by hidebound
leadership, cronyism and resentment among the populace of past brutality.

Administration officials said the worsening military balance was the main reason
that senior officials decided to get President Reagan more involved in the
long-running crisis.

A Message for Marcos

Last week, Mr. Reagan sent a close friend, Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of
Nevada, to Manila to impress upon Mr. Marcos that worry about the Philippine
situation had moved from the ranks of diplomats and intelligence officers into
the Oval Office.

Officials said the Director of Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, and the
White House national security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, had advocated the
Laxalt mission after Mr. Marcos, his wife, Imelda, and other Philippine
officials had repeatedly spurned warnings from American diplomats about the
growing violence and entreaties for military, political and economic changes.

Until the Laxalt trip, the officials said, Mr. Marcos appeared to believe that
these warnings did not reflect Mr. Reagan's own feelings.

'The President Himself'

''What bubbled it up was the continued negative trends - the number of people
under arms, the number of violent incidents,'' a senior Administration official
said in an interview. ''The President decided it was time to make sure President
Marcos knew it was not just a few guys in Washington who had a problem with the
Philippines, but the President himself.''

An American official who has recently met with Mr. Marcos and his wife said,
''There's a strong sense that they are somewhat divorced from reality.''

Administration officials and members of Congress generally applauded the
President's effort to deliver a firm message to Mr. Marcos, but they expressed
little hope that the mission would change Mr. Marcos's behavior.

'This Hasn't Worked Either'

''Fundamentally, they did it because previous steps hadn't worked,'' said
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who is chairman of the
House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs. Mr. Solarz, who has pressed the
Administration to distance itself from Mr. Marcos, added, ''I think it will soon
become apparent that this hasn't worked either.''

Administration officials familiar with Mr. Laxalt's meetings said the Philippine
President had minimized the dangers of the insurgency and in general had
dismissed the criticisms delivered by Mr. Laxalt as overstated and unfounded.
The officials said Mr. Marcos insisted that although he had ''a credibility
problem'' in the United States, his popular support at home was firm.

Administration officials said a 200-page report that Mr. Marcos gave Mr. Laxalt
last week, reciting changes under way in the Philippine military and describing
the status of the battle against the insurgent New People's Army, was merely a
repackaging of an earlier Philippine Government white paper and was far more
sanguine than American intelligence assessments.

For example, although President Marcos has estimated the number of armed
insurgents at about 9,000, and Lieut. Gen. Fidel C. Ramos, the top military
officer in the Philippines, said Friday that total had grown to 12,500, the
Pentagon puts the number at 16,500.

Congressional sources familiar with intelligence reports estimated that as many
as a million Filipinos are considered active supporters of the guerrillas,
providing food, housing or other aid.

''It's fair to say that President Marcos views the situation more optimistically
than we do,'' said Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, in an interview. He added that the number of
guerrillas was less important than the fact that ''the trend has continued
bad.''

Official is Slain

The increasing violence was highlighted Wednesday by the assassination of the
provincial governor of Mindanao, the highest ranking official to die in the
Philippines violence in many years. The New People's Army said it was
responsible for the slaying.

Mr. Armitage said he had not changed his own assessment that if present military
trends continue, the rebels will achieve a ''strategic stalemate'' in three to
five years, meaning neither side would have enough advantage to win a decisive
victory.

One official who has been briefed on the most recent intelligence information
said that even that forecast is ''optimistic, by a substantial amount'' when the
economic decline in the Philippines and public sentiment opposed to Mr. Marcos
are considered.

Despite the ominous intelligence reports, Pentagon officials said this week that
they envisioned no change in the Administration's strategy of coupling military
aid to the Marcos Government with exhortations for open elections, sharing of
military power and a breakup of the business monopolies that are blamed for the
islands' economic trouble.

More U.S. Training Teams

In a sign of the continued commitment, according to officials, American military
officers in Manila had scheduled a sharp increase this year in the military
training teams that rotate in and out of the Philippines to train Filipino
soldiers in equipment maintenance, logistics and administration.

A Pentagon official noted that members of Congress have been wary of closer
involvement with Mr. Marcos's Government, and he said the trainers would be
closely confined to technical advice on American-supplied hardware.

''We are not looking for advisers in the field,'' the official said. ''There is
no contemplation of advisers in the Vietnam sense.''

The United States is committed by treaty to protect the Philippines from
external attack, but is not obliged to help it cope with insurgency.

The Pentagon has already come under criticism from some members of Congress for
planning to spend hundreds of millions of dollars over the next several years to
upgrade aging installations and housing at the two American military bases on
the Philippines. Navy and Air Force officials in the Philippines have requested
$1.3 billion in construction money over the next seven years, although Pentagon
officials said only a fraction is likely to be approved.

Some Signs of Change

Pentagon officials who deal with the Philippine military said they were somewhat
encouraged by recent signs of change, including an increase in authority for
anti-insurgency field commanders, more disciplining of soldiers who abuse
civilians and small raises for the underpaid troops.

They said American aid, which until a few years ago concentrated on equipment
for combating foreign invaders, had been refocused to alleviate shortages of
trucks, helicopters and radios that would be useful against guerrillas, and such
essentials as uniforms and boots.

But the officials said about 35 of the 100 generals in the Philippine military
were cronies of Mr. Marcos who had been kept on out of personal loyalty,
preventing the promotion of younger officers and damaging morale. This, the
officials said, is a major barrier to improving the military.

Vital Outpost

The Philippines is considered a vital strategic outpost for supplying American
military forces in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, guarding oil routes from the
Persian Gulf and monitoring the growing Soviet military forces in the Pacific.

Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base are the largest American military
centers of their kind outside United States territory, and the most important
Western outposts between Hawaii and Japan.

According to Pentagon reports, these installations have taken on added
importance in the last two years as a supply point for increased Navy patrols in
the Indian Ocean, and because of an expansion of the Soviet Pacific Fleet based
in Vladivostok and a major buildup of the Soviet port and airfield at Cam Ranh
Bay in Vietnam.

The United States Pacific Command, based in Hawaii, has begun exploring the
possibility of alternative sites 1,500 miles to the east on the islands of Guam
and Tinian, in case the Philippine bases are cut off. Pentagon officials say
such a move would mean a major setback for the United States military, and would
cost from $2 billion to $8 billion.

'The Wrong Direction'

United States officials said the expansion of the New People's Army had taken
place without any evidence of support from the Soviet Union or other foreign
powers. Officials say that so far, the intensely nationalistic group has been
determined to rely on arms captured from Philippine soldiers or bought on the
black market.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a goverment armored vehicle burned by Communist guerrillas
(Agence France Presse)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR FOUR NEW YORKERS KIFFICULT VIETNAM VISIT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 46, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


It was in many ways a painful odyssey, marked now and then by tension and tears.
Four New York veterans of Vietnam, the first state delegation to make such a
trip, had returned to this country on public and personal quests.

They wanted to talk about public concerns - dioxin, Amerasian children, divided
families and missing comrades. But they also wanted to see Vietnam, meet the
Vietnamese and, in the safety of peace and the distance of time, talk about the
war.

It was a mixed group that arrived at Hanoi's small airport on Oct. 9.

John L. Behan, an Assemblyman from Montauk, L.I., and the marshal this year of
the first Vietnam veterans' parade ever in New York City, lost both his legs on
Hill 55, south of Da Nang, nearly 20 years ago.

With Dennis T. Gorski, an Assemblyman from Buffalo. Mr. Behan had won state
financing for the trip, and the pair hoped to help reunite some of their
Vietnamese constituents with family members left behind, to learn how the
defoliant Agent Orange had affected the Vietnamese and to see if they could help
the Amerasians. The Vietnamese Government assured them that it would look into
some of the concerns they raised.

Discovering a Country

Mr. Behan, energetic and good-humored, drew out Vietnamese amputees to confide
in him.

Mr. Gorski, a quiet, contemplative man and the only former officer in the group,
used the trip to clarify history for himself and to ask the Vietnamese about how
things were going now.

Wayne Jackson, the Assembly's sergeant-at-arms and the only former Army member
in the party of ex-Marines, was shaken by what he felt was his discovery of
Vietnam, the country, not the war.

''How the kids love water buffalos!'' he said, recalling how he and his fellow
soldiers used to shoot the animals. ''They used to charge us, come right at us -
at anything in green.''

Long Term in Vietnam

Later, disturbed at the sight of Amerasian children begging in the streets of Ho
Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, and by tiny, deformed toddlers in an orphanage,
he wept.

The fourth member of the group, John Kilbride, who spent the longest time in
Vietnam of any member of the delegation - November 1967 until August 1969 - is a
policeman and head of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association in Freeport, L.I.

He is a man who does not ornament his words. Of the efforts of the American
soldiers, he said: ''We were the guys who did it. We didn't romanticize it or
politicize it. We did it.''

'A Just Reason'

Do Vietnam's Vietnam veterans suffer stress? Le Binh, director of veterans
affairs in the Vietnamese Social Welfare Ministry, did not seem to understand
the question.

From across the table laden with tea cups and fruit, the Americans rephrased the
query. ''Are there psychological problems caused by war? Do you have mental
illness?'' Mr. Binh then replied: ''Oh, no. We have no such problems. Our
soldiers fought for a just reason.''

After a discussion of comparative veterans' benefits, campaigns and the ongoing
war in Cambodia, the meeting ended, and Mr. Binh, also an amputee, joined Mr.
Behan to talk about exercise and other concerns of people with prosthetic
devices.

Before parting, the Vietnamese veteran pointed to his head. ''We do have
problems, here, too,'' he said quietly to Mr. Behan. The two men shook hands
warmly and went their separate ways.

Asking About the Past

It was at the veterans affairs office, a dignified French colonial building on a
shaded street in Hanoi, that Mr. Gorski unexpectedly found himself face to face
with Trinh Cot.

The two men had been on opposite sides of the Perfume River in the ferocious
battle for Hue in 1968. As they talked, it became apparent they may have been in
direct combat. Mr. Gorski had many questions. First, ''did the North Vienamese
forces, headquartered in the ancient Citadel, know that Americans were reluctant
to bomb the historic building?''

Mr. Cot replied, through an interpreter, ''We understood that.''

The second question, ''Why were so many people massacred while Communist forces
were in the city for 26 days?'' The journalist and historian Stanley Karnow has
concluded that as many as 3,000 people perceived as enemies of Hanoi died in a
pogrom, while Western attention was focused on the My Lai massacre.

The Vietnamese Communists have offered a number of explanations.

''The army of the old regime executed these people,'' Mr. Cot said. ''They came
to Hue and killed their fellow man in order to slander the North Vietnamese
soldiers.''

''I am sorry to be discourteous,'' Mr. Gorski replied, ''but I find that to be
utter rubbish!''

Assessing American Soliders

Of Mr. Cot and another North Vietnamese soldier, Lieut. Col. Nguyen Dinh Lieu,
the group asked what the Vietnamese had thought of the American fighters.

''In 1965, when they first came, we thought they were the most well-equipped
force in the world,'' Mr. Cot said. ''But we studied them. We saw our light
equipment gave us flexibility. Most important, we believed.''

Colonel Lieu reflected for a minute, and added: ''We watched the American
soldiers, and we evaluated their strength. We began to fear them less. We saw
women combing the hair of the American soldiers. We saw them bathing in the
afternoon. And we understood our evaluation was right.''

That night at dinner, Mr. Kilbride remarked: ''We thought we were men then.
Hell, we were only boys.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John L. Behan (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KOREA WAR VETERANS RETURN FOR ANOTHER LOOK

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: INJE, South Korea


Some things have not changed here after 32 years. Searchlights still play every
night over the fingers, crags and ravines of midpeninsula mountains in the
demilitarized zone.

The loudspeakers still blare out the metallic music and propaganda messages from
the regime of the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung.

Bunkers still honeycomb the hills. They are made of reinforced concrete now
instead of sandbags piled helter-skelter on top of engineering stakes. Some
bunkers are painted blue and green. Cosmos flowers grow nearby.

Hill 930 here, about 100 miles northeast of Seoul, just above the village of
Wontong, towers over a region still called the Punchbowl because that is what it
looked like to G.I.'s during the Korean War. Not all G.I.'s fought in the
mountains, however. Until the war stabilized in 1952, it raged up and down the
600-mile peninsula, reducing it to rubble. #16-Nation U.N. Force The United
States and 15 other members of the United Nations came to the aid of South
Korea. Opposing them were the large armies of North Korea and its ally, China.

By the time a cease-fire was signed at Panmunjom on July 27, 1953, the United
States had lost almost 55,000 soldiers.

Now many American veterans are returning to the Punchbowl, Inchon, the Pusan
perimeter, Taegu and elsewhere to visit the old places of battle.

They are also campaigning in Washington for a memorial to mark what they call
''America's forgotten war.'' Many Korean War veterans say they are seeking
national recognition of the kind that was recently granted to the veterans of
Vietnam.

Veteran Says War Is Ignored

''The Korean War is to all accounts and purposes ignored,'' said Rudy Basurto of
Lompoc, Calif., who was a medic with the 45th Division 33 years ago in the
Punchbowl.

One reason was that the Korean War was never officially a war. It went down in
the records as a ''police action'' of the United Nations.

Mr. Basurto, who retired from the United States Justice Department, is one of
the veterans trying to change that.

Thousands like Mr. Basurto have revived their memories of the war with visits to
Korea. Mr. Basurto was with a group of 40 veterans and their wives.

Many Were 'Teary Eyed'

''It's a sentimental journey,'' said Meli Paule, a tour escort from Los Angeles.
''Many of them were teary eyed before it was over.''

The visitors rode around the country on a bus with banners identifying them as
American veterans. The Korean Veterans Association, a Korean association, was
the host. ''Old men saluted the bus at every town, and children cheered,'' Miss
Paule said.

Although little has changed in the Punchbowl, the Americans have seen elsewhere
almost a brand new country and one of the fastest growing in the developing
world. ''We went back to Inchon,'' said John P. L. Morrison, who was in the 11th
Marine Regiment of the First Marine Division on Sept. 15, 1950, when a bold
amphibious landing was staged under the command of Gen. Douglas MacArthur.

Mr. Morrison said that he barely knew Inchon because of all the commercial
development and that Wolmi-do, the offshore island where his unit had landed,
''was unrecognizable because it now had some trees on it.'' ''We'd blown most of
the foliage off,'' he said.  The Inchon landing was a dramatic and immediate
military success. But Hill 930 in the Punchbowl was taken, lost and taken again
in bloody cycles that went on for two years.

It used to be known as Heartbreak Ridge. To other high ground in the region,
G.I.'s gave other names that have been seared into the military record - names
like Porkchop Hill, Christmas Hill, Dagmar, Old Baldy.

This was one G.I.'s chronicle of the scene as fresh soldiers of the 179th
Infantry Regiment of the 45th Division moved into place on Christmas Hill in
July 1953 to relieve the division's badly mauled 180th Regiment:

''The dust, the constant jolting on the hard wooden benches inside the two
12-ton trucks and the heat jagged the nerves of the troops more than the distant
rumble of artillery and the thought of combat.

''We approached a R.O.K. artillery unit. Korean artillerymen were stirring in
one emplacement near the road. A round flamed from the muzzle of the 105
Howitzer just as we passed. We were all shaken a bit. Lifting a side-flap of the
truck one G.I. shouted obscenely at the R.O.K. soldiers. The reaction was
another explosive discharge. A Katusa inside the truck nudged his G.I. squad
leader. 'Tocson Chinese maybe hava yes.' ''

Hills Are Numbered

The dramatic names of those hills have now disapeared. On the South Korea Army
maps, they have all become numbers denoting meters of elevation.

''Tensions are still high up here,'' said Lieut. Col. M. S. Moon of the 65th
Artillery Battalion of South Korea's 12th Division as he pointed through the
wire fence that marks the southern boundary of demilitarized zone. Four
kilometers to the north, along another ridge line, was another fence.

''There could be four North Korean soldiers behind there, or 40,000,'' he said.

In 1953, the same hills were were nearly bare, pockmarked by shell holes. Trees
had long since been cut to stumps and looked like rotting teeth.

Now the foliage has returned, but the South Korean soldiers who live in the
bunkers and man the watchtowers say that they still do not see many animals.

Pvt. Soon Chul Aum, a draftee from Chunchon with a month left in his 30-month
period of conscription, said, ''There may be a few rabbits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PLAY OF IDEAS STIRS POLITICAL PASSIONS

BYLINE: By Michael Billington; Michael Billington reports frequently on the
cultural scene in Britain.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1586 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Wallace Shawn's Toby-jug features, alternately amiable and harassed, have become
a standard feature of American movies in the last eight years. Mr. Shawn made
his stage-acting debut in his 1977 adaptation of ''The Mandrake.'' As he
himself, some 20 films later, self-deprecatingly puts it, ''Once you're on the
casting directors' list of the six short, bald, little people they find comical,
you find that work tends to breed work.''

But although Mr. Shawn earns his living by acting, his vocation is writing
plays. It is not a well-rewarded one: He reckons that since 1967 he has earned
all of $8,000 as a dramatist. But his output includes the Obie Award-winning
''Our Late Night''; a brilliant Socratic dialogue, ''My Dinner With Andre,''
filmed by Louis Malle, in which he co-starred with Andre Gregory, and now ''Aunt
Dan and Lemon.''

''Aunt Dan'' has just enjoyed a successful six-week run at London's Royal Court
Theater, with an American cast including Linda Hunt and Mr. Shawn himself, and
opens in New York tomorrow night at the Public Theater in Max Stafford-Clark's
production. It has already proved somewhat controversial in London because of
its political content, and is likely to provoke considerable discussion in New
York as well.

Interviewed during the London run, Mr. Shawn frames his sentences with care in a
desperate anxiety not to preempt his play's ideas. But it is fair to reveal that
its principal characters are Lemon, a sick, enfeebled 25-year-old woman who
holds pro-Nazi views, and her adoptive Aunt Dan, an eccentric academic and
one-time friend of Lemon's cultivated family who spends much of the play
passionately defending Henry Kissinger's foreign policy.

It is up to each individual to discover the play's meaning, but it is, Mr. Shawn
agrees, a play about private and public morality.

Some theatergoers have found ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' disquieting because it
involves unreasonable characters who sometimes say reasonable things, and
because the liberal viewpoint is barely expressed, except through Lemon's rather
quiescent mother. Why is there no articulate liberal voice in the play?

''For two reasons,'' says Mr. Shawn. ''One is that I'm trying to hold the mirror
up to nature. What you might call the liberal voice is not the dominant one in
America right now. People like myself have been reduced to a gaping,
open-mouthed silence in this particular period; and the response to Reagan by
those who oppose him hasn't been as inspired as one might hope. But the second
point is that I'm trying to provoke a response in the many hundreds who I hope
will see the play. I think it's more interesting not to put my own attitudes
into the play, which would allow the audience to go home satisfied. The audience
has to react to this play, otherwise it's a disaster. If they sit there like a
piece of cheese, it would be a horrible experience.''

Mr. Shawn's intention, he says, is basically to challenge a liberal audience to
rethink its position and to confront them with certain unpalatable truths: in
particular that the preservation of Western comfort may well depend on a brutal
expedience in foreign affairs. He is also trying to delve into the way
individual psychology and political ideas are interwoven. But are the
Kissinger-fixated Aunt Dan and the fascistic Lemon figments of his imagination
or based on observable people?

''The characters have sprung from myself as well as my imagination,'' he says.
''I suppose the character of Lemon emerged because I spent a lot of time reading
about the Nazis. I was puzzled as to why the Nazi phenomenon occurred. One of
the strange aspects of it was that there were very intelligent people in Germany
in the 30's who actively admired Hitler. I wanted to explore the psychology of
such people, and even to ask what aspects of myself, if given free rein and
taken a little further, would make me into a Nazi sympathizer.

''I've seen a lot of plays and films in which the Nazis are depicted as totally
unlike ourselves: If you took one look at these people you'd know they were
awful. But at the time the ordinary German didn't know anything so obvious. Even
Aunt Dan doesn't say anything I consider completely laughable; and, in fact,
when I was 17 and a political student my idol was Henry Kissinger. A teacher had
turned me onto his books; and, whatever one thinks of his policies, he remains
the most intelligent man to have entered American political life for several
decades.''

These are frank admissions from someone like Mr. Shawn: a self-styled liberal, a
determined opponent of the Vietnam war and the product of a highly civilized New
York world (his father, William Shawn, is editor of The New Yorker). But British
theatergoers have found ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' disquieting not merely for its
content. The London critics have noted that, with its long speeches and bizarre
conjunctions of political passion and sexual wildness, it fractures almost all
of the textbook rules on playwriting; it comprises great chunks of argumentative
rhetoric rather than more traditional dialogue.

''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' is not only unlike conventional plays, it is also unlike
Mr. Shawn's previous works. ''My Dinner With Andre'' was virtually an extended
conversation piece, and ''A Thought in Three Parts'' was surreal sexual fantasy.
Why does Mr. Shawn feel compelled, every time he pens a play, to invent a new
form?

''I lack almost every quality that I would recommend to aspiring playwrights,''
he said. ''I'm driven to write plays but I don't have the skills ordinarily
required. So I come up with new structures, new ways of organizing the form that
will draw the audience along. But the basic reality is that every play must have
a plot and there must be a reason why people want to watch a play after the
first 15 minutes. There's got to be some suspense. That's true even of 'My
Dinner With Andre.' If you just put two hours of conversation between myself and
Andre Gregory on stage, people would have left. I spent a year constructing a
plot for the piece. I come to the restaurant determined to defend myself against
Andre and not to let him upset me: He's determined to evoke a response from me.
It all starts from there.''

But how has Mr. Shawn managed to bypass the American naturalistic tradition? The
answer, as so often, would seem to lie in childhood.

''When I was 12,'' he says, ''I was taken to see the Jose Quintero-Jason Robards
'Iceman Cometh.' That totally overwhelmed me. Shortly after, I went to see
Ionesco's 'Chairs' and 'The Lesson' with Eli Wallach, and later Alan Schneider's
version of Beckett's 'Endgame.' I was thrilled by the passion and psychological
insight of O'Neill and the exhilarating leap into the poetic of Beckett and
Ionesco. It gave me as a young boy the idea that a play can be absolutely
anything.

''But, around the same time, my brother Allen and I staged complex pieces at
home with my words and his music. One dealt with dynastic decline in China.
Another had Wittgenstein as the main character. We even did a four-hour version
of Milton's 'Paradise Lost' with a dinner break in the middle. We had a lot of
encouragement as children, and that perhaps gave me the arrogant idea one could
do anything in a play.''

What is curious is that, despite this background of enlightened creativity, Mr.
Shawn didn't plunge headlong into the arts. At 15 his hero was Dostoyevsky. At
17 it was Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Shawn, determined to be a diplomat, civil servant
or politician, came to regard the study of literature as self-indulgent in a
world threatened by nuclear extinction and starvation. After studying history at
Harvard, he spent a year in India and then went to Oxford to read politics,
philosophy and economics. It was there, in 1967, that he saw a poster
advertising a play contest and discovered what he really wanted to do.

For his first 10 years as a playwright, he was always in debt or broke. And even
now his plays, while popular on the Public Theater-Royal Court axis, have yet to
break through to a wider audience. ''My writing,'' he readily admits, ''remains
a rarified, or degraded, taste.''

But, in the end, is Wallace Shawn's writing, and specifically ''Aunt Dan and
Lemon,'' motivated by guilt? Guilt at being a comfortable member of a free
society when many in the world are suffering? Guilt at himself being a product
of a cultured, privileged upbringing? Mr. Shawn thinks a long time before coming
up with an answer.

''The word guilt,'' he says, ''has been thrown into extraordinary disrepute by
psychiatrists, so maybe we should start over without using that word. But some
people are born into a slum in Mexico City and have to figure out how to behave;
and some of us are surprised to find ourselves born into a comfortable,
middle-class world in a powerful country and have to figure out the appropriate
response. Each one of us literally pays taxes to support our government and what
they are doing on our behalf. The life we are leading is based on what they are
doing and we are reaping the benefits. We are connected to the weapons being
built and the secret agents being sent into South America. These connections are
not theoretical: they are direct.

''How do you live with the benefits of a government whose individual actions you
may reject? If one were a Gandhian pacifist, it would be very simple. Those of
us who are not have to work out what we ought to be doing. That really is at the
heart of my play.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR LAURA DEAN, A NEW DIRECTION

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section 2; Page 15, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1518 words


There was once a child named Laura Dean, who grew up to become a leading
American choreographer of modern dance. Early on, she had her own way of looking
at figures in space. ''I was in the first grade,'' Miss Dean said recently,
recalling a telling incident in her childhood. ''The teacher had gone to the
board and written down that one plus one equals two. I raised my little hand and
said this could mean something else. She got kind of huffy. 'What do you mean?'
she said. I went to the board and I wrote down that one plus one equaled two
ones, because I saw it visually. The teacher got extremely angry and said that
one plus one did not equal 11. I didn't even know what 11 was.''

Miss Dean does now. Today, she is known for creating dances with a rich,
abstruse weave of rhythms and patterns. Looked at from above, the dances unfold
in starkly discernible geometric shapes. Seen from the front, they render
musical impulse in design that has led some observers to think of Persian rugs
or American Indian or ancient Egyptian ritual.

The new dances to be seen at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where Laura Dean
Dancers and Musicians opens on Thursday as part of the Academy's Next Wave
Festival, take Miss Dean's choreography into less familiar areas. Though they
display a strong sense of community that some have likened to the familial
quality of folk dancing, Miss Dean's pieces have hitherto offered little
opportunity to her performers for any interaction other than the sharing of the
same stage space, which they occupy for the entire dance. There is little
differentiation between male and female bodies. That the dancers emerge on stage
as individuals seems paradoxical, for they are essentially elements in a
pattern. They move along their own paths, necessarily aware of each other in the
extremely tricky choreography, without casting so much as a sidelong glance.

''There's something very special about being on stage the whole time,'' Kristin
Jackson, a member of the company and rehearsal coach, says. ''You experience a
real sense of connection with the other dancers. And there is an exhilarated
feeling at the end. It's like a journey. You've gotten to that point you started
out for.'' Elizabeth Maxwell - a dancer who, with Marianne Schultz, completes
the rehearsal staff - agrees with Miss Jackson. ''It's such a responsibility to
step out on the stage and know you're not going to leave for 30 minutes,'' Miss
Maxwell says. ''You have to be committed, and you really become involved from
that moment on. In a way, it's a whole new world.''

But Miss Dean has created her first solo dancing - in a group piece in ''Sky
Light,'' which will receive its New York premiere in Brooklyn. And, most
innovatively for her, there are entrances and exits - as well as partnering - in
''Transformer,'' a new work danced to music composed by Anthony Davis. ''I'd
been listening to a piece by Philip Glass that had a wonderful, flowing quality
that gave me the image of continuous entrances and exits,'' Miss Dean says. She
tends to see dances as painted on the canvas of the stage, comparing time off
stage to negative space in painting.

All contribute to an increasing emotional coloration that some have noticed in
Miss Dean's once rigorously minimalistic choreography. The developments in her
work may prove the adage that adversity breeds invention. A choreographer who
helped to define the post-modernist movement and whose articulate intelligence
has made her a popular candidate for a wide range of government and private arts
advisory councils, Miss Dean has nonetheless gone through difficult times of
late.

The Brooklyn engagement marks her company's return to New York after a four-year
absence. During that time she gave up performing in an attempt to get the
company back into sound fiscal shape after mismanagement that led to
near-bankruptcy, though she hopes to return to dancing soon. Her ''10-year
plan,'' which comes to an end next year when, coincidentally, she celebrates her
20th year as a choreographer, helped Miss Dean through the hard times.

''When I hit the bumps - the worst were five months in 1983 - I saw no way to be
able to sustain my company. But because I had that commitment I kept on going.''
Now she faces raising $450,000 for a much-needed, permanent facility in Brooklyn
for her company.

But some things have not changed. With Miss Dean's new ''Impact,'' which
completes the Brooklyn program, she resumes her longtime collaboration with the
composer Steve Reich. And a love of color and painting still inform and motivate
Miss Dean's work. A room in her TriBeCa loft is filled with her paintings, whose
patterns are possessed of a strange, rhythmically vivid beauty despite their
seemingly casual execution.

''Sky Light,'' for instance, which is set to her own music, is ''yellow'' to
Miss Dean. ''I was thinking of sunlight and the yellows and ambers and the
warmth of that. Not hot light, but warmer reflected light.'' The title of the
dance, a piece she has reworked for the Brooklyn season, comes in fact from an
architectural term for the quality of light reflected indirectly from the sky.

And then, of course, there is the spinning that has identified Miss Dean's
style. Why spin? Miss Dean recalls her answer to a group of hostile Indonesian
critics encountered on a 1983 tour. ''I told them that I liked doing things in
the round because the earth is round, the planets are round and the stars are
round. And I like to spin because in the universe everything is spinning.''
Spinning looks deceptively easy to do. Dean-dancers cannot, like ballet dancers,
steady themselves by fixing on a spot in space. ''It is sort of like night
driving,'' Miss Maxwell says. ''You only have that white line to follow. You
have to be constantly looking ahead and aware of the sides, too, and what's
around you.''

Controlled abandon is important to Miss Dean. The body's energy must be
manifested, but it is expressed within a stringently imposed external structure.
''My work does have to do with establishing a sense of order,'' she says.
''That's why I do what I do. There's a sense of centering, of making form out of
chaos. But I have an enormous appreciation of chaos. There's no form without
it.'' That heightened sensitivity likely derives from two events in Miss Dean's
earlier life that profoundly influenced her work. Born in Staten Island in 1945,
she suffered an accident at 18 months that gave her a pervasive feeling of
distance from a burdensome and strange body. It continued through years of
ballet and modern dance training and early performing with the companies of Paul
Taylor and Paul Sanasardo.

''I had made friends with the milkman. I was playing in the driveway and I got
up to wave goodbye to him. He didn't see me and the truck rolled back over me.
It ran over my pelvis and leg. My dad told me I had a tire track on the side of
my face. I was in traction for eight months, and I had to learn to walk again,
though I have no memory at all of it.'' She does remember herself as a shy,
unsmiling and rather quiet child who counted compulsively and found it hard to
come out of the dreams from which she awoke each morning.

The second event came about some 20 years later. Possessed by a vision of
impending apocalypse, like many young people during the Vietnam War era, Miss
Dean gave up dance and traveled to San Francisco in 1969 to join a commune that
never quite organized itself. There were LSD experiences. In a sense, apocalypse
had arrived. One day, Miss Dean decided to go back to work. She rented a
storefront on Haight Street, an empty, mirrorless room. ''I locked myself in the
room three hours a day, sometimes four, sometimes five.

''The first week, I tried to dance. Everything I did felt like something else
out of a Taylor dance or my ballet training. There was absolutely no reason to
be moving.'' She had a faint memory of watching Merce Cunningham teaching and
being struck by the fact that she was seeing not what he was dancing but the joy
that suffused his moving. ''That gave me a focus. I hung on. I pushed through
two weeks. Then I saw that this was not the way to go at it. I had to go for the
negative, the flip side. What was the worst thing to do in a dance class? Sit
down, or lie down. So I sat down. It had to be one of the most painful things
I've done in my life. I had never consciously stopped and sat still. The tears
wouldn't stop.''

But she began to calm down enough by the second week to walk, then pace, talking
to herself ''like a madwoman,'' though she never went into the studio on LSD.
''Something told me not to. I just wanted to think consciously. Then I started
walking in circles, beginning to find that kinesthetic joy.'' Circling is a
fundamental element in the human motor instinct, she suggests, expressed
unconsciously in childhood circle-walking. ''The studio was not that big. I
started to lean in. That was my first move, so to speak. After the spinning, I
started simple things like jumping up and down. It was almost like learning how
to walk again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
PLUMBING THE SECRETS OF THE TALLEY CLAN

BYLINE: By Mel Gussow

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1556 words


In Lanford Wilson's richly textured cycle of plays about the Talleys of Lebanon,
Mo., generations of one family dominate a town and its inhabitants. The Talleys
are the owners of both the bank and clothing factory, primary employers as well
as local aristocracy of wealth. Almost to a man, they are acquisitive and
retributive. The secret of Talley acumen, as represented by the domineering
grandfather of the family, is decisive and impersonal maneuvering. In common
with Lillian Hellman's Hubbard family (in ''The Little Foxes''), the Talleys
know when to sell - and when to sell out.

Every generation, however, has one Talley who stands out by reason of his or her
humanity. In each of the three plays that Wilson has written so far about his
imaginary clan, a single good Talley has acted as an antidote to the
spitefulness that is synonymous with the family name. In ''Talley & Son''
(revived in revised form at the Circle Repertory Company), there is Charlotte
Talley, a self-denying aunt who sees herself and her relatives plain. In
''Talley's Folly,'' there is Sally (also a minor character in ''Talley & Son''
and ''Fifth of July''), who fulfills her Aunt Charlotte's own failed dream by
pursuing a romantic vision. And more than 30 years later, in ''Fifth of July,''
there is Ken Talley Jr., survivor of both the family wars and the war in
Vietnam.

One of the rewards of seeing the plays in the unfolding Talley cycle is our
knowledge of the interrelated, reflected Wilson worlds. When a character opens
the door in ''Talley & Son,'' we hear the sound of crickets and dance music -
and we remember that as a counterpoint to the bickering in the main house, Sally
(in ''Talley's Folly'') is down at the boathouse affirming her love for the
outsider, Matt Friedman. Turn the set around and walk through a Wilson time warp
and we would see the family years later in ''Fifth of July,'' as an elderly
Sally brings home the ashes of her dead husband, testifying to the fact that she
and Matt have had a long and happy life together. Behind everything, though not
yet visible on stage, is the figure of old Whistler Talley, the family's
archetypal dreamer, the man who built the idyllic boathouse in 1870 and went
merrily stomping and singing through the Lebanon woods. More than anyone, he
represents a pioneer Missouri spirit that is all but depleted in his
descendants.

In ''Talley & Son,'' Wilson has not allowed the male Talleys much of our
empathy. Weaving in and out of senility as it suits his purpose, the grandfather
is a scoundrel, as miserly with his own loyalty as he is with his money. His
son, Eldon, the focus of ''Talley & Son,'' is well-meaning but weak-willed, and
Eldon's older son Buddy is an opportunist (Matt Friedman already told us about
Buddy's bigotry in ''Talley's Folly''). As one sign of the family's emotional
barrenness, fathers and sons are often inimical. In its earliest conception, the
play was called ''The War in Lebanon.'' When it had its premiere in 1981, it was
''A Tale Told.'' The shift in title to ''Talley & Son'' demonstrates that at its
core the play intends to be about fathers and sons, describing how
disappointment can exist on both sides of the paternal fence. To the end, the
Talley men are mutually destructive.

It is Wilson's dramatic artistry that he is able to draw us into the realm of
the Talleys, encouraging us to understand the grasping fathers and sons as well
as those few who can embrace a life of individuality and responsibility. One
reason for looking forward to the promised play about Whistler Talley is that as
a character he should bring out the best in the author. In his work, Wilson has
an irrepressible congeniality and a longing for sustained relationships. While
Lillian Hellman seemed to warm to the task of unmasking the malicious Hubbards,
Wilson is more comfortable - and more revealing - with such likable characters
as Charlotte, Sally, Matt Friedman and Ken Talley Jr. For this reason, among
others, ''Talley's Folly'' and ''Fifth of July'' are better realized plays than
''Talley & Son.''

The revisions have given ''Talley & Son'' a greater cogency. Eldon Talley now
has a clearer line of motivation. Victimized by the scorn of his father, he
remains in middle age a ''junior'' who can never fully ascend to maturity. After
Eldon's single climactic act of assertion, his sister Charlotte addresses him as
''Mr. Talley.'' He stares at her, as if he does not, cannot, recognize the
appellation. There is still only one Mr. Talley and that is Eldon's father.

The clarification of Eldon is aided by the casting of Farley Granger in the
role. He brings to his personification a certain dignity. Even as he is
downgraded within his own family, we can see - through Mr. Granger's performance
- why Eldon remains such a pillar to the outside community. In the evening's
other pivotal role, that of Charlotte, Joyce Reehling Christopher artfully
conveys her character's order of priorities. The Talleys can destroy themselves,
but, in her mind, her favored niece must at all costs fly free.

The playwright has retained the younger son as a ghost, returning to Lebanon
after he has been killed in action in World War II. The device might be useful
if the character were able to give a sensitive overview of why the Talleys
behave as they do. Instead, he is, principally, a bridge between dialogues.
Still, Robert Macnaughton instills the figure with a youthful sense of idealism
and of loss. In some of the other characters and performances there is a
coarsening, as in the Talley handyman and Eldon's illegitimate daughter - as if
to forestall any chance that the audience might shift its sympathy to them.
Similarly, the portrait of Buddy's wife, Olive, the Lanford Wilson equivalent of
Natasha, the meddling sister-in-law in ''The Three Sisters,'' is of a woman who
is irritatingly quarrelsome.

Our allegiance and that of the author gravitate to Charlotte and her niece.
While brooding about her own debilitating illness, Charlotte makes sardonic
remarks about the selfishness around her. She remains not only the play's moral
center but the most evocative character on stage. When she prepares for her
niece's flight, speeding her headlong into the arms of Matt Friedman, it is a
moment of heartwarming urgency. Someone pure in spirit has escaped the Talley
net.

One's appreciation of a Talley play is enhanced not only by a knowledge of the
other works in the cycle but also by a familiarity with the Circle Rep family of
actors. Trish Hawkins, the original Sally in ''Talley's Folly,'' returns to the
role in ''Talley & Son.'' Helen Stenborg, who brightened ''Fifth of July'' as
the older, widowed version of Sally, is now the ineffectual Mrs. Eldon Talley.
Joyce Reehling Christopher, Ken's activist sister in ''Fifth of July,'' rises to
the more demanding challenge of Charlotte.

Emphasizing its feeling of family, the Circle Rep is performing ''Talley & Son''
in repertory with ''Tomorrow's Monday,'' a ''lost'' play by Paul Osborn, author
of ''Morning's at Seven'' and ''Oliver Oliver'' (forthcoming at the Manhattan
Theater Club). ''Talley & Son'' and ''Tomorrow's Monday'' share a milieu
(small-town American life), a John Lee Beatty set and an overlapping cast. Both
productions - the first directed by Marshall W. Mason, the second by Kent Paul -
stress atmosphere and character. While ''Talley & Son'' has a great deal to say
about the changing nature of the family, business and patriotism, ''Tomorrow's
Monday'' is a nostalgic homespun sampler with too tenuous a premise to justify
its length.

In this, its first New York production, the play reveals both the strength and
weakness of the author - his gift for eccentric character comedy and his
affection for the commonplace, untransformed. Ostensibly the play deals with a
young man's quest for independence. As it turns out, both he and the play are
dominated by an impossibly overbearing spinster sister (Trish Hawkins
overstating the character's frustrations). Beneath the sometimes amusing
domestic banter, there are seeds of a far more serious play, one about the
sister's psychopathological attachment to her two brothers and the mother's
eradication of her own ego.

Mothers come off badly in both ''Tomorrow's Monday'' and ''Talley & Son.'' In
the Osborn, the mother passively watched as her moralistic husband ruined their
daughter's life. In the Wilson, the mother is mired in her own ignorance. If
either had been able to take a stand, the outcome of the play might have been
different. Both characters are played by Helen Stenborg, and in ''Tomorrow's
Monday,'' against odds, she enlivens her character. There are several other
performances of note - by Robert Macnaughton as the younger son, Amy Epstein as
his mouse of a girlfriend, Richard Backus as his older brother and Diane Venora
as Mr. Backus's worldly wife who makes it her mission to free Mr. Macnaughton
from family rule. Looking a bit like Louise Brooks, Miss Venora energizes the
play - up to a point - with her sharp-edged sophistication, with promises and
temptations of a world beyond. Mr. Macnaughton is dazzled by her glamour. She
has, he says, ''more sheer power than any woman I ever knew.'' One could imagine
how such ''power'' would have polarized the Talley household in nearby Lebanon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Sanctuary Case Comes to Court In Arizona

BYLINE: By Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


A courtroom in Tucson, Ariz., provided the setting last week for what may become
the most impassioned conflict between state and religion since some churches
harbored draft resisters during the Vietnam War.

Eleven religious activists are being tried on 67 felony counts of smuggling
illegal aliens into the country, then giving them sanctuary. None of the
defendants deny that they worked to protect Central American refugees in an
''underground railroad.'' But they argue that they acted properly under
immigration-law provisions that protect those who are fleeing oppression. ''What
we're doing is simply what the faith compels us to do,'' said the Rev. John A.
Fife, a Presbyterian minister and one of the defendants.

But the Government classifies most of the Central Americans as economic refugees
and points out that conspiracy to smuggle, transport and conceal illegal alients
is against the law. ''Merely because they wear the garb of the clergy, they have
no greater or no lesser rights than anyone else,'' a United States Attorney
said. The Government relied on undercover infiltration for much of its evidence.

Mr. Fife said he was ''shocked'' by the Government's use of informers posing as
sanctuary volunteers. ''Their purpose was not to investigate, but to intimidate
the movement by spying within congregations,'' he said. The trial is expected to
last about two months. The defendants face prison terms as long as five years on
each count. The defense suffered a setback when the Government, in pretrial
motions, succeeded in barring arguments about religious motives, conditions in
Central America and United States foreign policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. John A. Fife in front of his church in Tuscon
(NYT/Suzi Moore)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY: WHERE CONSENSUS ENDS

BYLINE: By Madeleine G. Kalb; Madeleine G. Kalb is a Washington-based writer
specializing in Soviet-American relations.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 103, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4893 words


FOR PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN, THE UNITED STATES-SOVIET relationship is a constant
preoccupation - the touchstone by which all other issues are judged. Even at the
height of the Beirut hostage crisis last summer, the Russians were never far
from his thoughts. Anxious to avoid comparisons with President Carter's
self-imposed isolation during the Iran hostage crisis, Mr. Reagan went to a
Lions Club convention in Dallas to sell his tax-reform plan. Characteristically,
he departed from his prepared text to tell one of his favorite anti-Soviet
stories.

''A commissar,'' he said, ''visited a collective farm, grabbed the first fellow
that was walking by and said, 'How are things going? Are there any complaints?'
And the farmer . . . says, 'Oh, comrade commissar, I've never heard anyone
complain.' And the commissar said, 'Well, how are the crops?' 'Oh, sir, they've
never been better.' 'How about potatoes?' He said, 'Comrade commissar, if the
potatoes were put in one pile, they would reach the foot of God.' And the
commissar said, 'Just a minute. This is the Soviet Union - there is no God.' And
the worker said, 'That's all right. There are no potatoes.' ''

It was vintage Reagan, and the Lions loved it. Later in the speech he took the
same sort of uncompromising line toward terrorists that he had taken toward the
Soviet Union for most of his Presidency, denouncing them as ''uncivilized
barbarians,'' and he cited Theodore Roosevelt's warning: ''The American people
are slow to wrath, but once their wrath is kindled, it burns like a consuming
fire.''

Reagan's remarks reflected the distinctive flavor of his foreign policy: the
evocation of America's heroic past, the stern warning to any who would threaten
America's well-being, and the off-the-cuff gibe at the inefficiency of Communist
economies. On Oct. 10, after years of frustrating inaction in the face of
terrorist attacks against American citizens, the President was able for the
first time to make good on his warning to terrorists by ordering the
interception of four Palestinian hijackers aboard an airliner over the
Mediterranean. Now, as the White House prepares for next month's summit meeting
with Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, United States-Soviet relations are once
again at the top of the agenda. At stake, as Mr. Reagan sees it, is not just a
competition between two superpowers but rather a moral struggle between good and
evil, between political freedom and economic opportunity on the one side, and
dictatorship and economic failure on the other. And he displays no doubt about
the outcome. ''I firmly believe,'' he says, ''the tide of history is moving away
from Communism and into the warm sunlight of human freedom.''

This reassuring message is reminiscent of a simpler time - the halcyon years
after World War II before Vietnam shattered the American foreign policy
consensus, raising questions about the effectiveness of the nation's military
strength and the moral righteousness of its policy. With his unfailing optimism,
President Reagan is determined to restore that consensus as he restores
America's self-confidence and its position in the world.

But while his general approach seems to appeal to a majority of Americans, many
knowledgeable people in both parties are shaking their heads over what they
describe as the President's tendency to oversimplify complex situations and to
rely on nostalgia and rhetoric in the face of unpleasant realities. In the view
of these critics - past and present Administration officials, members of
Congress, diplomats and scholars - the President has failed to translate his
broad themes into a credible, consistent foreign policy. It is for this reason,
they argue, that his resounding re-election victory has not produced a strong
popular and Congressional consensus behind the Administration's specific foreign
policy decisions.

T HE DOMINANT theme of Reagan's foreign policy is toughness: America will defend
its interests through military strength; it will not hesitate to use force when
necessary. This is a deliberate contrast with the policies of Reagan's
predecessors - especially Jimmy Carter - which the President and his top
advisers believe were far too conciliatory.

In the 1970's, says Secretary of State George P. Shultz, while the United States
was ''neglecting its defenses,'' the Soviet Union launched a military buildup
and intervened in Angola, Cambodia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan, ''believing that
the West was incapable of resisting.'' Now, he explains, ''the United States is
restoring its military strength and economic vigor. . . . The Soviets, in
contrast, face profound structural economic difficulties and restless allies;
their diplomacy and their clients are on the defensive in many parts of the
world.''

Since Mr. Reagan took office in 1981, almost $1.2 trillion has been earmarked
for defense: for new weapons systems - the MX missile, the Stealth and B-1
bombers - and for the increased production of old ones. One Administration goal
is a 600-ship Navy. In addition, the manpower crisis has been eased; higher
salaries and pensions are encouraging more qualified officers and NCO's to
re-enlist.

Experts differ on the effectiveness of Reagan's military buildup. Says former
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.: ''I think his major contribution in
the foreign policy area has been the rebuilding of America's military defenses.
I think history will give him very high marks for this.''

Former State Department official Helmut Sonnenfeldt believes the Administration
has made its point. ''If you take a Cook's tour of the world,'' he observes,
''the places where conflict could break out, the number is much smaller than it
once was. It's partly a result of Soviet policy, and partly because Reagan has
created a sense of the robustness of American power.''

Others argue that this immense military buildup has not bought the United States
any additional security, and that it is not even relevant to many of the foreign
policy problems the country will have to face in the near future.

''I think we've been lucky,'' says Senator Gary Hart, a Colorado Democrat. ''I
expect every morning to turn on the radio or open the paper and find a crisis. I
fear physical harm to Duarte or Botha, Marcos overthrown, the South Korean
Government out. We've delayed if not the inevitable then the possible. Military
force will not solve these problems.''

Some critics, pointing to America's unprecedented budget and trade deficits,
argue that the Administration's massive defense outlays are a liability,
enhancing American security in a narrow military sense while undermining the
country's fundamental economic strength.

Other critics see danger in the gap between the Administration's tough talk and
the reality of America's strategic position. They stress that no level of
military expenditure can restore the kind of unchallenged superiority the United
States enjoyed in the 1950's. ''For two decades subsequent to World War II, the
American position in the world was pre-eminent,'' says former Defense Secretary
James Schlesinger. ''In the past 20 years, as our relative power has receded,
our commitments have not receded commensurately. Indeed they have grown. Thus we
unavoidably live with a higher level of risk.'' The gap between power and
commitments means a foreign policy that Schlesinger describes as ''bluff backed
by inadequate forces.''

Not even the capture of the Achille Lauro hijackers - a flawless military
exercise that boosted American morale - can obscure the fact that America's
power in the 1980's is sharply limited. In these circumstances, a national
consensus is more necessary than ever to make the nation's remaining power more
effective.

T HE ADMINISTRA-tion has had a mixed record in creating a Congressional
consensus behind its policies. In a purely practical sense, it needs two things
from Congress: money - for everything from the MX to contra aid - and approval
for the use of force. Money was no problem for the first four years, as
Congress, reflecting the popular perception that America's defenses needed
strengthening, lined up to support the Pentagon's budget requests.

But this year, mounting deficits and widespread reports of overpayments to
defense contractors created considerable resistance and bitterness. Early in the
session, when Robert J. Dole, the Senate majority leader, suggested a smaller
increase in defense spending than the Administration wanted, Pentagon spokesman
Michael I. Burch was asked for Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's
reaction. Burch replied: ''Secretary Weinberger feels that those who hope for
success in bringing down the defense budget really mean success in weakening the
security of the country.'' A few days later, an angry Senator John H. Glenn Jr.
challenged Mr. Weinberger: ''I do not see how you are really going to build a
consensus by impugning the motives and patriotism of those who may disagree with
your ideas about defense spending.''

The Administration's difficulties in creating a consensus on Capitol Hill are
partly a question of style. Complaints are heard - even on the Republican side
of the aisle - about the Administration's failure to consult on foreign policy,
its tendency to reach its own decisions and then expect Congress to support
them. Says Senator William S. Cohen, a moderate Republican and member of the
Armed Services Committee: ''I am under no illusion that I have any access or
influence with the Administra= tion. They come to me only when they need
votes.'' Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum, one of eight Republicans to vote against
the MX, resented White House insistence that ''a vote against the MX is a vote
against peace.'' She and the other seven Senators received ''Chamberlain
umbrellas'' from the College Republican National Committee to remind them of
Neville Chamberlain's appeasement of Hitler at Munich in 1938.

After the Administration ignored widespread Congressional objections to its
policy of ''constructive engagement'' in South Africa, Senator Dole, Senator
Richard G. Lugar, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, and Senator
Kassebaum, chairman of its Africa subcommittee, put their considerable weight
behind a bipartisan bill containing economic sanctions against Pretoria. Only
when the bill was close to passage and it was clear that both Houses would
override a Presidential veto did the White House adopt limited sanctions in
order to avoid a politically damaging defeat.

Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard N. Perle, who worked on Capitol Hill for
many years on the staff of the late Senator Henry M. Jackson, concedes there was
not enough consultation in the first couple of years of the Reagan
Administration but maintains that that has changed. ''There's a parallel
frustration at the White House,'' he says. ''The President is responsible for
policy. He has a strategy he thinks will work. Congress won't go along. If
there's a failure, the President will be held responsible. But the failure would
be brought about by the unwillingness of Congress to pursue his strategy.''

On a more substantive level, the difficulties in reaching a consensus reflect
profound differences about the use of American power - differences between
Democrats and Republicans, differences within the Administration itself.

As difficult as it is to reach agreement on spending money for defense, it is
even more difficult to agree about the spending of American lives - a question
that lies at the heart of any foreign policy, but especially one that puts its
primary stress on military strength rather than on conciliation. There is broad
agreement among Republicans and Democrat, liberals and conservatives, that if
Western Europe were attacked by the Soviet Union, the United States would honor
its treaty commitments and respond. Nearly everyone reacts the same way about
Japan and Korea, and about Australia and New Zealand -if they are reminded about
them. Some mention Israel, although it is not a formal ally linked to the United
States by a defense treaty.

Beyond these obvious cases, people say, it gets fuzzy. When it comes to
ambiguous third world situations, everyone agrees that there is no agreement at
all. ''I think we're very confused as a nation about the use of force in foreign
policy,'' says former Under Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger.
''Grenada worked because it was done secretly, quickly, with few casualties. But
the death of 200 Marines in Lebanon sent the nation into a paroxysm. It was
tragic, but we lose more on the highway in a weekend. A lot of this,'' he adds,
''is the result of Vietnam. The good, solid middle-class American doesn't think
the use of force is good.''

Senator Lugar ponders the same question: ''We have simply eschewed the use of
force altogether, as if the use of force - even in a worthy cause - is somehow
intrinsically wrong.''

Democratic critics, taking the Administration at its word, have precisely the
opposite concern. Senator Paul S. Sarbanes says: ''Force shouldn't be used as a
first resort, as this Administration uses it.'' Former Defense Secretary Clark
Clifford warns: ''They always seem to be looking for a military solution rather
than a diplomatic solution. It's a dangerous way to run a country.''

In fact, for all the tough talk, critics on the right complain that there has
been comparatively little tough action. One reason is that Mr. Weinberger,
despite his vehement anti-Soviet line, is reluctant to use American troops in
''gray area'' conflicts unless certain conditions are met - notably, defined
objectives, a clear intention of winning, and a ''reasonable assurance'' of
popular and Congressional support.

Thus the only significant use of force has been the Grenada invasion. Hailed as
the ''turning of the tide'' against Soviet expansionism, the invasion made a
useful political point. But, in the eyes of some critics, the Administration's
disproportionate pride in that accomplishment raised questions about its
seriousness. Those doubts were compounded during the 1984 Olympics, when the
President proclaimed America ''Number One'' - with its chief athletic
competitors, the Soviet Union and East Germany, missing. ''If only they could be
persuaded to disappear altogether,'' joked one longtime Washington observer,
''our foreign policy could be as successful as our athletes.''

T HE SOVIET UNION, far from disappearing, is the central focus of Reagan's
foreign policy. From the start, the President pulled no verbal punches,
lambasting the Soviet Union as the ''evil empire.'' He displayed no eagerness to
reach an arms-control agreement. His first major proposal on intermediate-range
missiles, the ''zero-option'' plan, was recently described by former Secretary
of State Haig as ''non-negotiable . . . shortsighted if not stupid.''

It was only in the fourth year of his term, as he prepared for his re-election
campaign, that the President began sending more conciliatory signals to Moscow.
In September 1984, he met for the first time with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei
A. Gromyko. This was not enough to satisfy his critics on the left, who were
convinced that he felt no sense of urgency about controlling nuclear weapons.
But it confirmed the fears of many of his staunchest supporters on the right,
who noted that the Administration's actions had not always lived up to its
anti-Soviet rhetoric. Secretary Shultz, they observe, never fails to point out
that it was President Carter who imposed the grain embargo after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan; it was President Reagan who removed it. Mr. Shultz also
notes repeatedly that after the Russians shot down a Korean passenger plane in
September 1983 with the loss of 259 lives, the United States protested
vigorously but sent its negotiators back to the arms talks in Geneva.

As he approaches his summit meeting with Mr. Gorbachev, the President is still
receiving conflicting advice from the experts in his Administration, not all of
whom are reconciled to the idea of a summit. While Mr. Gorbachev bids for the
peace vote in the United States and Europe, Mr. Reagan is hanging tough,
yielding nothing in advance, and suggesting that the summit will succeed only if
the Soviet Union makes major concessions.

R EAGAN'S ANTI-Soviet stance has strained relations with the NATO allies, who
generally prefer a less confrontational approach. While the Administration can
point to some successes in its effort to stiffen the spine of its NATO allies -
notably the promise of increased European military contributions to the alliance
and the successful installation of Pershing 2 and cruise missiles in West
Germany, Britain, Italy and Belgium in response to the deployment of new Soviet
SS-20 missiles targeted against Western Europe - it still must face an ironic
fact: Many people in Europe feel more threatened by the weapons supplied by the
United States to protect them than by the adversary the weapons are designed to
protect against. The feeling is so widespread that the major opposition parties
in Britain and West Germany are pledged to reverse nuclear gears if elected.

This has been a frustrating problem for previous administrations, but it has
been exacerbated by the Reagan record: the President's casual talk in 1981 about
limited nuclear war in Europe; his failure to reach an arms-control agreement
with the Soviet Union, and, most recently, his Strategic Defense Initiative,
popularly known as ''Star Wars.'' Many Europeans fear Star Wars may intensify
the arms race and ultimately ''decouple'' the United States from any future
nuclear conflict in Europe.

There is also the matter of differing political perceptions. As Sir Oliver
Wright, the British Ambassador to the United States, explains, NATO has
succeeded so well that to many Europeans, the Soviet Union no longer looks
particularly menacing. ''For Europe,'' he says, ''detente worked well: there was
peace in the most dangerous and most important part of the world.'' Thus, when
the President repeats his litany of Soviet aggression - Angola, Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, Nicaragua - as he did in his V-E Day speech in Strasbourg, France,
this year, it makes little impression.

For many years, Reagan's anti-Communism applied to Peking as well as Moscow. But
after he became President, he was persuaded to mute his longtime support for
Taiwan and pay a visit to China because of its strategic value as a
counterweight to the Soviet Union. More recently, China's move toward economic
decentralization was welcomed by the Administration as a vindication of the
free-enterprise system. Said Secretary of State Shultz: ''China's long march to
market is a truly historic event - a great nation throwing off outmoded economic
doctrines and liberating the energies of a billion talented people.''

Administration officials also pride themselves on the fact that since President
Reagan took office, the Soviet Union has made no new inroads in the third world.
Instead, they claim, in some of the ''gray areas,'' the situation is being
reversed. ''After years of guerrilla insurgencies led by Communists against
pro-Western governments, we now see dramatic and heartening examples of popular
insurgencies against Communist regimes,'' Mr. Shultz told the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, referring primarily to Afghanistan, Cambodia and Nicaragua.

Afghanistan has been the least controversial of these areas in Congress, because
it is a clear example of direct Soviet aggression - and there is little danger
of American military involvement. There has been broad bipartisan support for
the millions of dollars in covert aid that have been sent to the Afghan
guerrillas through Pakistan. Though no Administration official will publicly
confirm the figure, Representative Jack Kemp, a New York Republican, stated
during the April Nicaragua debate that $250 million had been provided in the
last year. Moreover, in July, Congress voted for the first time to provide $15
million in overt humanitarian aid.

Cambodia is a more delicate problem. The Administration had been reluctant to
take the initiative, says Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, because
it sensed that ''the nation and Congress were not ready for a military role in
Indochina.'' It became considerably less controversial last spring, when
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a New York Democrat who is chairman of the
House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, broke with other liberals and
proposed that the United States provide $5 million in military aid for the two
small democratic opposition groups fighting the Soviet-backed Cambodian
government, which is kept in power by a large Vietnamese army.

The proposal was adopted by both House and Senate, despite vocal opposition from
other liberals. Representative Michael D. Barnes, chairman of the Western
Hemisphere Affairs Subcommittee and others warned of a precedent for aid to the
contras in Nicaragua and expressed concern about the aid falling into the hands
of the Khmer Rouge, who killed some two million Cambodians when they were in
power, and who are now in a tactical alliance with the democratic groups.

Representative Solarz rejects the comparison with Nicaragua, arguing that the
contras are ''fighting to overthrow an indigenous government'' while the
Cambodians are ''fighting to end the occupation of a foreign invader.''

Nicaragua has been the most controversial of the three areas because of fears of
American troop involvement, and doubts about the democratic credentials of the
rebel groups, or ''contras,'' fighting the Marxist Sandinista regime. In April,
the President failed to persuade the House of Representatives to support a $14
million aid package for the rebel forces - primarily because many on both sides
of the aisle felt the Administration was not ''leveling with them.'' Said one
State Department official: ''The Administration has never fully articulated what
its aims are in Nicaragua: to get rid of the Sandinistas or pressure them to
agree to a reasonable solution. There's distrust on the Hill about what the
Administration is doing. They haven't established their credibility, even with
their own supporters.'' Republican Senator Cohen, who reluctantly voted for the
contra aid measure adopted in the Senate, summed up the mood during the debate:
''What we need is clarity. No more mirrors. No more doublespeak. No more
deception.''

Many of the Administration's strongest critics, such as Senator Christopher J.
Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, agree that if the Soviet Union or Cuba established
a military base, or introduced sophisticated offensive weapons, in Nicaragua,
''there would be a consensus to move in and remove the threat.'' But they argue
that the United States would be in a much stronger position to do so if it had
tried nonmilitary pressures first - and if it acted with the support of its
allies in the region.

Administration officials, on the other hand, do not want to engage in long,
drawn-out negotiations to satisfy the Latin Americans while the Sandinistas
consolidate their power. They believe the Nicaraguan Government constitutes an
urgent threat that must be dealt with now. As Mr. Weinberger says, ''We cannot
afford another Cuba in the Caribbean area.''

This sort of hard-line rhetoric has led to widespread suspicion that the
President, despite repeated denials, would welcome an American military solution
in Nicaragua. Even if he does not intend to commit American troops, many of his
critics believe that aid to the contras will lead inevitably to that commitment.

Administration officials argue that, on the contrary, aid to the contras is the
best hope for avoiding direct American involvement. Still, they have never ruled
it out entirely. ''Direct application of U.S. military force must be recognized
as an eventual option, given our stakes in the region,'' says Mr. Shultz.

In June, less than two months after the Administration's initial defeat, the
House reversed itself, bowing to Presidential and popular pressure. Instead of
the original $14 million, Congress has offered the President $27 million,
provided it not be distributed by the C.I.A. More important than the funds is
the vote of confidence in his tough anti-Communist policy, even if he does not
have an entirely free hand to carry it out.

O N JUNE 14, TWO DAYS after the contra victory in the House, Lebanese Shiite
terrorists hijacked a TWA plane, plunging the Administration into a ''gray area
conflict'' far more complex than Afghanistan or Nicaragua.

Western vulnerability to state-sponsored terrorism has been high on the
Administration's agenda for some time; in fact, it is virtually the only bleak
spot in Shultz's optimistic assessment of America's position in the world. Yet
the Administration was clearly undecided about how to handle terrorism even
before the Beirut crisis. The Secretaries of State and Defense were openly at
odds over the use of marines in Lebanon between 1982 and 1984 to help prop up a
Christian government and prevent Soviet-backed Syria from becoming the dominant
foreign influence - a prospect Mr. Reagan described as highly damaging to
American interests. Mr. Shultz was the activist; Mr. Weinberger opposed the
mission. In the end, after the suicide bombing of the United States Embassy and
Marine headquarters, with more than 250 Americans killed, the President sided
with Defense Secretary Weinberger and pulled out the marines. There was no sign
of the ''swift and effective retribution'' against terrorists Mr. Reagan had
promised in 1981.

A similar gap between rhetoric and policy continued throughout the TWA crisis.
In order to win the hostages' release, President Reagan negotiated with the
terrorists indirectly through every conceivable intermediary, including Syria
and Iran - usually high on the Administration's list of practitioners of
state-sponsored terrorism - while insisting that the United States would never
deal with terrorists. After the hostages were on their way home, the President
repeated his stand: ''The United States gives terrorists no rewards and no
guarantees. We make no concessions. We make no deals.''

But, as one diplomat put it, ''The facts speak for themselves.'' Says former
Secretary of State Alexander Haig: ''It's not important how the world or public
opinon perceives it -the bottom line is how the terrorists perceive our
performance. If they perceive, first, that they got their prisoners back,
second, they got attention, and, third, they are rewarded by the post-mortems,
then clearly the outcome will be one that is not a deterrent to future terrorist
acts.''

The Administration's handling of the hostage crisis won praise from liberal
Democrats, who felt he had demonstrated American steadiness and maturity by
negotiating and getting the kidnapped Americans back alive instead of ordering
senseless retaliation. But the President's conservative supporters were far from
satisfied. One warned that the message the Russians will derive from the crisis
is not a reassuring one for the United States: ''When you cannot deter at this
ambiguous level of violence, you begin to erode your credibility at more
important levels, and it becomes harder to deter challenges in the future.''

Both liberals and conservatives applauded the President's decision earlier this
month to intercept the hijackers of the Achille Lauro. Ironically, this action,
which seemed morally unambiguous to Americans of all political persuasions, led
to diplomatic difficulties with Italy and Egypt, while the Soviet Union
unexpectedly weighed in with an endorsement of the United States's move, calling
it ''understandable and just.''

''I suspect the fact that the Russians had four of their diplomats in Beirut
kidnapped and one of them killed may have put some sense into their heads,''
said Richard Pipes, a professor of history at Harvard University, who formerly
served as a Reagan adviser on Soviet affairs. ''They've been funding and arming
many of these terrorist groups, directly and indirectly, and they suddenly find
things get out of control and they're no longer immune.'' The fact that both
superpowers are now vulnerable to terrorism may force that subject onto the
agenda at the upcoming summit in Geneva.

I N THE FIFTH YEAR OF HIS Presidency, Reagan still has not been tested by a
major United States-Soviet crisis. Some attribute it to luck, others say it is
the result of the impression of renewed American strength he has conveyed to the
world. Others, looking at the record, fear that the President, with his
optimistic 1950's rhetoric, has created unrealistic expectations about America's
position in the world that he cannot fulfill. Moreover, they argue, through
inconsistent actions and a general reluctance to consult even members of his own
party on foreign policy issues, the President has failed to create the kind of
public or Congressional consensus necessary to deal with future crises when they
arise.

As former Secretary of Defense Schlesinger told the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee: ''A national consensus cannot simply be wished into being. . . . It
will come about only through the development of mutual trust, reasonable
success, and the sustained credibility of the executive branch.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Shultz and Eduard Shevardnadze (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW JAPAN TEACHES ITS OWN HISTORY

BYLINE: By James Reston Jr.; James Reston Jr.'s most recent book, ''Sherman's
March and Vietnam,'' was published last spring by MacMillan.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4228 words


THE REVISION OF HISTORY IS A NEVER-ending process. Each generation, it is said,
rewrites history in the light of its own experience. But when the historical
event is defeat in war, as Japan experienced in World War II and the United
States experienced in Vietnam, the impulse to ignore or explain away or tidy up
the defeat is particularly strong.

In such cases, history is an embarrassment. If the defeat is marked by widescale
atrocity on the battlefield or by initial aggression of the defeated power - as
in Japan's case - the embarrassment is that much more humiliating, and the
impulse to sanitize it is that much stronger. A country is apt to go through a
period of amnesia, when its citizens simply do not want to think about the
downbeat side of its recent past.

The loss of memory can go on for years. Sometimes, after the period of amnesia,
history re-emerges in a distorted fashion. Its embarrassments are not as clearly
recalled as its heroics or its near-victories. A country's own suffering is
better remembered than the suffering it caused.

Inevitably, there are questions: What should succeeding generations be taught
about the darker periods, what weight should those times be given?

On a recent trip to Japan, I explored such questions with a number of Japanese
educators and writers and government officials, for I expected that the problems
the Japanese face, and perhaps the solutions they have found, 40 years after
World War II, might tell us something about America's memories of its own dark
periods. IN A SPARE, UNADORNED CLASSROOM AT HIROSHIMA University, across from
the only structure on the campus to survive the atomic blast, a frail Asian
scholar named Humio Kobayashi began his lecture in a course titled
''Comprehensive View of War and Peace.'' Speaking softly, he opened with a
challenge.

''You are,'' he said, ''ignorant of your country's aggressive past. You are not
responsible for that ignorance, because you have been forced to be that way. But
if you are to have a true concept of peace, you need a historical context.''

An unrelenting two-hour discourse on the bellicose instincts of the Japanese
nation in the 20th century followed. With quiet intensity, Professor Kobayashi
spoke of Hiroshima, with its military port of Ujina, which became the chief
military depot for the invasions of China in 1894 and 1931; of the victory over
Russia in 1904 and 1905 that validated Japanese imperialism in Korea and
originated the prejudice against Korean people by the Japanese, which endures
today; and of the atrocity at Nanjing in 1937 that showed the Japanese potential
for barbarism.

In a hushed classroom, Professor Kobayashi drew his conclusion: ''It is said
that over 200,000 people were killed in the atomic-bomb attacks on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. . . . But this tragedy of Hiroshima happened as a natural course of
events. From 1931 to 1945, we Japanese killed more than 10 million Chinese, the
majority civilians. Have you heard about that?

''Some say, 'But that was different. Chinese are different from us.' Even some
survivors of the atomic bomb here sometimes say that. Of course, atomic bombings
can not be countenanced. But there was a reason. Japanese were the aggressors,
and so it was inevitable that they would end up as victims.''

At the end of two hours, two graduate students, both of whom had been born in
the 1960's, when Japan's era of economic growth took off, approached the front
of the classroom to discuss their trip to Nanjing the year before with Professor
Kobayashi. The first student spoke softly of walking along a road near a site
where reportedly 10,000 Chinese had been slaughtered by Japanese soldiers. The
area had recently been excavated and human bones were clearly visible. As he
spoke of his shame, the youth's voice cracked, and he concluded quickly with the
hope that the students in the class could see this for themselves.

The professor was not surprised by the young man's reaction.

''When I take students to China . . . students who were brought up in
affluence,'' Kobayashi said, ''who have never seen poverty anywhere and don't
know it exists, who have lived entirely in a peaceful Japan, they go through
culture shock. This is what I can do as an individual. All educators must share
this kind of mission, for if this present trend of beautifying the seamy side of
our history continues, history could repeat itself.''

T HERE IS A SENSE now that Japan has arrived at a historical bench mark, at
which economic power alone begins to seem hollow. Concerns about the ''Japanese
soul'' are moving to the fore. For the first time in 40 years, basic
institutions are being questioned; among them, education is one of the most
hotly debated.

Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone has declared that the postwar era of Japanese
history is now at an end. Forty years after Japan's humiliation, a new era,
unassociated with that humiliation, must begin. All institutions, especially
those imposed upon Japan after its defeat, must now undergo a ''total
re-evaluation.'' Using accountants' parlance, he asserts that it is time ''to
settle accounts'' and ''to close the books.''

A new educational system must match the social changes and the cultural
developments of the last 40 years. To that end, he has formed the Provisional
Council on Educational Reform. From its early draft proposals, the commission
-whose members are, for the most part, conservative and nationalistic - is
clearly looking for ways to strengthen traditional values and moral education.

But all this talk of new societies, of reviving traditional values, of
reinforcing moral education, make some Japanese nervous indeed. It is, they say,
merely a code for reviving prewar imperial values: what Nakasone is really up to
is a master plan for the remilitarization of Japan; for scrapping the peace
constitution with its total renunciation of war; for teaching a patriotism that
is dangerous.

The controversial novelist Kenzaburo Oe feels, for example, that talk of a new
era is nothing short of an attempt to nullify the lessons of World War II and to
undermine the unique Japanese vision, molded in the ashes of defeat. That vision
was of a world without nuclear weapons, in which Japan would be the world's
spiritual leader. For Oe, whose work examines the spiritual emptiness of a
nation fixated upon material wealth, the authenticity of Japan's spiritual
leadership is rooted not only in the wretchedness of a nuclear holocaust, but
also in the honest acknowledgment of the Nanjing massacre as a poisonous seed.

The official visit of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone in August to the Yasukuni
Shrine for the Japanese who died in World War II only served to exacerbate fears
of a new militarism and a state Shintoism. Although the Prime Minister tried to
put the worries to rest, the symbolic move aroused condemnation at home and
abroad. In its first official reaction, China attacked the visit, contending
that it ''pandered to and has actually emboldened those in Japan who have always
wanted to deny the aggressive nature of the war and to reverse the verdict on
Japanese militarism long condemned to the dustbin of history.'' Then, in
September, on the anniversary of the Mukden incident in 1931 that led to the
Japanese invasion of Manchuria, more than 1,000 students marched in Peking,
shouting anti-Japanese slogans and protesting Nakasone's visit to the shrine.
Again, the Japanese seemed to be caught out at the virulence of the reaction.
Just this month, bowing to Chinese sentiment, Nakasone canceled his intended
second visit to the Yasukuni Shrine. Nonetheless, two weeks ago, the topic of a
revival of militarism arose at talks between the Foreign Minister of Japan,
Shintaro Abe, and the Foreign Minister of China, Wu Xueqian.

Americans might take offense at Nakasone's official homage as well. In a
prominent place at the Yasukuni Shrine, a letter from a 15-year-old Okinawa boy
is displayed. He was embroiled in the battle for Okinawa - one of the bloodiest
of World War II - in which 12,000 American soldiers died. ''I wear the uniform
of the Iron Blood Imperial Corps to demolish the United States and Great
Britain,'' the letter, in graceful calligraphy, reads. ''There will come a time
when Okinawa sees victory.''

Three years ago, worries about militarism surfaced in Japan in a curious way.
Over a period of four months, torrid headlines charged that the Ministry of
Education was out to ''water down,'' ''prettify,'' ''sanitize'' or otherwise
ignore the unpleasant facts of modern Japanese history. Extraordinarily, the
controversy became a serious diplomatic flap, when China and Korea leaped in
with emotional official protests.

At issue was a pattern of textbook revisions that made historical embarrassments
more palatable. In Japan, the education ministry validates all textbooks for use
in elementary and secondary schools. It is called the authorization procedure,
and is justified on the notion of insuring a standard level of excellence in the
schools.

Authorization systems of this sort are scarcely unheard of in democratic
countries. In Germany, the 11 states approve school texts, and each state has
specific guidelines for sensitive subjects, such as how to deal with the Third
Reich. In France, the Ministere de l'Education Nationale decides what French
schoolchildren should be taught about the French debacle in the Algerian war and
the weak resistance during the Nazi occupation. An old saw about French
education holds that at any given minute in the school year one can know the
precise page of the precise textbook that every sixth grader in France is
studying.

The Japanese position that its own authorization system has only to do with
standards of excellence foundered, however, when, in 1982, it came to light that
the newly authorized high-school textbooks used semantics to obscure painful
historical memories. Just as the United States' invasion of Cambodia was
presented as an ''incursion'' and the invasion of Grenada was painted as a
''rescue mission,'' so the Japanese invasion of China in 1931 had been recast as
an ''advance.'' Still worse, the Nanjing massacre of 1937 had become an episode
of ''mob confusion,'' during which ''innumerable civilians and soldiers were
killed'' -no mention by whom, no mention that fatalities numbered between
200,000 and 300,000. The Chinese Government was outraged, and the official
Peking Review charged that, in distorting historical facts, the education
ministry sought to ''obliterate from the memory of Japan's younger generation
the history of Japan's aggression against China and other Asian countries so as
to lay the basis for reviving militarism.''

In Korea, where Japan tried systematically for 40 years to merge the Korean
identity into the Japanese empire, the Government was livid at the new
''updating'' of history. Not only had the annexation of Korea in 1910 become an
''advance'' of Japanese forces, but the March 1 uprising of Korean resisters in
1919 had become a ''riot.'' The outlawing of the Korean language became
''education in the Japanese language.'' Koreans were ''conscripted'' rather than
forcibly impressed into service. Prayer to the Japanese spirits at Shinto
shrines was ''encouraged,'' not required. The last Korean king simply
''resigned.'' No mention was made of the fact that during World War II young
Korean girls from the countryside were forcibly packed off to the front lines to
serve as ''wartime ladies of consolation'' for Japanese troops.

Within the conservative education ministry, there was consternation at the
virulence of the official Chinese and Korean protests. Privately, the intrusion
from abroad was deeply resented: ''How would you feel if another country
complained officially that the teaching of Pearl Harbor in your schools was
inaccurate and provocative?'' asked Teiichi Sato, until recently the head of the
textbook division at the ministry.

But diplomacy takes precedence over education and, because both China and Korea
made Japan's remorse about the past a ''principle of major importance'' in
diplomatic relations, Japan capitulated. Good relations with her two neighbors
are just too important for the future. The Japanese promised to reinstate the
words ''aggression'' and ''invasion'' to its future history texts.

Japan also promised to rectify 14 of the 19 changes demanded by Korea. (As yet,
it has not agreed to deal with ''wartime ladies of consolation.'') The tone of
national regret was evident in a note to the Korean Government. Acknowledging
''the great pain'' Japan had inflicted on Asian peoples, the Government pledged
itself ''not to repeat such past deeds.''

Today, resentment over the meddling from abroad lingers at the education
ministry.

''We are in transition, trying to go beyond the psychology of the postwar era,''
said Isao Amagi, formerly the vice minister of education. ''The American
attitude after the war was that everything before the war was wrong. After the
war, we were cut off from the past. We cannot deny history, good or bad. But we
have a long history on our back. While we must be aware that the Chinese and
Korean people still hold anti-Japanese feelings, we don't want to exaggerate
past bad events.'' Akio Nakajima, the senior division chief in charge of
textbooks for elementary and secondary education, was more blunt: ''For 30
years, we have criticized ourselves severely. This should pass. There is no need
for continuous cleansing now. We must see history from a more neutral point of
view.''

In searching for a ''neutral point of view,'' Nakajima and others at the
education ministry are struggling with the subtle problems of the defeated
nation, while they try to find the right emphasis for certain historical
embarrassments.

Clearly, education must avoid propagandizing, which was so evident in imperial
Japan. Then, education was a tool of indoctrination. History textbooks for
children began with the divine origins of the Emperor at Ise, and every school
had a copy of the Imperial Rescript on Education, defining the virtues of the
good Japanese citizen: filial piety, affection for friends, love of parents,
respect for elders and obedience to the Emperor. Regularly, the Imperial
Rescript was read at school functions; once, when it was misread, the bumbling
principal committed suicide to atone.

After World War II, American occupation authorities censored Japanese school
books, blacking out whole sec-tions of text. After the occupation, new texts
rarely referred to the Emperor, and the Russo-Japanese War was described in a
paragraph. In that lesson, the picture of a victorious Japanese admiral outside
Port Arthur was replaced with a photo of President Theodore Roosevelt
adjudicating the 1905 Treaty of Portsmouth between Russia and Japan in New
Hampshire.

In effect, Japan was cut off from its cultural heritage. Historical heroes
vanished from the texts, and the pendulum swung toward a ''scientific'' approach
to history, one not so very different from the new genre in this country called
''Vietnam revisionism.'' Social structures and economic forces, rather than the
acts of individual men, were said to move history. But, in the opinion of many
educators, the pendulum swung too far. Now the problem of the education ministry
is to find the correct median point between imperial propaganda and the
influences of American conquerors. It is trying to rehumanize Japanese history.
''We need more heroes now, not just political and wartime heroes, but cultural
heroes,'' said Isao Amagi. ''We must teach young people what those heroes did
and how they served the nation.''

What about historical villains? Upon this tender point, it is very hard to get
any forthright opinion at all, much less a consensus. The prime candidate would
seem to be Gen. Hideki Tojo who, as the Japanese Prime Minister at the time of
Pearl Harbor, symbolizes to Americans the bushido spirit of Japanese military
fanaticism in World War II. But he is scarcely mentioned in the textbooks.
Masanori Komiya, a 19-year-old honors student at a superior Tokyo high school,
knew of Tojo only as ''a bad politician'' who failed to control the military.
When pressed for reasons for the war and for names of those who might be
accountable, he blurted out: ''We don't have anything inside of us that compels
us to ask our fathers why. Nothing to suggest blame or placing responsibility.''

In his inability to identify culprits, young Komiya was, to some extent,
exhibiting an essential Japanese trait. In a country long ruled by consensus and
factions, responsibility is seldom placed on individual leaders.

I was struck by this fact during an interview with Ryotaro Shiba, perhaps
Japan's best-known historical novelist, who is something of a cross between
Bruce Catton and Gore Vidal. Referring to Tojo as ''the midget who held the
magic stick of supreme military power,'' Shiba said: ''He was a ghost - or a
skeleton. It is a waste of time to look for answers in him. It is important to
try to define the magic that lay in the policies then, and to see how those
policies of collective leadership were executed.''

Japanese bridle at the association of Tojo with Hitler, for time has softened
the once-harsh attitude toward Tojo. (For years, Tojo was disdained and
ridiculed for his bungled attempt at suicide when American G.I.'s ar-rived at
his home to arrest him.) ''The Germans could blame everything on Hitler,'' said
Teiichi Sato. ''His discrimination policy was his own. In our case, leadership
was collective. Everyone has to bear the burden of the past.''

When everyone is guilty, individu-als are exonerated. Historically, the
acceptance of collective guilt took the form of a statement on Aug. 28, 1945, by
Prince Higashikuni, who was the Prime Minister of a caretaker Government for the
first two months after the war. Known as the ''confession of a hundred million
people,'' it implicated every Japanese citizen in the war and in the defeat.
Higashikuni felt that collective confession was the first step toward
reconstruction of Japan.

Some trace this unwillingness to consign political blame back to the imperial
system. Only the Emperor could declare war, thus the political leadership behind
him was absolved. And yet, in this, the 60th year of Emperor Hirohito's reign,
few are ready to castigate the kindly old man. Instead - again a matter of
emphasis - it has become a hallowed verity in Japan that the Emperor, not the
Americans, graciously ended the Pacific war by breaking a deadlock between the
fanatics and the doves in the war cabinet with his vote for the nation's
surrender.

Meanwhile, in Aichi prefecture, Gen. Hideki Tojo is buried alongside the six
other men executed by Americans as war criminals. The inscription on the
sepulcher reads: ''The Tomb of Seven Martyrs.''

Other potential villains are even less likely to be recognized: Nobusuke Kishi,
Tojo's minister of commerce and industry, who was tried as a Class A war
criminal and sentenced to three years in Sugamo Prison, is known as a leader of
the Reconstruction Era in Japan who signed the United States-Japan Security
Treaty. Between 1957 and 1960, he was Japan's Prime Minister. Today, the
89-year-old statesman wants to eliminate Article 9 from the Japanese
Constitution. That article renounces war as an instrument of national policy.
Old voices, even from the old militarist past, are still respected.

A T SOPHIA UNIVERSITY, Prof. Masao Kunihiro turned over his politics and
economics class to me, so that I might ask his students a few questions.

Virtually every student in the class of 200 said that he had been taught nothing
of Japanese history from 1930, or only the sketchiest details. The emphasis was
on ancient eras and the Middle Ages. By the time a teacher reached the Meiji
Era, which commenced in 1868, the pace of instruction started to pick up speed.
Many students told of their teachers' ''running out of time'' at the end of the
school year, just before reaching 1930, and of being instructed, if students
were interested, ''to read the rest of the book'' on their own. Not a single
student could remember having been asked a question relating to modern Japanese
history on the all-important college entrance examinations they had taken.

Thus, it became clear that all the questions about what cast to give events such
as the Nanjing massacre, Pearl Harbor, the invasion of China, the atomic bombs
and the colonization of Korea, are really moot. As a practical matter, history
from 1930 is simply not taught. Teachers consider the post-1930 period too
fraught with political awkwardness. Nor is there much interest in the 30's among
scholars in Japanese universities. (This contrasts sharply with Germany, where
scholarship on the 1920's and 30's is voluminous.) As a result, young Japanese
have virtually no notion of how Japan got into World War II, what major leaders
were responsible, or whether Japan's cause was righteous or immoral. The
cataclysm simply happened in the ''flow of history.'' It was something like a
typhoon, which could not have been stopped and for which no one, least of all
Emperor Hirohito, was held to be responsible.

One hears a great deal about Japanese ''peace education.'' But there is an irony
to this; the curriculum is superficial, inconsistently used and lacking in
grounding or follow-up. What instruction does exist emphasizes Japan as the
victim of the war. ''Peace education days'' are designated by the dates of
American attacks on Japanese areas: June 23 in Okinawa, the day the battles
ended there; May 29 in Yokohama, when the city received its most devastating
bombing; July 7 in Kofu, for the same reason, and, of course, Aug. 6 in
Hiroshima and Aug. 9 in Nagasaki.

In response to official pressure, the graphic detail with which the bombings at
Hiroshima and Nagaski were once described in school texts has been watered down
over the years. Recently, there has been a sharp decline in visits by
schoolchildren to the frightfully realistic Peace Memorial Museum in Hiroshima.
Such visits, students told me, are strongly discouraged now by high-school
administrators, who prefer instead that students visit Kyoto or Nara, the
graceful ancient capitals of Japan where an affluent young citizen can learn
lessons of Japan's culture and past. Atomic bombs are downbeat. ''The trend now
is to emphasize the upbeat side of our modernization,'' novelist Kenzaburo Oe
commented, ''Japanese are supposed to talk of Toyotas, not Toyota traffic.''

A current high-school text in wide use, written by three well-known Tokyo
University professors, devotes part of only one sentence to the nuclear events.
It reads: ''While the Japanese Government was trying to deal with the Potsdam
Declaration, on Aug. 6 in Hiroshima and Aug. 9 in Nagaski, the United Stated
dropped atomic bombs.'' There is nothing written about the special nature of the
devastation, and there is no picture. By contrast, a 1953 text contained a
bizarre Goya-esque painting of humans at the epicenter -next to copious details
of the holocaust.

The way in which textbooks handle the atomic blasts is at the heart of the case
of Prof. Saburo Ienaga. In 1963, Ienaga, professor emeritus of the Tokyo
University of Education, submitted a revised version of his Japanese history for
authorization to the education ministry. It was not approved. Of the 300
complaints leveled by the ministry, Ienaga considered two-thirds of them to be
political in nature. Two offending pictures dealt with Hiroshima -a mushroom
cloud and the demolished city. These, Ienaga was told, were ''too gloomy'' for
children. Another showed a war casualty with a gruesome artificial arm standing
next to a sign asking for donations. Underneath, the author's caption read: ''We
should never have this kind of victim in war again. That is why we have the
Peace Constitution.'' The ministry objected, said Ienaga, because the picture
was ''too cruel for children.''

In 1965, Ienaga sued the Government. Twenty years later, his case is still in
the courts. It is famous now in Japan, and behind the professor is a nationwide
organization that claims more than 20,000 adherents. Its purpose is to destroy
the authorization system. Of the controversial picture of the maimed casualty,
Ienaga commented: ''The education ministry camouflages its control with this
talk of what is suitable for children. Their objection to that picture is an
excuse. That picture is not cruel. I was restrained. I could have used other
pictures.''

Ienaga withdrew for a moment to his library and returned with a picture book,
opening it to a double-page spread depicting bodies strewn across a field after
the firebombing of Tokyo by United States planes, resembling somewhat the
photographs of My Lai:

''One picture of a maimed victim? Compared to the enormity of war, that one
picture is nothing.''

Often, throughout modern Japan, one feels a visceral revulsion of war, even
though there is no thorough understanding - or any widespread attempt to
understand - the causes of war. For the most part, one hears only: ''It must
never happen again.''

''That is the kind of promise my adolescent son would make,'' a social
psychologist at Keio University said. ''It is a promise made and quickly
forgotten.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister Nakasone (Matsumoto/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD AHEAD

BYLINE: By Thomas Morgan; Thomas Morgan is an assistant metropolitan editor of
The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5010 words


THE MEMORY OF the motel sign is still vivid despite the years. Neatly printed
black letters on white spelled a puzzling message for a young black boy from
suburban St. Louis traveling with his parents through sleepy Arkansas towns with
the rural charm of Norman Rockwell paintings.

The sign read: ''Whites Only.'' When the boy asked about it, his mother answered
resignedly, ''It means we can't stay there, son.''

Nearly 30 years have passed since I saw that sign and pondered its message. I
have grown and prospered because my father, a postal employee, and my mother, a
public-school teacher, sent me, like Moses through the bulrushes, to the shores
of new opportunity created by the civil-rights movement. I was one of two blacks
to integrate a suburban elementary school in 1958. Later, a white ninth-grade
English teacher encouraged me to become a journalist because she saw a spark of
writing talent.

After college, I served as an Air Force lieutenant and White House military
social aide under President Ford, which allowed me, in a position other than
that of a servant, to see the gracious pomp and ceremony surrounding the First
Family. In the late 1960's and early 70's, with the implementation of
affirmative-action programs, I was among those blacks who found entry-level jobs
in professions that, for the most part, had been closed to our parents.

Despite the advances in race relations that my life may exemplify and my close
friendships with several whites, I cannot in good conscience tell a Thomas
Morgan is an assistant metropolitan editor of The Times. young black child he
can succeed by merit alone. Nor could I tell a black child to expect, in
general, the same opportunities as whites, because prejudice, though waning,
lingers.

I still see the sign, ''Whites Only,'' but it is not hanging from some Southern
motel. The words ''Whites Only'' come to mind when I go as a journalist to
cocktail parties and other events where crucial contacts and decisions are being
made and I am the only black not serving the hors d'oeuvres. I see the sign when
I hear racially insensitive comments by white acquaintances who profess a
knowledge of black culture, love the 60's and the Motown sound and reject the
idea of discrimination, but who have no real black friends or who do not
socialize with blacks outside professional settings.

It is an enigma to me, a 34-year-old middle-class black man, because although I
have benefited from civil-rights advances and better relationships with whites
than my parents, the reality I see from my own experiences, and one that is
supported by recent surveys and polls, is that America remains a divided society
outside the office. This reality is even more difficult for young, middle-class,
professional blacks, who came of age in the 1960's and still feel racism of a
subtler nature both at work and in recent policy positions taken by the Federal
Government. Although a recent New York Times-CBS News poll shows that President
Reagan's approval rating among blacks has increased from 10 percent in 1982 to
28 percent this year, 60 percent of blacks still disapprove of his performance.

At social gatherings, church events and in the privacy of their own homes, black
parents are discussing a dilemma: How to explain discrimination to their
children, who have different racial experiences. Parents want to know how to
help them establish a black identity and pride while they are learning white
mainstream cultural values through the influences of television, popular music
and friendships with whites. These parents, many bet-ter educated and more
politically sophisticated than their parents, feel that they must prepare their
children, the next generation growing up in integrated environments, for
prejudice and teach them how to deal with it.

HIRLEY AND ANDREW CAR-ter were sitting in the bedroom of their sprawling home
several months ago when Ellis, their 17-year-old son, entered clearly troubled.

''He was apprehensive, he was confused and torn, and I remember feeling, 'Now
what?

What are we going to have to deal with now?' '' Mrs. Carter says.

The Carters live in a recent subdivision of wooden-frame, three-level homes in a
tree-shaded bedroom community of rolling hills in Rock Hill, S.C., about 20
miles south of Charlotte, N.C. Tricycles and toys dot the neatly kept lawns
where black and white children play together. The Carters have three sons, Neal,
4, Michael, 13, and Ellis, a senior at Northwestern High School. Both parents
serve as youth advisers at their church, New Mount Olivet African Methodist
Episcopal. At supper, family members hold hands and bow their heads as they
offer grace.

At age 42, Andrew Carter, his black hair flecked with gray, is a senior
industrial engineer for Rockwell International. Raised in Mobile, Ala., he was a
Marine navigator, flying more than 200 missions during a 10-month tour in
Vietnam before leaving the service with the rank of captain.

Mrs. Carter, 40, small and soft-spoken, has spent much of her working career as
a homemaker, although she has taught college psychology and high-school special
education locally. A graduate of Bennett College, a black women's school in
Greensboro, N.C., Mrs. Carter is the family's emotional bedrock.

The Carters say Ellis was upset because, earlier that day, he and another black
student who had announced their candidacy for student-council president had
learned that the requirements had changed: Unless they had served on a
junior-high council, which they had not, they would be ineligible to run.

''I remember him asking us, 'What do you think I should do?' '' Shirley Carter
says.

Andrew Carter, who met with the principal privately, says that after other black
parents also complained, school officials delayed implementation of the changes.

Ellis says, ''Since last year's president was a black woman, a lot of blacks
thought that the change was done to keep us out. I ran for senior-class
president instead and won.

''None of the students, black or white, could understand why the change came
about. The racial problem at school is not with the students, but the faculty
and adults. Students felt that the advisers made the change.''

Earl Lovelace, Northwestern's principal, says students, not school officials,
decide eligibility. ''I can't change the constitution of the student council
without it going to committee and then being voted on by the students,'' he
says.

Lovelace points out that although blacks make up only about 25 percent of the
student body, several have been elected council officers. ''I don't think
anything was decided on a racial basis,'' he says. ''Our relations here, I feel,
are excellent.'' Several weeks later, Ellis presented his parents with another
dilemma: An advanced chemistry class was overcrowded, and nine students would be
excluded. Ellis and the three other blacks registered for the class were among
the nine.

''He approached us, and he said, 'I think this might be racial,' '' Mrs. Carter
recalls. ''There is no proof that this was, in fact, racial discrimination. We
don't know who made up the list or that it was a deliberate attempt to exclude
blacks. I get the feeling that the whole thing was just handled poorly.''

After several parents complained, all of the students were allowed to take
chemistry. In explaining the incident, Lovelace says school officials merely
looked at numbers, not the names of people signed up.

Ellis, a deliberate speaker with his mother's shy smile, says that his
junior-year social-studies class discussed civil rights and its impact. Most
students, including himself, decided that the civil-rights movement had improved
society.

Yet, in the murky twilight between childhood and manhood, Ellis is groping to
understand the world, people's actions and motivations. ''I have problems with
my friends because my black friends sometimes don't like me spending time with
my white friends, and my white friends don't feel comfortable around my black
friends,'' he says. ''I feel like I have to straddle two worlds sometimes.

''Last year, the student-council president, who was black, wanted to set aside a
day to honor Martin Luther King. A lot of blacks said it was a good thing to do,
but a lot of whites said it was a waste of time and was not fair. A lot of
whites don't know about famous black people.

''I felt hurt that they would accept me as a black person but would not accept
the idea of honoring a black person,'' Ellis says. ''One of my white friends
said, 'I don't see you as a black friend, but as a friend.' But I want them to
look at me for what I am. I am a black person.''

Although Ellis understands that prejudice occurs, he says he feels that his
parents see more of it than he does. Both he and Michael, who wants to be an
astronaut, believe their parents are making too much of the race issue.

The Carters, thinking of the future, worry that their teen-age sons are naive
and may be ill-equipped to handle racism when it confronts them. Ellis began to
ask questions about racism only last year, and they were grateful they could
discuss relevant issues before he left home for college.

''Twenty years ago, the signs of racial discrimination were clear,'' says Andrew
Carter, ''and you knew they were there and you knew what they were. Now, our
kids are dealing with subtleties.''

Shirley Carter says, ''It's difficult for us to explain these things because the
subtleties are not always clear to us.''

''We worry all the time about what they might face, and whether we, as parents,
have prepared them properly,'' Carter says. ''It's unrealistic for us to have
them think that things are going to be rosy.'' R. JAMES P. COMER, Maurice Falk
Professor of Child Psychiatry at Yale University Child Study Center, says that
he co-authored a book, ''Black Child Care,'' with Dr. Alvin F. Poussaint of
Harvard University in 1975 because he had received repeated requests for advice
from black parents. ''I did it,'' he says, ''because I was dealing with so many
parents at cocktail parties who asked me questions like, 'The kid comes home and
says, ''I wish I was white.'' ' Or, 'He comes home and says, ''The white kids
called me names.'' '

''It's hard to go around dealing with the race problem all the time. Some
parents don't want to. The world tells you there is no race problem, the
President tells you the same thing and says that black civil-rights leaders only
want to keep their jobs. Schools don't talk about it, and for all different
reasons, white school- teachers say that discussing the issue is too painful for
them.

''I was a grown man before I could handle matters of race without consuming a
large amount of energy,'' Dr. Comer says. ''Much of it was frustration and anger
about the whole racial situation.

''I realized that was hurting me, and as a consequence of that I really began to
think about how that is a problem for blacks in general. The amount of energy
consumed and the distraction that racial prejudice presents are enormous.''

Dr. Deborah Prothrow Stith, a 31-year-old Harvard-trained Boston internist
specializing in adolescent medicine, and her husband, the Rev. Charles R. Stith,
pastor of the interracial 500-member Union United Methodist Church in Boston's
South End, are raising three children. Both grew up in the South and met while
he was at Atlanta's Interdenominational Theological Center and she at nearby
Spelman College.

''I lived in black Atlanta,'' says Dr. Stith. ''My parents went to a black
college. Their friends were black. My father worked for a black company, and his
boss was black. And when I went to the white high school in eighth grade, it was
not on the level of 'Let's go be friends with these people.' It was on the level
of 'We've got to show them that black folks can be as good as, if not better
than, they are.' It was a totally different dynamic.''

Dr. Stith, who lives in Roxbury, a black community in Boston, says she asked her
7-year-old son, Percy, when he was 5 who his best friend was. ''He said, 'Evan,'
his friend at school, Evan Pressman,'' says Dr. Stith, who also has a 3-year-old
daughter, Mary Mildred (Mimi). ''I said, 'But Percy, Evan's white.' Percy said,
'So what?' And I thought for a moment and said, 'Percy, you're right. So what?'
''

''It really struck me because when I was 5 years old, I didn't have a white best
friend,'' she says.

James (Trey) Edmondson, 15, the Stith's nephew and ward, listens to his aunt
with an expression of amusement. Later, he says he has heard this all before. A
sophomore at Boston Latin School, a distinguished preparatory institution, Trey
says he has not encountered any racist situations at school. He dismisses racial
epithets he has heard as jokes blacks tell about whites and whites tell about
blacks.

''Older people talk too much about discrimination,'' observes Trey, shifting
uncomfortably in an overstuffed chair in the Stith living room. ''They talk so
much about it because of their past experiences. I haven't seen any racial
situations.''

''But what about the play, Trey?'' Dr. Stith asks.

''Oh yeah, the play,'' he says, his puzzled frown turning into a smile of
recognition. ''About two years ago, at the William Monroe Trotter school, there
was a play, a school production, 'The Wizard of Oz.' None of the black kids had
any of the major roles. The black kids played the role of monkeys, without
masks. Only one white kid played a monkey, and he had a gorilla mask on.''

Dr. Stith, who had taken Trey and Percy to the play, says she was livid and
later wrote to school officials and a local newspaper protesting the casting of
black children as evil characters or monkeys. She used the incident to teach
Trey about discrimination. But even now Trey seems unperturbed.

His reaction reminded me of a personal incident that had occurred years ago. I
had been chosen to play the role of Ali Hakim, the Persian peddler, in my
high-school production of ''Oklahoma!'' I was the only black in the play. During
a rehearsal, the choral director made a slight change in the script, which calls
for Ali to kiss one of the leading ladies. I would kiss only her hand.

I remember being bothered that I wouldn't get to kiss a girl as some of my male
friends in the cast would, but I simply dismissed the matter. A few years later,
as I thought about the racial implications of that slight change, I became
angry. It was one of several such occurrences I never told my parents.

''We tried to shield you from prejudice, but when you integrated your elementary
school as a 7-year-old, you went through stress that we never really
understood,'' recalls my mother, Loris Willis Morgan. ''You developed a stutter,
I think because of it.

''One day, when you were little, you came home and wanted to know why your hair
was curly. You never thought those things before you went to the white school. I
said, 'Tommy, you are black. People are different.' You said, 'I don't
understand, I don't want to be different,' and you cried.

''Another time, when the television program 'Bat Masterson' was popular, you had
a Bat Masterson T-shirt, and you loved to wear it,'' says my mother. ''One
morning, I put it on your bed with the other clothes you were to wear, and you
said you didn't want to wear it anymore. You said the children said there was no
such thing as a black Bat Masterson, and you refused to wear it. I wanted to go
to that school and tear it up.

''I had to be very careful not to show you all the resentment I have for white
people. I do not trust them. I think many of them have false faces, and while I
know that there are good white people in the world and I know you have white
friends, I believe that if it comes down to a white having to make a decision on
whether to give something to a white or a black, the white will always get it.''

As I grew up, my mother's expressive anger was often balanced by my father's
calm and by his experience working and socializing with whites as a young man.
When a high-school counselor told me I would never be elected student-council
president because the school was not ready for a black in that office, I told my
father that I would run for vice president only. ''Never aim for second place,''
he replied.

''I don't think children should be taught differences in people,'' my father
said recently. ''They should be taught to take advantage of opportunities. When
you were born, I knew that your options would be better than mine, and I never
thought you had to be limited to any one type of life, or think of racial
limitations. If I could go back in time, I would tell you the same thing. Only I
would be more alert to what was happening to you at school.''

F OR SOME BLACK parents, the irony is all too evident. The dream of the 1960's
civil-rights effort was for equal access to better housing and schools. But few
thought then that the price of integration might be a denial or dissipation of
the rich diversity and special qualities ethnicity brings to society. Not many
paused to think that the cost of social assimilation might be a loss of
identity.

Recently, Jane and Tom Edwards of West Haven, Conn., ''strongly encouraged''
their only child, Keira, 14, to change from a predominantly white school to one
with a 40 percent black enrollment. Both of the Edwards were raised in
integrated New Haven neighborhoods when integration was still a social
experiment elsewhere. They grew up and went to school with whites and have white
friends.

Keira, articulate with a quick, charming smile, has visibly accepted mainstream
teen-age culture. She likes white as well as black musicians, wears Madonna-like
jewelry, peg-legged pants and Day-Glo colors.

''Here, Keira is in a predominantly white neighborhood,'' says Mrs. Edwards, a
cost-containment specialist for Blue Cross and Blue Shield. ''I began to fear
that she would get hurt by white people in general. Several years ago, I had to
force her to make friends with black kids.''

Listening to her mother, Keira is clearly embarrassed and denies ever having
trouble making friends with blacks. Yet she notes, as Ellis Carter did, that it
is sometimes difficult to chart a course between black friends and white ones.

''For a while, I was afraid that black kids would not accept me because I talk
like the white kids,'' she says. ''But now, some of my black friends who live
nearby talk like my white friends.''

Tom Edwards, a tall, lanky 41-year-old who until recently worked for a
minority-owned oil company and is now looking for a new job, says that ''our
example, from high-school experience, is that we would have white friends in
high school, but after that, we see them on the street and they would not speak.
They might not even look in our direction.''

Edwards has told his daughter that her white friends may desert her at some
point. ''It would be almost awkward to try to establish black friendships later
on.''

M ANY BLACKS PER-ceive the 1980's as a reversal of the economic and social gains
of the last two decades. The Reagan Administration's shake-up of the Civil
Rights Commission, its opposition to extending the Voting Rights Act and its
legal challenges to affirmative-action programs have antagonized many blacks.
And Tom Smith, senior study director at the National Opinion Research Center at
the University of Chicago, says that general social surveys conducted by the
center from 1972 to 1984 show that blacks rank lower on general happiness tables
than whites, and higher on social alienation.

Several blacks I interviewed said they fear their children may be naive,
unsuspecting and lacking a historical perspective of race relations necessary to
adapt to the future. At the same time, many are starting to come to terms with
integration's impact on their children and how it has eroded the cultural
cohesion that segregation enforced on the black community.

Today, black parents must accept a vital role in passing on a cultural history.
They have belatedly discovered that they cannot live in integrated
neighborhoods, send their children to integrated schools and expect them to have
a strong ethnic awareness without parental guidance. At the same time, white
parents, regardless of their ethnic backgrounds, also have a responsibility to
explain how different cultures, like colorful threads, contribute to the weave
of American life.

Black parents may have a considerable amount in common with some Jewish parents.
Many Jews tell their children about the centuries of persecution and oppression,
about the Nazi Holocaust, hoping their children will remember and remain wary.

''The more oppressed a group is, and blacks and Jews have certainly faced
oppression and racism, there is a cultural memory that exists even if you have
not experienced racism,'' says Joseph Giordano, director of the Center on
Ethnicity, Behavior and Communications for the American Jewish Committee in New
York. Experiencing racism, he says, ''influences how you feel about yourself and
how you feel about others.

''When a hijacked plane was flown to Beirut and passengers with Jewish-sounding
names were taken off, anything like that which happens in the context of society
at large reminds Jews of who and what they are. The question is, 'What do people
do with it?'

''If we strengthen kids in ethnic backgrounds,'' Giordano says, ''they are more
likely to accept differences, more fortified with the strength of knowing who
they are. Discrimination comes out of fear, and a lot of it comes from
projection.''

T HE BLACK PAR-ents I interviewed are basing the advice they give their children
not on statistics, which show that blacks in general are not keeping pace
economically with the white population, but rather on their perceptions of what
is happening around them.

Charles Stith, who is also president of the Organization for a New Equality, an
interracial Boston-based national civic organization, tells Percy and Trey that
''in a society that is still race-conscious, black folks should be inculcated
with a sense of self-esteem - that is a statement against discrimination.

''I tell the boys they are as good as anybody else, that they have a
responsibility to help those who do not have the opportunities and options that
they have, and that they really have to deal with people on the basis of their
humanity, and that includes white people.''

In sharp contrast to the vivacious and feisty manner of his wife, Charles Stith
is controlled. His advice reflects his active involvement in trying to improve
troubled relations between Boston's whites and blacks.

Raised in St. Louis, Stith says his earlier experiences influence his thinking
about race. ''My mother was very explicit about the race thing,'' Stith says.
''She said, 'I expect you all to marry black women.' Her position had nothing to
do with white folks being less than us, or our ability to deal with anyone's
humanity. Her position was, 'I'm not going to work this hard to put you through
school and do all that and not have you keep these things within the race.'

''Some of the stuff that comes down now is not racist, but part of that
dog-eat-dog ethic. It requires different strategies. And if the situation you
are dealing with is the corporate dog-eat-dog thing and you go into your race
thing, it's just not appropriate.''

M ENTAL-HEALTH PROFES-sionals and educators say they know of black parents who,
in the 1970's, believed that affirmative action and desegregation had removed
the need to prepare their children for discrimination. ''Some of them thought
that things had changed so dramatically that what was left was simply a class
struggle,'' Dr. Comer says. ''Many of their kids went off to college and were
confronted with racial situations that they weren't ready to deal with. Some
could. Others went into the real world of work and found limitations that they
hadn't anticipated.

''The effects ranged from being seriously and psychologically traumatized to
being able to make adjustments and coping with the problems,'' Dr. Comer says.
''Some of them who had those problems are parents now and are joining black
churches and social clubs so that their kids can interact with other blacks of
similar backgrounds, and most of them do that without becoming antagonistic
toward whites.''

James Hunter and Stacey Branch, 19-year-old students at Columbia University,
have joined the Black Student Organization to connect socially on a campus that
is overwhelmingly white. Both say they wish their parents had prepared them
better.

Hunter, who is taking premedical courses, moved with his family to Harvey, Ill.,
a Chicago suburb, when he was 9 years old. His family was the first black one on
the block. Within two years, only one white family remained, he says. His father
was an assembly-line worker at a Ford Motor plant, and his mother was a
homemaker. Hunter, who always had dreams of going to college, was bright and
went to honor classes in high school. Often, he was the only black in the class.
Other blacks told him they didn't want to be in a predominantly white class.

''I never got to really know white people until I got to know a guy named Dino,
who was 16 when I was 13,'' Hunter says. ''He would play baseball with the
neighborhood guys. The difference was that Dino tried to get to know us.

''Then I went to high school and found white kids were not interested in getting
to know me. On a personal level, they seemed nice, showed some interest, but on
a public level, they acted like they barely knew me. I felt like a commodity. I
felt that I could not trust them. They were not the same to me in all
situations.''

His Columbia experience has been similar, although he says he sometimes
socializes with whites. For the most part, he depends on his black friends for
support. ''I still see whites as people, but their attitudes toward others are
different,'' he says. ''They sometimes act like they are superior. They tell
black jokes, they rub my hair and say, 'You could clean a pot with that.' But
I've learned to demand respect.

''If I had children, I would tell them to expect a level of racism, but to try
to stay pleasant. Whites have access to information, and you have to be able to
get along with them to get it.''

Stacey Branch, a native of West Philadelphia, Pa., is studying economics. After
three years of public school and at her mother's prompting, she applied for and
won a scholarship to The Shipley School, a private school in Bryn Mawr. She
doesn't remember feeling racial discrimination as a youngster, although she says
her white friends stopped inviting her to their homes around the time they
started dating.

Because she commuted to school every day and returned nightly to the realities
of her working-class black neighborhood, the differences between white
neighborhoods and blacks ones were stark. Yet racial issues were seldom
discussed in her family, she says. Neither her mother, who works as a safety and
health specialist for the Federal Government, nor her grandmother ever raised
the issue. Her father died when she was very young.

''When I came to Columbia, I sought out black people,'' she says. ''I needed to
be around them to see what they knew. I was taught very little about black
people in high school. I knew nothing about the civil-rights movement. What I
know now is based on my own research or by talking to people I've met here.

''I would hope that once I have a family, I would be able to tell my children
exactly what I have experienced. I'm not sure whether I would want them to go to
a predominantly white college. I don't know yet. But I would definitely make
them much more aware of race at a younger age.

''Knowing something about race earlier would have made me a little more
confident about being black,'' she says, ''and a little more willing to bring up
my own personal experiences in classes in high school and making them more aware
of black experiences. I think that when you are in a white situation like that,
you should not only be learning their culture, but they should be learning yours
as well.''

Dr. William Julius Wilson, chairman of the department of sociology at the
University of Chicago and author of ''The Declining Significance of Race,'' says
black parents should make every effort to have their children make contacts with
a variety of people, including whites, and not retreat to the black subculture.

''If you go to any high school or college, you'll see the black students in one
corner and the whites in another,'' he says. ''The more isolated people are, the
more likely they are to define issues in racial terms. Children, and people in
general, need to understand that racial prejudice is situational: If you
understand the circumstances in which prejudice exists, you can understand
prejudice better. I find that there is little basis for the idea that blacks
lose their identity if they become involved with whites and white
organizations,''

In spite of Percy Stith's friendship with Evan Pressman, his mother believes her
son will eventually face racism. ''My biggest worry is that he will internalize
other people's low expectations of him,'' Dr. Stith says. ''I always had black
teachers who were supportive. When I got to Spelman, they were very clear about
this: All you had to do was make a couple of A's, and they said, 'Let's grab
her, she's got some talent. What do you want to do? Be a doctor? Let's try to
get her into Harvard.'

''We're telling our kids to deal with people as humans, that things are not
always cut and dry,'' Dr. Stith says. ''So much of what black kids see today
that is new or good or takes money is all white and when they go into the black
community, they see trash and things not looking as well. We've got to figure
out how to help them feel good about being black and yet deal with white folks
on a human level and go beyond that to a world that's inclusive. That's scary,
because there is a part of me that says I still can't trust white folks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAKING THE BEST OF IT

BYLINE: By Anthony Austin; Anthony Austin is a former editor and Moscow
correspondent for The Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 629 words


SHARED DESTINY Fifty Years of Soviet-American Relations. Edited by Mark Garrison
and Abbott Gleason. 167 pp. Boston: Beacon Press. $16.95.

BEFORE their summit meeting next month, the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev,
and President Reagan could do worse than to read ''Shared Destiny: Fifty Years
of Soviet-American Relations.'' This slim collection of essays, edited by Mark
Garrison and Abbott Gleason, comes as a shaft of light - and no wonder,
considering the caliber of the contributors.

George F. Kennan, the former American Ambassador to the Soviet Union, provides a
bittersweet memoir of what it was like during the initial exchange of diplomatic
missions between the two Governments a half-century ago. He writes with feeling
of the hopes that foundered so quickly on intractable political and cultural
differences - and of his realization that Russia's leaders, like ours, are
flesh-and-blood people trying to make the best of the circumstances into which
they were born.

Mr. Gleason, a professor of history at Brown University, traces these
differences to the 19th century - and finds them to be a product of the profound
insularity of both societies. What Americans have yet to learn, he says, is that
other nations can have cultures unlike ours and still not be our enemies.

Alexander Dallin, a professor of history and political science at Stanford
University, explores the irrational fear of Communism that leads Americans to
squander their resources in pursuit of unattainable ends.

John Lewis Gaddis, a professor of history at the University of Ohio, says there
is nothing uniquely Communist about Moscow's tendency to expand its influence at
others' expense - it is the classic result of great power wedded to great
insecurity, a combination treated in Thucydides' ''Peloponnesian War'' 2,400
years ago. To resist requires firmness, flexibility, consistency and civility,
Mr. Gaddis says, finding American policy lacking in some of these attributes.

Adam B. Ulam, the director of Harvard University's Russian Research Center,
provides case studies of American misreadings of the Soviet mind. For instance,
if we had known how deeply the Soviet Union and China were at odds by the end of
the 1950's, there would have been a better chance of America's refraining from
massive intervention in Vietnam.

Robert Dallek, a professor of history at the University of California, Los
Angeles, argues that the American disposition to see a Communist ogre intent on
destroying the American way of life says more about our uncertainty over the
durability of our institutions than about the realities of Soviet aims and
power. More than that, he contends, anti-Soviet evangelism like President
Reagan's is fundamentally a symbolic protest against welfare-state trends here
at home. H ANS ROGGER, who also teaches history at U.C.L.A., makes clear that
the spirit of incomprehension and ethnocentrism dwells on the Russian side too.

And Mr. Garrison, the director of Brown University's Center for Foreign Policy
Development, points out that because of the nuclear threat, the Soviet Union and
the United States are prisoners of each other's history and culture. ''For
thirty-eight of the first fifty years of formal relations,'' he writes, ''we
dealt with each other in the shadow of the bomb, but it cannot be said that we
have brought increasing wisdom to the task. On the contrary, both sides have
avoided facing up to the consequences of having created a machine which can
destroy, quickly and completely, everything we value.''

He warns that both the Russians and the Americans will have to attain a better
understanding of the reasons for their mistakes, particularly as they affect the
nuclear arms race, if their shared destiny is not to be oblivion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photoo f the Soveit Leader Leonid Brezhnev and President Richard Nixon
in 1972

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FORMALLY AND PASSIONATELY YOURS

BYLINE: By Geoffrey Wolff; Geoffrey Wolff's ''Black Sun'' has recently been
reissued. ''Providence,'' his fourth novel, will be published in February.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


DARLINGHISSIMA Letters to a Friend. By Janet Flanner. Edited and with commentary
by Natalia Danesi Murray. Illustrated. 507 pp. New York: Random House. $24.95.

TEN years ago this autumn, Janet Flanner, The

New Yorker's Genet, wrote her final ''Letter From Paris.'' Half a century of
them, regularly informed, various, passionate, curious, cosmopolitan, stately. I
wish I could claim to have read all her published letters that came my way; I'm
sure I'd have been the wiser for reading them. Like many Americans, I'm
star-struck by the glamour (bogus or authentic) of Paris, but Flanner's appetite
(bless it) for matters French - politics, painting, music, flora, food,
architecture, the nation a to zed - could wear a reader down.

A final personal note (she despised the first person pronoun): when prizes began
to catch up with Flanner's journalism, I attended a New York ceremony honoring
her and other writers. Before this I had seen her on television talk shows
managing to seem at once majestic and resolutely minor (in her own estimation),
an actor in the best sense, playing a dignified and honorable version of
Civilized Woman, stern and persuasive, a scold to such mischiefs as Norman
Mailer and Gore Vidal, not without humor or proportion, and, incidentally,
dressed and coiffed to kill. But at that ceremony, from deep within circles of
well-wishers at Lincoln Center, I heard a laugh like no laugh I had heard. This
was a swell laugh, from the belly and heart, deep and uncalculated, and that was
Janet Flanner laughing.

That uninstitutional woman, having a blast at a fancy party, a friend to people
you'd like to have as friends . . . there was someone it should be good to know
from inside. This book is as far inside Janet Flanner's consciousness as any can
get, a collection of letters to her best and beloved friend, Natalia Danesi
Murray, with whom Janet Flanner shared what Mrs. Murray calls a ''passionate
friendship'' from 1940 until Flanner's death at 86 in 1978, three years after
her final Paris letter as Genet.

Ten years Flanner's junior, born in Rome, married to and divorced from an
American with whom she had a son, Natalia Murray was steadfast in her devotion
to Flanner, and her relentless affection was returned. There were hurdles: World
War II separated them (a division that provoked the beginnings of such a
monumental correspondence), and after the war, when Mrs. Murray lived first in
Rome and then in New York, Flanner's loyalty to her work (and shrewd sense that
a letter from Paris was the particular work chosen for her) kept the two apart.

Natalia Murray publishes only one side of the correspondence, providing
expository connections that range from the tautological (''The seasons succeeded
each other with regularity despite nature's capriciousness and violence'') to
the banal (''Nineteen sixty-eight turned out to be a bad year, even a shameful
one. The war in Vietnam escalated and spread to Cambodia'') to simple, grave
nobility. Her introduction explains why she has published these private letters,
''as a demonstration of how two women surmounted obstacles, trying to lead their
personal and professional lives with dignity and feeling. I hope that my
grandchildren, and other young men and women like them, born in a freer, more
liberated society, more knowledgeable about relationships between the sexes and
without the inhibitions or taboos of an earlier era, will understand and value
our experience and efforts to be, above all, decent human beings.''

Flanner had also been briefly married, but as she wrote in 1975, ''my emotional
push toward my lesbic ap-proach to all of life'' dominated her senses. ''How
strange that I was turned in that direction, the way the branch of a young tree
is turned and twisted without pressure from anything outside of its own
inclination, acting like a rope or a chain though none exists - no constraint,
no pressure from any element except the shaping of my erotic emotions within me
which were like an emotional nearness, constantly pressing me into the company
of some woman who excited and charmed me and when her influence waned, another
took her place. But it was always a woman, never a male.''

If there were storms of jealousy between Flanner and Mrs. Murray, the merest ebb
and flow of fidelity, nothing in these letters suggests it. The language is
formally passionate, never mean or diminishing. Love is frankly, relentlessly
avowed, at once from the heart and with the high rhetoric of a time now gone.

Mrs. Murray has chosen to publish, no doubt for their representative character,
passages that reflect well on her. Such apostrophes (''You are a superb,
civilized woman of wisdom, gravity and grace.'' ''I have never heard [Josette]
praise any friend of mine as she praised you. Josette talks of you with delight:
'She is so lovely to look at and listen to . . .' '') put their recipient and
editor in the unenviable position of collaborating in what must feel
uncomfortably like self-promotion.

Given Flanner's general good will and tolerance, her hospitality to the new, it
is unsettling to read her judgment that a French movie star ''looks so much like
a faggot,'' and that someone else has ''two fairy friends (very kind).'' In
fact, these letters now and then reveal a misanthrope, and more than seldom a
male-hater. (Any reviewer who has written more than a few letters he would as
soon never have written must experience complex sensations of kinship and
humility retailing another's lapses into vulgarity or bad will. Here, Flanner's
are rare, but strident.) After World War II Flanner visited and wrote from
Buchenwald, and the extreme passions excited in her by that experience and
France's misery following the war provoked her to indulge in generalizations
about males. (Her mind characteristically moves in these letters with reflexive
extrapolation from the particular.) ''Man is so wicked and cruel, so strong of
arm in torture, so violent of mind in his notions of improving the world that he
scatters blood like a fish leaping from a lake, merely in pleasure and strength.
I used to see the good things which men hoped for or wrote, and now I see more
clearly their evil and even in the good writings I see the evil in ink, like a
typographical error. I haven't the wisdom to know the real truth about anything,
and my half-minded, half-hearted sorties into facts, and then my insolently
sure-sounding reports on them are beginning to terrify me. Who dares tell the
truth, even the little he knows?''

The passage has a nervous wash of self-doubt, often melodramatic in expression,
extreme in anger and sorrow, that characterizes many of these letters. They
contrast with the healthy zest and vigorous serenity of her published
journalism, and seem often inexplicable, save by pathology. Of course the
realities Flanner deplores - cruelty, violence, ignorance, apartheid,
pornography - are reasonably to be deplored. That she divided herself from her
beloved by an ocean caused genuine pain. But there is a scale to the language of
suffering here that is out of measure. (''The only happiness I have had in two
years was in Rome with you.'' ''Yes, this is a bad life. Ours. I have influenced
you. Now you influence me. I am frightened. For I love you.'') This is, after
all, a woman who wrote exceedingly well for half a century. Who lived at the
Ritz Hotel. (Does it betray a reviewer's crass envy to avow that a room at the
Ritz would make him happy?) This was arguably the most sought-after American in
Paris after the death of Gertrude Stein. This was a woman of wit, dressed to the
teeth, fond of food and wine. Hers wasn't a bad life. As a child in
Indianapolis, she had wanted to be a railway conductor. How could someone who
wanted to be a railway conductor, who grew up able to ride a train anytime,
anywhere, feel so sad?

There are more than a few allusions here to nervous exhaustion, and love - even
so patiently requited - exacts a heavy toll from some lovers. Finally, to remark
that the toll was for her unreasonably heavy is to remark something
uninteresting, just another injustice among the serial injustices that mar any
life.

Even her professional history, so sunny to an outsider, was shadowed by doubt
and disappointment, of course. Flanner noted in a letter written during the
Vietnam War that ''it is strange to be a woman and so little part of the male
rule of the world.'' Many years earlier she had written Natalia Murray that she
wanted ''to write a piece, for my pleasure, about why women have been left out
of man's civilization. This will be a relief to my imagination, for usually I
report only the result, not the cause.''

As far as I know she never wrote such a piece, but it would have been something
to read, maybe as fired by intelligent passion as Virginia Woolf's ''Professions
for Women.'' Woolf writes of the ''Angel in the House,'' the domestic self she
put to death. Flanner also defied domesticity, taming impulses that threatened
her calling, but what resistance, other than self-made doubts, troubled her
work?

Her years with Harold Ross, the founding editor of The New Yorker, were mostly
untroubled. (They had a spat once about her expense account; he brought her home
to New York once to educate her about America; the consequences were mostly
comical.) Ross named her Genet, which was probably fake-French for Janet; he
never told her what he thought it meant. While The New Yorker's editors
ruthlessly trained out of her the oracular voice (not to mention the first
person singular), they were characteristically runic in their reactions to her
work, as she reports their responses. I N fact, the record shows she was loved
and supported handsomely by the magazine - if she sometimes felt bad about her
work (''I merely copy myself year after year in The New Yorker, getting better
with practice in copying me, but not expanding''), and sometimes good (''Have on
the whole written with authority, style and personality that makes me suddenly
all the more indignant that with all the prizes that float about in New York, I
was never awarded one for writing, as well as information, and record to you
that I deserve it'').

Soon the prizes came too, and they were indeed deserved, and made her laugh that
laugh I once heard, and want not to forget. It was a laugh she evidently laughed
long before she thought to wish for prizes for writing. I expected, beginning
these letters to someone loved, to hear more of that laughter. I wish more were
here, and do not pretend to understand why it is not. In 1944 she wrote Natalia
Murray: ''I have discovered that some people, in loneliness or sadness, flower,
become noble of speech, thought, and are generally improved; I have become not a
flower but a weed, have become sour, bitter, cross and the wrong sort of garden
growth of late.'' How painful, for one who took such joy from gardens. Because
she was smart, and because she was honest, Janet Flanner was the best judge of
her letters: ''My beloved, these are state papers we write each other, not love
letters, have you noticed?'' How fail to notice, alas!

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Janet Fanner and Natalia Danesi Murray

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HWO HISTORY SURPRISED US

BYLINE: By Donald S. Zagoria; Donald S. Zagoria teaches at Hunter College and is
a fellow at the Research Institute on International Change at Columbia
University. He is writing a book on Soviet-American rivalry in Asia.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words


THE AMERICAN OCCUPATION OF JAPAN The Origins of the Cold War in Asia. By Michael
Schaller. 351 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $22.50.

AS Michael Schaller recounts, two months before the end of the Pacific war, Asia
specialists from the State Department sent a long report to the War Department
full of foreboding about the future of the Far East. Japan, the report
predicted, would be reduced to a smoldering ruin and would have to be garrisoned
indefinitely by American troops. China, far from being President Roosevelt's
cherished ''policeman of Asia,'' would fall victim to civil war and possible
Soviet intervention. A wave of nationalism would sweep Southeast Asia and make
it difficult or impossible for the European powers to reimpose colonial rule.
Finally, a ''rising force'' of Soviet ideology throughout the Far East would
threaten to close the entire region to Western influence.

Much of what the State Department predicted did happen. To make matters worse,
by 1950 Chinese Communists took power in Peking and entered an alliance with
Russia, North Korea invaded South Korea, Southeast Asia was rife with armed
insurrection, and because Japan's natural trading area was now in turmoil, there
was widespread concern in the West that Soviet economic pressure alone might
ultimately bring a shattered Japan into the Soviet sphere, thus dramatically
altering the global balance of power.

Today, four decades later, the Asian-Pacific region is prosperous, generally
peaceful and basically pro-Western. The economic output of the Pacific region as
a whole now equals more than two-thirds of the total United States gross
national product, and our trade with East Asia exceeds our trade with Europe and
accounts for almost 30 percent of America's total world trade. Moreover, most of
the countries of the region are directly or indirectly linked to the United
States through treaties, arms sales or strong economic ties.

How is it that such a vast and important region, which only a few decades ago
was vulnerable to radicalism, instability and Soviet power, is today prosperous,
peaceful and pro-Western? A thoughtful answer to that question would point to
the historic splits in the Communist camp - first between Russia and China, then
between China and Vietnam - as vivid proof that nationalism is stronger than
Marxism. It would also take into account the enormous vitality of the free
market economies and the failure of those that were centrally planned. Then,
too, there have been the crude policies of the Soviet Union that have driven
China to the West and turned Japan into an adversary. Despite its failure in
Vietnam, America's policy of containing the expansion of the Soviet Union has
been a success over all. But one of the most important elements in the story,
which is the main focus of this work, is the legacy of the American occupation
of Japan, which was one of progress, peace, prosperity and democracy.

Michael Schaller, a professor of history at the University of Arizona, has dug
into American Government archives to produce a fascinating account of the
Occupation and how it fit with America's overall postwar policy in the Far East.
He makes clear that there were two important turning points. The first came in
the spring and fall of 1947 when the United States, increasingly drawn into a
cold war in Europe, reversed course in Japan. Instead of purging tainted
officials, seeking reparations, breaking up the giant industrial monopolies
(zaibatsu), though American policy had the effect of breaking most of them up
anyway, and moving ahead with war crimes trials, the United States decided to
build up Japan and its Far Eastern anchor. The second and perhaps even more
critical turning point came in 1950 as a result of the North Korean attack
across the 38th parallel. The war led to a dramatic increase in the American
military budget and to an integrated Pacific defense strategy. It laid the
groundwork for a series of American security partnerships throughout the region,
most of which have lasted to the present. It also hastened a rather generous
peace treaty with Japan, greatly accelerated Japan's recovery by pumping
billions of dollars into the Japanese economy for war supplies, and moved Japan
away from neutrality. On the debit side of the ledger, the Korean War alienated
the United States from China for two decades and made Peking more dependent on
the Soviet Union. Ultimately this frustrating dependence contributed to the
Sino-Soviet split. Thus Soviet imperialism from Korea to Afghanistan has
probably done more to galvanize the Western alliance than any other factor. M R.
SCHALLER'S book is not without serious flaws. The author has very little to say
about the purposes and goals of Soviet policy in postwar Asia. Moreover, on the
rare occasions that he provides some clues to his own thinking (as opposed to
the views of the many officials he cites), Mr. Schaller never explains or
develops his own underlying assumptions in analyzing the origins of the Korean
War. He concedes that North Korea struck first, but waters this down in the next
sentence by saying that ''many American observers had long feared a similar
cross-border attack by the Rhee regime in the South.'' This leaves the reader
with the erroneous impression that the two Koreas were and have been equally
adventuristic. Mr. Schaller then goes on to express his apparent disapproval of
the ''militant, repressive South Korean government'' that the United States
helped create in 1945. But he does not say what the alternative should have
been. Could the United States have imposed instant democracy on South Korea in
1945?

In addition, Mr. Schaller does not carefully analyze the ''harder'' line options
open to the United States in the immediate postwar period. It could be argued
that the real mistake made by the United States in 1945 was not that it helped
to created a non-Communist South Korea, which is now one of America's most loyal
and prosperous allies in the Far East, but rather that it allowed the Russians
to occupy North Korea. The United States made a similar mistake in 1950 when the
American Secretary of State signaled that South Korea was not included in the
United States defense perimeter, thus virtually inviting a North Korean attack.

These caveats aside, Mr. Schaller has made an impressive contribution to our
understanding of the origins of the cold war in Asia, and this volume will be
indispensable to all who seek to understand the more recent chapters in the
historic struggle between the two superpowers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Douglas MacArthUr and Emperor Hirohito (AP)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


Oct. 27, 1985 Fiction

* 1 HEAVEN, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $4.50.) The first volume of a trilogy
about unspeakable horrors that haunt a family living in a cabin in the hills.

* 2 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine
driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

* 3 THE BACHMAN BOOKS, by Stephen King. (NAL/ Plume, $9.95.) Four early novels
originally published as the work of Richard Bachman.

* 4 THINNER, by Stephen King writing as Richard Bachman. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.)
The case of a lawyer whose body is mysteriously wasting away.

* 5 PASSIN' THROUGH, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) The adventures of a
drifter in the Old West.

* 6 RIDE A PALE HORSE, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) An American woman
reporter in an espionage intrigue in Eastern Europe.

* 7 THE TALISMAN, by Stephen King and Peter Straub. (Berkley, $4.95.) Two
parallel worlds and a young boy who can travel between them.

* 8 THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $4.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.

* 9 CRESCENT CITY, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $4.50.) A Jewish woman in 19th-century
New Orleans.

* 10 SUPERIOR WOMEN, by Alice Adams. (Fawcett, $3.95.) Five friends at Radcliffe
in the mid-1940's and after.

* 11 GOD KNOWS, by Joseph Heller. (Dell, $4.50.) King David describes his life
in comic and anachronistic style.

* 12 FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.) The relationship of a mother
and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.

* 13 ''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Berkley,
$5.95.) Chronicle of an Ohio hamlet from 1868 to 1932.

* 14 PRINCE OF PEACE, by James Carroll. (NAL/ Signet, $4.95.) The anguish of a
pacifist Roman Catholic priest during the Vietnam War years.

* 15* HAPPY ARE THE MEEK, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Warner, $3.95.) Father Blackie
Ryan solves the murder of a tycoon. Nonfiction General

* 1 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

* 2 ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Warner, $3.50.) A Mississippi
childhood.

* 3* PIECES OF MY MIND, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Avon, $4.50.) Essays by the
television journalist.

* 4 OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $4.50.) The actress's midlife
''journey to find her true self.''

* 5 SON OF THE MORNING STAR, by Evan S. Connell. (Harper & Row, $8.95.) A
biography of Custer and a history of the Great Plains wars.

* 6 HEY, WAIT A MINUTE (I Wrote a Book!) by John Madden with Dave Anderson.
(Ballantine, $3.95.) Autobiography of the television sports announcer.

* 7* IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.

* 8 SWEET DREAMS, by George Vecsey with Leonore Fleischer. (St. Martin's,
$3.95.) A biography based on the new movie about the country singer Patsy Cline.

* 9* IACOCCA, by David Abodaher. (Zebra, $3.95.) His life, by a former employee
of Chrysler's ad agency. Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

* 1 GARFIELD ROLLS ON, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) The 11th volume about
the cartoon cat.

* 2 THE SETPOINT DIET, by Gilbert A. Leveille. (Ballantine, $3.50.) Food and
exercise.

* 3 VALLEY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $5.95.)
Cartoons.

* 4 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

* 5 RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally,
$5.95.) For 1985.

* 6 GROWING UP CATHOLIC, by Mary Jane Frances Cavolina Meara, Jeffrey Allen
Joseph Stone, Maureen Anne Teresa Kelly and Richard Glen Michael Davis.
(Doubleday/Dolphin, $4.95.) Humor. The listings above are based on
computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative
wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety
stores, supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WORRIES ABOUT SECURITY OF 2 BASES IN PHILIPPINES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words

DATELINE: SUBIC BAY, the Philippines


The scene was disturbingly familiar: United States marines in battle gear with
camouflage blacking on their faces, moving along a jungle trail and carrying
M-16 rifles.

It was a routine patrol within the perimeter of this vast base, with no enemy
and no war. But the symbolism did not escape the soldiers themselves.

''Charlie's out there somewhere,'' one of them joked, using the terminology of
the Vietnam War.

A Growing Issue

With increasing anxiety in Washington about the stability of the Philippine
Government, and plans under way to invest $1.3 billion to upgrade America's two
big bases here, the long-term security of the installations has become a growing
issue.

Two recent intelligence studies for Congress have warned that the political and
military situation in the Philippines is deteriorating, adding to concern about
the future of the bases, Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base.

Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage has estimated that if present
trends in the Philippines continue, the Communist insurgency could reach a
''strategic stalemate'' with the armed forces in three to five years.

Reagan Sends an Envoy

As an indication of the Administration's concern about the situation in the
Philippines, President Reagan sent a personal envoy, Senator Paul Laxalt, on an
informal diplomatic mission here recently. Senator Laxalt met with President
Marcos and later said he had agreed to permit American observers at the
Philippine election in 1986 and 1987 and to relax his controls over the
Philippine military.

''We now have a base line from which future reforms can be assessed,'' said Mr.
Laxalt, a Nevada Republican.

An agreement allowing the United States to use the two bases in the Philippines
expires in 1991, and negotiations to renew the pact are expected to begin before
then.

Effects of a Move

American officials say categorically that there are no plans to move the bases.
But they have also been talking publicly about contingency plans for a move,
which they say are a normal part of military analysis.

It is a move that Philippine opponents of President Marcos are increasingly
demanding. Even Mr. Marcos's Government is finding it politically expedient
these days to make disparaging remarks about the bases. But it is a move would
pose severe difficulties for the Americans.

In their strategic location, in the facilities they are able to provide, and in
the economy of their operation, Subic Bay and Clark Air Base are acknowledged by
American officials to be irreplaceable.

Estimates of the cost of moving them, if the need arises, have ranged from $2
billion to $8 billion.

Analysts say it is probable that no one site could duplicate the complex of
services the two bases provide, and therefore it is likely that some operations
would be scattered among more than one location.

The alternative sites usually mentioned are the Pacific islands of Guam, where
the United States now has a smaller base, and Tinian. Both are in the Marianas.

Strategic Location

Subic Bay Naval Base, which covers 450 square miles of land and ocean in one of
the world's great natural harbors, and Clark Air Base, with a 150,000-acre
target range that is unmatched in any other overseas facility, are the biggest
American bases of their kind outside United States territory.

They are strategically placed on air and sea routes to control and supply a
broad sweep of Asia, from the American base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean
through the vital Strait of Malacca into the South China Sea and the Pacific.

They guard what the military calls ''choke points'' for one-half of the oil
supplies that travel from the Persian Gulf to Western markets.

Just 70 minutes by jet fighter from the huge Soviet base at Cam Ranh Bay in
Vietnam, the bases in the Philippines have grown in strategic importance as the
Soviet naval presence in the Pacific has grown.

Difficult to Duplicate

No alternative site offers either strategic location or natural facilities that
would come near to duplicating the advantages of the two bases, American
officials say.

Relocation to Guam and Tinian, which lie more than 1,500 miles east of the
Philippines, would move the key American centers some three to four hours'
flying time, or several days' sailing time, farther from the vital areas they
defend.

Military officers say such a move would give the Russians geographical dominance
over the sea lanes from the Indian Ocean to the Pacific.

It would also mean the loss of a skilled and inexpensive work force that could
not be found on small Pacific islands.

The two bases employ 44,000 local workers, many of them experienced tradesmen
whose families have worked in specialties such as ship repair for generations.
That many workers would equal half the population of Guam and more than the
total population of Tinian.

Low Salaries

The wages now paid are estimated to be about one-seventh of what Americans would
receive if they were needed to replace the Filipinos. Some of the Filipinos, for
example the Negrito tribesmen who build bamboo models of airplanes for Clark's
target range, are paid in rice.

On the naval base, where an average of 9,000 sailors come ashore each day, a
move seems far away.

The base bustles with activity, in its 200 acres of warehouses, along its
runways and roads, and in some of the most lavish recreational sites the
American military offers. There are auto hobby shops and sites for horseback
riding and skeet shooting.

Western diplomats here suggest that with the attention that has now been aroused
over the future of the bases, it would be politically difficult for the United
States to draw back from plans to improve them.

U.S. Commitment Cited

Any move such as a public search for alternative sites, they say, would shake
confidence in America's commitment to the bases and would further complicate its
political difficulties.

These difficulties, which include recent suggestions by the Government that the
Philippines could live very well without the bases, may in part be preliminary
maneuvering over the renewal of the bases agreement.

Under the current five-year contract, which was signed in 1983, the United
States is required to pay $900 million as compensation for use of the bases,
about half of it in military aid and half in economic assistance.

The Marcos Government is expected to demand a large increase in this sum under
any new agreement.

Plans for Improvements

The $1.3 billion that the Pentagon has earmarked for improvements would go
primarily into upgrading the physical plant, including the runways and housing.
But Major Thomas J. Boyd, public affairs director for Clark Air Base, said
security improvements would also be included.

These improvements would presumably address serious breaches reported last month
by a delegation from a Senate subcommittee. It found empty guard towers and
missing fencing around much of the perimeter of Clark, which, like Subic Bay, is
patrolled by the Philippine military.

Most dramatically, the subcommittee reported evidence of Communist guerrilla
presence within the perimeter of the Subic installation, which includes miles of
fields and hilly jungle that are used for gunnery practice and training
exercises.

The subcommittee report found the signs of guerrilla presence in these outer
parts of the base ''nothing short of incredible.''

The potential for a clash between guerrilla groups and the American marines who
tramp the jungle trails with their M-16 rifles, the report said, ''is all too
apparent.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of military strength near Phillipines (page A6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC, AN EVER-WARY WATCH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: ABOARD U.S.S. BLUE RIDGE, off the Philippines, Oct. 24


As they maneuver their navies in a widening competition for dominance in the
Pacific, the Russians and Americans keep a constant wary eye on each other's
movements.

Here aboard the flagship of the Seventh Fleet, an amphibious command ship
crowned by a flamboyant tiara of antennae, satellite receiving dishes and radar,
an intelligence officer pointed on a map to the precise locations this morning
of elements of the Soviet Pacific Fleet.

For example, in Cam Ranh Bay, the former American base in Vietnam that has
become the hub of Soviet operations in Southeast Asia, 24 vessels are docked
today, including two submarines, a guided-missile cruiser and four light
frigates.

On the base's runways, from which American planes once took off for bombing runs
over North Vietnam, satellites today detected what the intelligence officer said
were ''more than a half dozen'' long-range Bear surveillance and antisubmarine
aircraft, a dozen Badger bombers and several swing-wing MIG-23 supersonic
interceptors.

Their latest training and reconnaissance flights are plotted on the map in large
loops that sweep out across the South China Sea. On Wednesday, the map shows,
two Bear reconnaissance aircraft flew over Hong Kong, where an amphibious
American ''ready group'' was on shore leave after exercises with the aircraft
carrier Midway and the Australian Navy.

Russians Expand Base

The deployments today at the base, where the Russians have added three new piers
to the three left behind by the Americans, are about average, according to an
intelligence officer, who gave only his first name and asked that even that not
be published. The base has grown steadily since the Soviet Union signed a
friendship treaty with Vietnam in 1979, and it has taken on added significance
as concern has grown in Washington over the future of America's naval base in
Subic Bay in the Philippines.

According to Prasong Soonsiri, secretary general of Thailand's National Security
Council, Cam Ranh Bay is now the Soviet Union's biggest overseas naval
installation. He told the Bangkok newspaper The Nation that a sixth floating
dock had been added to the base and that a new storage tank for bomber fuel had
been built.

At Subic Bay today, Philippine and American mechanics worked on the
guided-missile cruiser Sterett, which is undergoing three months of repair and
modernization, and the frigate Francis Hammond, which is using the base for
training exercises and tests of its armaments, after an overhaul.

A nuclear attack submarine and six smaller vessels are also berthed at Subic Bay
for upkeep and standby, the intelligence officer said.

The Sterett is the only vessel in the fleet for which Subic Bay is a home port.
But most of the 75 to 80 ships in the Seventh Fleet, which patrols the Indian
Ocean and the western half of the Pacific, rely on it for servicing and supply.

Aboard the Blue Ridge, the strategic balance in the Pacific is plotted carefully
each day in darkened communications rooms with glowing radar screens and
scrambler telephones.

Different Styles of Deployment

The movements plotted today reflected the two navies' differing concepts of
deployment. Much of the Soviet Pacific surface fleet was anchored at its home
port of Vladivostok, with other vessels at Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka
Peninsula or at Cam Ranh Bay. The Soviet Navy tends to bring its ships out of
port only for large, well-prepared maneuvers, the intelligence officer said. The
United States Navy, by contrast, keeps at least half its fleet at sea on a
constant round of maneuvers and port calls.

The Americans now expect to see Soviet exercises resume in the Sea of Japan,
where maneuvers were recently interrupted by a typhoon, and in the Gulf of Aden,
where the battle cruiser Kirov is now sailing in the company of two destroyers.
The American carrier Kitty Hawk is not far away, steaming off the coast of Oman
with its own battle group.

The United States sees the primary threat in the region as coming from the
Soviet Pacific Fleet's 126 submarines, half of which are nuclear-powered. These
watch American movements and patrol key straits that are vital both to Western
supplies of oil and to the ocean access of the Soviet Navy.

The Russians also keep scores of smaller vessels, which the Americans call
''tattletale ships,'' watching and listening in the areas of prime American
naval activity - the northwest Indian Ocean near the Middle East, the northwest
Pacific around Japan and Korea, and the straits of Southeast Asia.

They also ply the waters around the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia, where
the United States keeps about 16 vessels to support its rapid-deployment force
for the Middle East. In the South Pacific, the Soviet Navy so far has sent
mostly research ships and submarines on what appear to be mapping missions.

If it holds true to form, though, such missions may be the first step toward
regular naval cruising. ''We're seeing the beginnings of perhaps a new Soviet
move into the South Pacific,'' the intelligence officer said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Plea on Writer's Exclusion

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 240 words


A group of noted writers is going into Federal District Court tomorrow to
challenge the 1952 McCarran-Walter Act, which permits the Government to exclude
from the United States anyone who advocates ''the economic, international and
governmental doctrines of world Communism.'' Specifically, the lawsuit will seek
to reverse a decision of the Immigration and Naturalization Service that denied
permanent resident status to Margaret J. Randall, a 48-year-old writer who gave
up her citizenship in Mexico in 1967.

The case is being brought by the Center for Constitutional Rights, a
public-interest law group, with the cooperation of the American Civil Liberties
Union. The plaintiffs include Norman Mailer, Arthur Miller, Grace Paley, William
Styron and Kurt Vonnegut.

In a decision Oct. 2, the Immigration Service concluded that ''her associations
with and her activities and writings in support of the Communist-dominated
Governments of Cuba, North Vietnam and Nicaragua and her advocacy and support of
revolutionary activity in Mexico, as well as her affiliation with and
participation in Communist Party activities, warrant the denial of her
application'' for permanent resident status as a prelude to regaining
citizenship.

According to the center, the suit maintains that it is unconstitutional ''to
exclude someone from this country simply because that person's views are not
consistent with the views of the Administration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

It's Time to Put Heat on Marcos

BYLINE: By Bill Bradley; Bill Bradley is Democratic Senator from New Jersey.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is a consensus here about what is wrong in the Philippines. But there
seems to be a kind of paralysis about what to do.

First, everyone agrees that Ferdinand E. Marcos has presided over the unchecked
spread of a nationwide Communist insurgency. Second, no one disputes that Mr.
Marcos has stubbornly rejected warnings that unless he undertakes major reforms
soon, the opportunity to revive democracy, regain prosperity and restore
security will be lost. Third, policy makers even agree on specific reforms he
must make to insure fair elections, free the economy from the monopolistic grip
of his cronies and revitalize the leadership of the armed forces.

As Senator Paul Laxalt told Mr. Marcos during a recent visit to the Philippines,
important American interests are at stake. If the Communists take over, we are
virtually certain to lose our military access to the bases at Clark Field and
Subic Bay. The Filipino people would lose any chance for a democratic future.
Worst of all, a ruthless Communist regime is likely to turn the Philippines into
a brutalized, stagnant society, like Vietnam and Cambodia, and would allow the
Soviet Union to replace America as its military partner.

What is so frustrating about this consensus is its failure to produce a
solution. High-level warnings to Mr. Marcos have fallen on deaf ears. The reason
is that the reforms he must make to turn the tide against the insurgency will
also remove the political and economic foundation of his regime, perhaps putting
his own life in jeopardy.

Indeed, Mr. Marcos may lack the capacity to carry out the necessary reforms.
It's unlikely, for example, that he will confront the power and wealth of many
of his corrupt cronies to restore genuine competition to the marketplace. At
most, he might be able to deliver free and fair elections - if he devotes
himself wholeheartedly to the task. So far, he has shown little inclination to
do so.

In due course, America will probably have to choose between supporting Mr.
Marcos or supporting the democratic process. Our future position in the
Philippines rests not with a dictator but with democracy, which alone gives
people hope of a better society without revolution.

Most Filipinos retain respect and affection for the United States. These
feelings are a major source of strength we must now openly use or lose. We must
sever the symbolic link the Communists are forging with their rallying cry of a
''U.S.-Marcos dictatorship.'' We must put Mr. Marcos on notice that our
interests in Filipino democracy will no longer be held hostage to a rigged
election. We must let the Filipino people know we will no longer acquiesce in
his continued abuses of power.

We may have to establish a timetable for electoral reform if Mr. Marcos lacks
the will or capacity. To ease his resignation, we should offer him and his
family safe passage and sanctuary for his retirement. We must also be prepared
to provide a worthy successor to Mr. Marcos with the additional security
assistance needed to restore democracy - not, as Mr. Marcos has used it, to prop
up his cronies and loyalists.

President Reagan believes there is still time to persuade Mr. Marcos of the
error of his ways and set his regime on a new course. But time is running out.
The Administration temporizes, transfixed by the ghosts of old friends in Cuba,
Vietnam and Iran. These are false, hence dangerous, parallels. Breaking with Mr.
Marcos is not a signal that we are abandoning the Philippines to the Communists.
On the contrary, it signals our commitment to seeing democracy restored. The
sure way to betray that good will and bring about the Communist victory we are
eager to thwart is to slight the democratic option. Then the tide of revolution
will sweep away not only the dictator but also future American influence in the
Philippines.

This grim reality requires us to act promptly. It is time to speak publicly to
the Philippine people, pledging our support for the democratic process. Only by
giving Mr. Marcos this kind of ultimatum can we open the way for the free and
fair elections upon which any successful counterinsurgency must be based and
upon which the future of the Philippines depends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOLFF RETURNS TO VIETNAM IN FICTION

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words


It was March 1968. ''I remember after Tet,'' Tobias Wolff recalls. ''I was
driving down a road in the delta with a Vietnamese lieutenant after the worst of
the offensive was over, and the road was lined on both sides with corpses, and
most of them were children. They were wrapped in straw mats with just their feet
sticking out - little feet. People were wearing surgical masks because of the
stench. It was like being in hell. I thought this was a place I'd never leave.
But I did.''

Mr. Wolff, whose most recent collection of short stories, ''Back in the World,''
has just been published to critical praise, served as a first lieutenant in the
Army in Vietnam, and his experiences in the year he was there have played an
important and unusual role in his fiction. His short novel ''The Barracks
Thief'' - which won the $5,000 PEN/Faulkner award in May as the best work of
fiction published in 1984 - is set among a group of soldiers about to embark for
Vietnam. And in ''Back in the World,'' memories of the war pop up at crucial
moments.

''I'll always in one way or another return to it in my writing,'' Mr. Wolff
says. ''It bent me in a certain way - I don't mean misshaped me - and it put a
kind of depression in my mind in which things gather occasionally, slide in, so
I am compelled to return to it from time to time, without actually writing about
Vietnam myself, which I find really hard to do. You know the Hemingway story
''Soldier's Home,'' when the guy gets back from World War I. It's very
autobiographical. He's been wounded over there. He was an ambulance driver, and
whenever he starts telling the truth about it afterward he feels that he's lied.
Even if he's told the truth as he understood the truth to be, he feels that he's
lied and misshaped it in some way and misrepresented it, and his own part feels
degraded by it.

''I have the same problem whenever I write about Vietnam itself,'' Mr. Wolff
says. ''I feel like it's something I can't lie about, can't feel that I've not
told the truth about. I seem to need to approach it from an oblique angle. Maybe
some day I'll actually write about my experience in Vietnam itself, when I find
a way to do that that makes me feel like I'm really telling the truth.''

Lying to Each Other

Lies and truth also play a pivotal role in ''Back in the World.'' Many of the
characters - a teen-age girl who works in a movie theater and shoplifts in her
spare time, a mediocre priest who befriends a salesman and travels to Las Vegas,
an unemployed young man whose car breaks down in the desert while he's taking
his pregnant wife and infant son to California, a woman and two men who meet in
a park - spend a good deal of their time lying to one another. Does he seem to
be saying that people have to lie to each other in order to survive?

''I think that's probably about what it is,'' says Mr. Wolff, seated in his New
York hotel room. ''Those are extreme examples of it, but other people are
unknowable in some final way. It's like when you hear about what goes on in
someone else's marriage. You think, 'My God, I never would have . . . how could
they live like that?' But the fact of the matter is that you don't know them.
Your knowledge of other people stops at a certain point, and what they're
presenting you at any moment is a kind of fiction of themselves, and they
probably just present that particular self to you, and without meaning to,
without calculation, something else to someone else.

''It's like, if you've ever been in a situation where you have really good
friends from two very distinct parts of your life, maybe your work and your
play, people you really drink with and get down-and-dirty with, and then maybe
somebody with whom you're a bit more dignified, and if they're in the same place
with you it can be kind of traumatic - you don't know who to be. In a way those
are caricatures of an idea I have of what we do all the time. We're always
representing ourselves, we're always making up a self to present to people in
some way. That's not bad or good, it's just something we do. We can choose a
monster to present to other people or choose something else, but I think there
is a kind of way we write ourselves as we go through life, we invent ourselves.

''I don't want to make it sound like this was some strategic plan of mine in
writing the book,'' he adds. ''Part of the reason that that happens is that I
myself am a terrible liar, and I hear myself say things sometimes that I didn't
even mean to say that are absolutely untrue but that sounded like something I
wanted to say at the time. I don't mean like self-aggrandizement. I tend to
invent a lot when I talk to people. For the sake of the story, to keep the story
going. So undoubtedly some of that must sift into the stories, to the process of
writing the stories as well.''

Truth Can Destroy

In one story, ''Soldier's Joy,'' someone is too tired to lie and tells the truth
about his experiences in Vietnam - and this leads to disaster.

''Sometimes a lie can save you when the truth can't,'' Mr. Wolff says. ''We do
that to each other all the time. We say to somebody who's dying, 'It's all
right, it will be all right.' We have to. I used to know somebody who made a
great point of always telling the truth, exactly what was on his mind. 'That's
an ugly dress you have on. You're gaining weight. You look older.' There's a
kind of truth that's destructive.''

He points out, however, that ''I don't think of my fiction as prescriptive in
any way. I don't think when I write a story that I'm saying if somebody tells
the truth it destroys. In this instance somebody told the truth and it
destroyed. The truth can destroy. And I'm not saying that people have to lie to
themselves in order to survive or that survival is only possible if people lie
to themselves. In a particular instance that might be true.''

Many of the characters in his stories also seem to be losers, but he shows a
sympathy and understanding for them.

''I wouldn't use the word loser,'' he says. ''It indicates a condition of
character, and I don't see my people as being without insight or heart, or
without nobility. But they are people who aren't what they dreamed they would
be, and aren't what they still wish they were. I sympathize with them because -
I suppose these things all come in some way from our own history - my own family
had ups and downs, mostly downs, and I don't believe in security. I'm very
medieval in my outlook about a wheel of fortune. And I've seen it turn fast on a
lot of people.''

In Residence at Syracuse

Mr. Wolff, who turned 40 this year - ''it was a bump for me,'' he says; ''I
never thought it would be, but when the day actually came, it was'' - grew up in
the Skagit River Valley in the state of Washington and lived for many years in
Arizona and California. Five years ago he moved to upstate New York, where he
lives with his wife and two sons and teaches at Syracuse University as writer in
residence.

At one time, Mr. Wolff was a reporter - ''a very bad reporter, a terrible
reporter'' - for six months for The Washington Post. ''People who remember me
there still laugh about it,'' he says. ''I wrote a lot of obituaries. I was
taken off that beat when I wrote an obituary of a man who was not dead. You were
supposed to check with the family and the mortuary both and I did neither
because I couldn't imagine why anyone would turn in a death notice on somebody
like that. I got into a lot of trouble for that.'' It was after being dismissed
from that job that Mr. Wolff began to pursue a career as a writer. His first
collection of stories, ''In the Garden of the North American Martyrs,'' was
highly praised when it came out in 1981, and his work has been published in The
Atlantic, Esquire, Vanity Fair and other magazines.

Has he thought about writing a full-length novel?

''I'm still writing stories,'' he says. ''I do not at all disallow the
possibility of writing a novel. I have this feeling, though, that writers
shouldn't choose forms; they should let the forms choose them. you should write
to the form that, as you sit down to work on a piece, that piece demands, and
for me that seems again and again to be the story form. If I had something to
say that needed the length of a novel to say it, then I'd write a novel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tobias Wolff (Catherine Wolff)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: WALLACE SHAWN'S 'AUNT DAN AND LEMON'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


IT'S the running gag of Wallace Shawn's comedies - ''Our Late Night,'' ''Marie
and Bruce,''

''The Hotel Play'' - that polite, literate, seemingly well-mannered people say
and do the most outrageous things. The most civilized discourse can, without
warning, turn into a beastly description of bodily functions (both sexual and
alimentary), frequently punctuated by the word ''pig.'' Mr. Shawn's brave new
play at the Public Theater, ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' is no exception, but this
time the people are more refined than ever, their pronouncements the most
piggish of all. And the running gag, at long last, reaches its explosive,
horrifying punch line - for Mr. Shawn has harnessed it to nothing less than a
central moral question of our age.

Simply put, this is a play about how literate, civilized societies can drift en
masse into beastliness and commit the most obscene acts of history. The evening
opens and closes with monologues in which a creamy-toned young Englishwoman,
named Leonora and known as Lemon (Kathryn Pogson), very sweetly tells us why she
rather admires the Nazis for their ''refreshing'' lack of hypocrisy. The rest of
the play explains, in flashbacks, how Lemon came to hold these pro-Nazi views,
and it does so in a most insinuating way. The single-minded Mr. Shawn never
supplies a character to challenge Lemon's articulate arguments. Instead, the
audience is left to think up its own rebuttal - forcing us to wonder whether we
could and would counter the spurious polemics of a clever fascist like Lemon in
real life. I can't remember the last time I saw a play make an audience so
uncomfortable, and I mean that as high praise.

Along with the discomfort, there is a lot of mordant laughter. Much of it is
provided by the character known as Aunt Dan (Linda Hunt), a friend of Lemon's
parents who, during the Vietnam 60's, was the principal influence on the
youthful heroine. A brilliant, American-born Oxford don, Dan (for Danielle) is
obsessed with defending the honor of Henry Kissinger. As she explains to Lemon
at bedtime each night, Mr. Kissinger was a ''prayerful'' man offering ''the
entire world the hope of a safe and decent future'' even as he was thwarted by
''filthy, slimy'' journalists and ''young intellectuals who studied economics at
the Sorbonne or Berkeley.'' Dan's rabid tirades - in which she defends her
idol's dates with starlets as strenuously as the bombing of North Vietnam -
often backfire hilariously, but she does score some points. Like its companion
play at the Public, David Hare's ''Map of the World'' (whose published text
cites Mr. Shawn in its dedication), ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' has its own nefarious
reasons for giving the right wing its say.

In this play's case, Dan's pro-Kissinger arguments are warped and expanded in
her acolyte's subsequent rationalizations of Nazi Germany. But Mr. Shawn goes
further still, refusing to settle for blaming Lemon's callous convictions
entirely on the political ideology she inherits from Aunt Dan. As we gradually
learn, Dan instructed the young Lemon not just in public policy but also in
private morality, regaling her with reminiscences of her wild salad days as an
Oxford student. Most of these reminiscences center on Mindy - a high-priced
prostitute who gleefully murders a client and whom Dan regarded as ''the most
exciting person'' she ever met.

Mindy's amoral escapades - approvingly recounted by Dan and presented
voyeuristically on stage in sexually graphic, hallucinatory fragments - are the
ultimate dramatizations of what Mr. Shawn regards as the rot eating away at a
supposedly civilized world. Throughout ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' we are reminded
that tabloid headlines like ''Mother Eats Infant Baby While Father Laughs''
lower our resistance to cruelty, that even an obsessive interest in morbid crime
fiction can desensitize us (as it does Lemon) to the crimes of Treblinka. Dan
and Lemon stand accused not for the political views they hold but for the
compassion they have lost - a point brought home in a climactic scene at the
older woman's death bed, when even the friends' compassion for each other goes
unexpressed. And it is only compassion that can allow anyone, in prewar Germany
or elsewhere, to puncture the smooth but specious analogies with which the
shrewdest leaders may argue that the preservation of a privileged ''way of
life'' is worth any moral price.

All of Mr. Shawn's own arguments, including his implicit view of Mr. Kissinger,
are open to debate, of course - which, along with his refusal to tell the
audience what to think and his omission of any ''sympathetic'' characters, helps
make ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' the most stimulating, not to mention demanding,
American play to emerge this year. The most artful it is not. One may well want
to resist the dramaturgy, which is plotless, all but structureless and almost
entirely dependent on lengthy monologues. The crazed language with which the
characters plead their obsessions usually, though not unfailingly, carries the
speechifying. Only Mr. Shawn could turn even a description of Arnold
Schoenberg's music into a memorable riff of Lenny Bruce-ese.

The production, which has been imported from London's Royal Court Theater under
Max Stafford-Clark's direction, is good enough, but hardly definitive. Some of
the staging, especially of the lurid Mindy scenes, lacks an edge, and I'm not
convinced that the lively Miss Hunt, who seems at times to be impersonating Dr.
Jeane Kirkpatrick, is the dazzling don who could permeate a girl's entire
existence. The rest of the Anglo-American cast seems perfect. Miss Pogson's
Lemon remains as elegant as Princess Di no matter what poisonous sentiments
emerge from her pert mouth, and there are crisp supporting cameos from Lynsey
Baxter as Mindy and Larry Pine as a roue who finds the most unsavory forms of
hedonism a cause for only genteel giggles.

The most ferocious comic turn, however, comes from Mr. Shawn himself, who
appears in three roles. The first and best of them is that of Lemon's
American-born father, a proper auto-parts executive who suddenly flies into a
digressionary rage about the dog-eat-dog Darwinism of the business world.
Described by his daughter as ''kind of a caged animal,'' the character is
typical of those proper-looking monsters who have exploded before us from a safe
distance in past Shawn plays. A couple of hours later we're rather startled to
discover that, as playwright, Mr. Shawn has finally succeeded in unlocking the
beasts within ourselves. A Turn to the Right AUNT DAN AND LEMON, by Wallace
Shawn; directed by Max Stafford-Clark; scenery by Peter Hartwell; costumes by
Jennifer Cook; lighting by Christopher Toulmin and Gerard P. Bourcier; sound by
John del Nero and Andy Pink; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen. Presented
by Joseph Papp. At the Public/Martinson Hall, 425 Lafayette Street. LemonKathryn
Pogson Mother, June and FloraLinda Bassett Father, Freddie and JasperWallace
Shawn Aunt DanLinda Hunt MindyLynsey Baxter Andy and MartyLarry Pine
RaimondoMario Arrambide

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Wallace Shawn (Martha Swope)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY SECRETARY, CRITICIZING PLEA, CONTRADICTS U.S. ON SPYING CASE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


The Secretary of the Navy tonight sharply criticized the Justice Department's
decision to arrange a plea bargain with John A. Walker Jr., saying the
information Mr. Walker could provide about his spying for the Soviet Union would
be of little value to the Government.

The comments by the Navy Secretary, John F. Lehman Jr., directly contradicted
what the Government said in court Monday was its main reason for striking a deal
with Mr. Walker.

Mr. Walker pleaded guilty Monday to charges that he had spied for the Soviet
Union and that he had recruited his son, brother and friend into an espionage
operation that the authorities have called the most damaging in American
history.

A Federal prosecutor told Federal District Court Judge Alexander Harvey 2d of
Baltimore, ''John A. Walker has something that is of vital interest to this
country and something the Government wants very much to know. We need to know
what has been broken and what must be fixed.''

But, in an interview with ABC News, Mr. Lehman said of Mr. Walker: ''I don't
think he has much to offer in assessing the damage he did. We know what he had
access to. We know he has made enormous compromises of very valuable operational
communications.''

Possible Link to North Vietnam

A Navy official said tonight that the service was studying the possibility that
Mr. Walker's disclosures to the Soviet Union gave the North Vietnamese access to
Navy communications, including the locations of planes sent on bombing runs from
aircraft carriers. ''It could have cost some people their lives.'' the official
said.

Other military officials have said that cooperation by Mr. Walker would be
essential in determining whether damage of this sort had been caused by his
dealings with Soviet agents. These officials have said that without his direct
testimony, they would have to rely solely on the premise that he had given away
everything to which he had access.

Mr. Lehman said in the interview that the Justice Department officials ''know
very well I objected to the plea bargain. ''

''I never agreed to it,'' he added. ''I have trouble with them treating
espionage as just another white-collar crime.''

Michael Schatzow, the Assistant United States Attorney who prosecuted the case,
said tonight that he had been told the deal had been authorized by the ''highest
levels'' of the Justice Department and Defense Department. He added that he
understood this to mean that Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d and Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger had approved it.

''Everyone in Washington seems to have their own agenda,'' Mr. Schatzow said.
''Obviously, Lehman's is different from those in the Department of Defense who
authorized this deal.''

Mr. Schatzow also said Mr. Lehman was ''entitled to his opinion'' that Mr.
Walker's cooperation would be of little value. But he added that the Secretary
would be contradicted by ''any professional who works in this field.''

A Navy official said Secretary Lehman was angered by the Justice Department's
decision to recommend that Mr. Walker's 22-year-old son, Michael, receive a
sentence of 25 years in prison. His father received a life sentence. Both
Walkers faced two life terms and more than $500,000 in fines.

Wrong Signals Feared

This official said a reduced sentence for Michael Walker would send ''the wrong
signals'' to Navy personnel.

Under the plea agreement, Michael Walker will be eligible for parole after
serving eight years and four months. John Walker, a 47-year-old retired Navy
communications chief, will be eligible for parole after 10 years. Justice
Department officials have said it is doubtful that the Federal Parole Commission
will release the elder Mr. Walker at its first opportunity.

Stephen S. Trott, head of the Justice Department's criminal division, would not
respond directly to Mr. Lehman's comments. Justice Department officials said the
Navy had been fully informed about the plea bargain.

Earlier today, Mr. Trott said of Mr. Walker: ''He got a life sentence. We got
everything we could have gotten out of a trial plus more. We don't have the
ability to force information out of people.''

Plea Agreement Defended

Mr. Trott defended the plea agreement and contended that the cooperation of Mr.
Walker would be of great value to the military's efforts to measure the damage
it has suffered from nearly two decades of espionage by Mr. Walker and his
associates.

Mr. Walker is also said to have recruited his brother Arthur, who was convicted
of espionage and is awaiting sentencing, and Jerry A. Whitworth, who pleaded not
guilty to espionage charges and is scheduled to be tried in January.

Judge Harvey, in accepting the agreement, said he usually would not accede to
arrangements in which specific sentences were set. But in this case, he said, he
was convinced the ''public interest'' was served.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. REVIEWS ABOUT GANDHI SEEM MIXED

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 29


It was his United Nations debut, and although Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi
charmed his audiences with his open manner and witty one-liners, he also showed
he still had much to learn.

Yet he left no illusion that his country's foreign policy would veer from that
of his mother, Indira Gandhi.

In a speech to a meeting of the nations espousing nonalignment, the 41-year-old
Indian leader won high praise for his clear, straightforward remarks warning
that nations ''not aligned with either of the power blocs face new and sinister
threats of intervention, interference and pressure.''

Perhaps his greatest success came during more than a dozen two-sided meetings,
at which he impressed other world leaders with his open mind and flexibility,
particularly on subjects that touched on India's domestic policies and economic
development.

'A Man to Bury the Hatchet'

''Here is a man to bury the hatchet with,'' Foreign Minister Sahabzada Yaqub
Khan of Pakistan said in an interview after Mr. Gandhi's meeting with Gen.
Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, President of Pakistan. Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of
Japan called Mr. Gandhi a ''pragmatic politician,'' one who is ''very receptive
to new ideas.''

When he shared the General Assembly podium last Thursday with leaders more
seasoned than he, including President Reagan, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
of Britain and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China, he left many in the audience
disappointed.

The day before, General Zia had reiterated his country's willingness to enter
into any agreement with India to keep the area free of nuclear weapons. ''We
would welcome any ideas, participate in any consultations, attend any conference
in order to achieve this objective,'' he said in his speech before the General
Assembly.

General Zia proposed nothing new, but his dramatic language from the world forum
attracted new attention.

Familiar Concerns Addressed

Instead of using his turn at the Assembly podium to respond, Mr. Gandhi repeated
calls for the resolution of familiar concerns: independence for South-West
Africa, an end to apartheid, a Palestinian homeland, a condemnation of
terrorism.

''I was initially very impressed with him, because he came across as so
direct,'' said a United Nations representative whose country is one of the 101
nations in the movement espousing nonalignment. ''But his speech to the Assembly
lacked depth. It was posturing.''

Other diplomats said they felt General Zia overshadowed his younger colleague.
''Gandhi is elegant, but still very young,'' a delegate from a Western country
said. ''Zia was more impressive in his speech. What a bulldog.''

Part of Mr. Gandhi's problem was the position that India has tried to maintain
throughout its three-year term as chairman of the group of nations espousing
nonalignment. Mr. Gandhi, who asked to speak on the same day as the five
permanent members of the Security Council, wanted to appear both as the head of
a great power and at the same time as a champion of the causes of small
countries that make up the vast majority of the membership of the United
Nations, a number of diplomats said.

Easing Some Tensions

Although Mr. Gandhi was given high marks for having eased tensions with some of
his neighbors, particularly Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka, he made it clear
that on East-West issues, his policies would differ little from those of the
family that shaped him. His calls for disarmament and accusations about
Pakistan's development of a nuclear weapon were standard Indian fare, according
to diplomats who heard his speeches at the United Nations.

At the United Nations, he struck American foreign-policy analysts as tougher
than he was during his visit to Washington last summer. In both speeches and
meetings during his three-day visit, he criticized the United States for not
letting India think for itself, but praised the Soviet Union, saying Moscow had
not forced India to give up its policy of nonalignment.

A number of analysts and foreign diplomats also noted that two of the top
officials he chose to bring with him were leading architects of India's Soviet
connection for his mother.

A Visit to Moscow

Throughout his three-day visit to the United Nations, he carefully avoided any
criticism of the Soviet Union, including its combat role in Afghanistan, which
is opposed by most of the nations espousing nonalignment. And after his time in
New York Mr. Gandhi visited Moscow.

India breaks ranks with most of the nations supporting nonalignment at the
United Nations by abstaining on two key resolutions opposed by only the Soviet
bloc: one calling for an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan, the other calling on Vietnam to withdraw its troops from Cambodia.

The United Nations failed to agree on a universal declaration for the 40th
anniversary in part because of the unwillingness of India's representative,
Natarajan Krishnan, to press Syria and Iraq to drop specific references on the
Palestinian issue that were unacceptable to the United States, according to
Western diplomats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
In Behalf of Books

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Books by and about members of Congress, their triumphs over political odds and
their solutions for world problems drop off the presses every week or two and
are baptized by friends of the author over drinks and soggy canapes in a House
committee room in late afternoon.

Tomorrow at the Georgetown home of Senator and Mrs. Claiborne Pell, the book
party will be a little different. Ten present and former Senators are joining
the Pells in celebrating ''Father and Son,'' a biography of their former
colleague, Frank Church of Idaho, who died of cancer in 1984. Like Mr. Church,
all the Senators are Democrats; like Mr. Church, five of them were Presidential
candidates who failed of nomination. At least two are still trying. Another,
Edmund S. Muskie, went on to become Secretary of State. Two others, George
McGovern and Gaylord Nel-son, lost their Senate seats in the same 1980 election
in which Mr. Church was narrowly defeated.

The author is the Senator's son, the Rev. Dr. F. Forrester Church, who is
minister of the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York City. The book tells
of his father's initial victory over cancer at the age of 23, his election to
the Senate at 32 in 1956, his keynote speech at the 1960 Democratic convention,
his opposition to the Vietnam War and his chairmanship of the Foreign Relations
Committee. It also tells a good deal of the personal relationship between father
and son.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 751 words


VIOLINIST Not all great violinists hail from Odessa but sometimes it seems
easier to name those who do than those who don't. Among the Odessans, the name
of Nathan Milstein is one of the most luminous. The violinist turned 80 last
year, and his 70 years of virtuosity lead him, once again, to Carnegie Hall,
where tonight at 8 he will be giving his only New York recital this season.

In keeping with his reputation for transcribing works for the violin, Mr.
Milstein will include two on the program: Prokofiev's Andantino and Andante
Assai from ''Tales of the Old Grandmother'' and Tchaikovsky's ''Lullaby'' from
''Mazzeppa.'' He will also perform his own work, ''Paganiniana,'' variations for
solo violin, as well as works by Handel, Beethoven, Bach and Sarasate. George
Pludemacher accompanies on piano.

Mr. Milstein left Odessa 16 years ago to settle in Paris, where he lives today.
He made his New York debut in 1929 with the Philadelphia Symphony conducted by
Eugene Ormandy. He and Ormandy last appeared together at Carnegie Hall in 1974.

Admission: $12, $15, $18, $20; a limited number $3 tickets for students and
over-65's may be purchased in the lobby between 6 and 6:30 P.M. Reservations:
247-7800.

CENTRAL AMERICA

Conflicts on the neck of land linking the Americas have aroused passions and
concerns far beyond the borders of the small countries involved. Tonight, two
documentaries dealing with the area start a run at Film Forum 1, 57 Watts
Street, which is two blocks north of Canal Street near the Avenue of the
Americas.

''Witness to War: Dr. Charlie Clemson'' is a half-hour 1984 documentary directed
by Deborah Shaffer that is about a Vietnam veteran who finally balked at
fighting there, went to medical school and then to El Salvador to treat
civilians in rebel-held territory. In his New York Times review of the film last
April, when it was screened during a special series, Vincent Canby wrote, ''It
is effective for being as straightforward and direct as the doctor himself
appears to be.''

''Living at Risk'' is a one-hour 1985 film, directed and edited by Alfred
Guzzetti, Susan Meiselas and Richard Rogers, that tells of five members of an
upper-middle-class family who stay in Nicaragua after the fall of the Somoza
regime and reshape their lives to the new revolutionary Government.

The 6 and 8 P.M. showings today are a benefit, and admission is $15; limited
seating. The regular showings are today at 10 P.M., then through Nov. 12 at 6, 8
and 10, with additional screenings at 2 and 4 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays.
Admission: $5. Information: 431-1590.

LAND OF GOLD

''The Golden Land,'' a bright and lively Yiddish musical that traces the
immigrant experience, left New York after a triumphant debut Off Off Broadway
and it has now returned, upgraded as an Off Broadway production, to the Second
Avenue Theater (formerly the Entermedia) at 189 Second Avenue, at 12th Street
(674-1460).

It is the handiwork of Zalmen Mlotek and Moishe Rosenfeld, and it has a cast of
six youthful singers and dancers, some from the original production, who perform
to the music of a nine-member Klezmer band. This new production is a version
created during the show's performance at the American Music Theater Festival in
Philadelphia, and then as now the direction is by Jacques Levy with musical
staging by Donald Saddler.

This week at 2:30 P.M. today and tomorrow; 8 P.M. Saturday, and 1 and 5 P.M.
Sunday. Next week at 2:30 P.M. Wednesday; 8 P.M. Tuesday through Saturday, and 1
and 5 P.M. Sunday. Admission: $27.50 and $25, except Friday and Saturday nights
and Sunday afternoon, when it is $29.50 and $27.

SWEET ROMANCE

The Fourth Romantic Times Booklovers Convention opens today at the Vista
International Hotel of the World Trade Center, and that is enough to cause heavy
breathing among aficionados who find reading happiness in the romance novel.

The convention, through Sunday, has two free events among the otherwise
fee-required workshop sessions that will touch on such romantic and other topics
as ''Mass Appeal/What Makes a Best Seller,'' ''The Ever Changing Market'' and
''Breathing Life Into Your Characters.''

The no-charge occasions are the awards ceremony, at 8:30 P.M. today, and a Book
Fair sponsored by Waldenbooks Saturday from 12:30 to 3 P.M., at which authors
will be on tap, pen in hand, to autograph their books.

The fee for the convention workshops is $299 for all five days or $50 on a
day-by-day basis. Information: 938-9100.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Korean War Memorial

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


Almost as many Americans (54,259) died in the Korean War as in the Vietnam War
(58,022) but there is no Korean War memorial in the Washington area. Sponsors of
Korean War Memorial legislation now before Congress hope to change that. The
House version of the bill, sponsored by James J. Florio, Democrat of New Jersey,
will be on the floor for a vote next week. The Senate version, by William L.
Armstrong, Republican of Colorado, is also expected to pass, probably in
November. Veterans who have expressed their support for the memorial include
three who were fighter pilots in the Korean conflict: Ed McMahon, the
entertainer; Ted Williams, the retired slugger, and Senator John Glenn, Democrat
of Ohio.

Generally, the legislation provides that the kind of memorial and the site are
to be chosen by the American Battle Monuments Commission. Still in question is
whether any Federal money will be provided, or whether it will have to be built
entirely with money from veterans' organizations and other private sources.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DONATIONS BY AUTHORS AND PUBLISHERS GROWING

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words


The number of authors and publishers donating portions of their royalties and
profits to charities has grown significantly in recent years, according to
publishing executives, with the result that some of the beneficiaries will
receive six- and even seven-figure windfalls.

Most of the royalties from Lee Iacocca's autobiography, for example, one of the
biggest-selling hard-cover books of all time, go to the Mary Iacocca Fellowship
at the Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston.

Garrison Keillor has assigned half the royalties from his best-selling ''Lake
Wobegon Days'' to Minnesota Public Radio.

By donating two cents for every copy sold of Jean Auel's forthcoming novel,
''The Mammoth Hunters,'' Crown Publishers will distribute a minimum of $20,000
among a variety of programs to combat illiteracy.

And royalties and profits from ''Liberty: The Statue and the American Dream,''
the official book of the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation, which has a
first printing of 300,000, will help restore the statue and create a museum on
Ellis Island.

More Authors Make Donations

Authors and publishers have made similar donations in the past, according to
industry officials, but not nearly as often as today.

One senior editor wryly suggested that the impulse for this trend is directly
related to ''making sure the I.R.S. doesn't get it all.''

Brian Comerford, a professor at Brooklyn Law School and a tax-law specialist,
said there is a considerable tax advantage to an author diverting substantial
royalties to a recognized charity: ''That way he can obtain a deduction as high
as 50 percent of his adjusted gross income.''

''But there does not seem to be any advantage over just simply receiving all the
royalties due, and giving the same amount to the charity,'' he added. ''Either
way, the deduction could not exceed 50 percent of the author's adjusted gross
income.''

Other publishing figures do not deny that, but they add that it is an effective
way to raise money while offering something of value - the book - in return, and
because of heightened social concern among writers and publishers.

''There is more of a general awareness these days of society's problems and
needs, at the same time more people find themselves in a position to answer
cries for help,'' said Louis Wolfe, president of Bantam Books, the publisher of
''Iacocca.''

Daniel Bell, Henry Ford 2d Professor of Social Sciences at Harvard University,
recalled that in the late 1950's the writers Arthur Koestler and Graham Greene
donated royalties to help writers in Europe and the United States who were down
on their luck.

''Those were writers with a poltical sensitivity,'' he said. ''Here it is
seemingly people who are less political. What it may represent is the return of
a degree of civic committment, some vague, inchoate movement toward
strengthening private institutions.''

''Writers are people who are often deeply committed, and this could well be a
sign of their commitment,'' said Dr. Mortimer Adler, the philosopher.

These are among the books, authors and publishers making such donations:

* A portion of the proceeds from the sale of Dominique Lapierre's ''City of
Joy,'' a book about Calcutta, will go toward Action Aid for Lepers' Children of
Calcutta, founded by the author and his wife.

* Profits from the sale of Rock Hudson's forthcoming biography, to be written by
Sara Davidson and published by William Morrow, will be donated to the Rock
Hudson AIDS Research Foundation.

* Profits from ''The Live Aid Worldwide Concert Book,'' to be distributed by
Unicorn Publishing House, will be donated to the Band Aid Trust for famine
relief in Africa. Perigee Books donated its profits from ''We Are the World,''
an account of the making of the record, to USA for Africa. Similarly, USA for
Africa will benefit from sales of ''Check Your Egoes at the Door,'' since the
author, Gary Trudeau; the book's publisher, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, and Mr.
Trudeau's newspaper syndicate, Universal Press, will all contribute royalties
and profits.

* George Mendoza donated royalties of ''Norman Rockwell's Patriotic Times'' to
the Community Foundation of Greater Washington for the Nancy Reagan Drug Abuse
Fund.

'Liberty' Partnership

In a unique partnership, four corporations have donated time, talent or money to
the book ''Liberty: The Statue and the American Dream,'' and the B. Dalton chain
has promised its support.

Summit Books, a division of Simon & Schuster, is distributing the book to stores
and donating all profits from its sale to the Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island
Foundation. The National Geographic Society produced the book at no cost; Leslie
Allen, a writer at the society, wrote the text of ''Liberty.''

The Kimberly-Clark Corporation contributed $1.5 million toward ''Liberty,''
which included the cost of paper for the first printing as well as paper,
printing and binding for 30,000 deluxe editions. And Quadgraphics Inc. paid for
the printing.

Authors not only donate royalties from a book - some of them establish
endowments, prizes or fellowships.

The Rev. Andrew Greeley, the priest, sociologist and best-selling novelist, gave
$1.2 million in 1983 to a chair of Catholic studies at the University of
Chicago, in honor of his parents, and gave $150,000 for a lectureship to St.
Mary of the Lake Seminary in Mundeline, Ill., his alma mater.

James Michener finances a number of writer-related projects, including a prize
for first novels and underwriting the cost of publishing books of American
poetry in Britain - books that, given the sales of most volumes of poetry, would
probably not find a foreign publisher otherwise. The sesquicentennial edition of
his new novel ''Texas,'' consisting of 400 copies bound in buffalo hide and
published by the University of Texas Press, will be given to major donors of the
press's fellowship training program, to which the author has already made a
major financial contribution.

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn assigned part of the royalties from ''The Gulag
Archipelago'' to the Russian Social Fund for Persecuted Persons and Their
Families, which assists families of Soviet dissidents.

Awards Encourage Writing

Ten percent of the royalties from Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s ''Robert Kennedy and
His Times,'' published in 1978, go to the Robert Kennedy Memorial, which gives
an annual cash prize to an author whose work most faithfully reflects Mr.
Kennedy's concern for the poor and the powerless.

Scott O'Dell, the author of many books for children and young adults,
established a $5,000 award to encourage the writing of historical fiction for
young people. The writers Glendon and Kathryn Swarthout, who live in Scottsdale,
Ariz., have long financed creative-writing awards at nearby Arizona State
University.

Veterans of the Vietnam War have benefited from this charitable impulse. W. W.
Norton is donating profits from its book ''Dear America,'' letters written from
Vietnam edited by Bernard Adelman, to the Veterans Job Programs. Harper & Row
published ''To Heal a Nation,'' by Jan C. Scruggs and Joel L. Swerdlow, a book
about the building of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial; the publisher and authors
alike have contributed a portion of their profits to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial Fund. Bantam is donating to various Vietnam veterans' organizations a
portion of the proceeds from the sale of nine Bantam books about the Vietnam War
and World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Garrison Keillor (Arthur Plotnik); photo of Lee Iacocca
(NYT/Andrew Sacks)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS PREDICTS REBELS' DEFEAT WITHIN A YEAR

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1414 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 31


President Ferdinand E. Marcos today predicted victory over the country's
Communist insurgency within one year, provided the Philippines receives
financial aid from the United States. At the same time, he rejected American
warnings of a political and military crisis in the Philippines.

Responding to American predictions that the New People's Army, the Communist
guerrilla force, might achieve a ''strategic stalemate'' with the Philippine
armed forces within three to five years, he said: ''If at all there are going to
be any changes, it will be because we have wiped out the N.P.A., or because they
have surrendered.''

In a three-hour interview, Mr. Marcos admitted to some irritation with
continuing American pressure on him and asserted that any show of dissension
between the two allies could be an invitation to meddling by the Soviet Union or
Vietnam.

U.S. Bases an Issue

While asserting his continued backing for the presence of two large American
bases here, he said a failure by the United States to pay the full compensation
agreed on could lead the Philippines to reassess its commitment to regional
defense.

Mr. Marcos denied recent reports in Washington that he is seriously ill. But he
said he has kidney problems that physicians watch closely and that have led them
to consider an operation.

Despite a somewhat frail appearance, the 68-year-old President displayed
remarkable stamina and maintained his concentration throughout the long
interview, which followed a 90-minute session with the American Ambassador,
Stephen W. Bosworth, and a half-hour meeting with aides.

Plans to Reinstate General

Mr. Marcos complained only of asthma and allergies, and he dabbed frequently at
his eyes with small pieces of gauze from a stack on his desk.

He said that despite American pressure on him, he planned to reinstate his close
friend, Gen. Fabian C. Ver, as Chief of Staff of the armed forces if, as
expected, the officer is acquitted of involvement in the 1983 assassination of
Benigno S. Aquino, the opposition leader.

But President Marcos added that the general might be removed after being
reinstated, as part of a wide-ranging review of the military designed to bring
younger officers into positions of command. He said he expected this decision to
be taken in December.

The interview was conducted in the President's study in Malacanang Palace a day
after a Congressional hearing in Washington at which Paul D. Wolfowitz, an
Assistant Secretary of State, called Mr. Marcos's response to American pressure
''inadequate and disappointing.'' Mr. Wolfowitz warned that if the situation was
not reversed, the Philippines could face ''a civil war on a massive scale.''

His statement was the latest in a series of warnings by American officials that
the Philippines is heading for crisis if it does not halt a growing insurgency,
carry out political changes, restructure the military and revitalize the economy
by breaking up monopolies based on patronage.

Challenge Seen as Military

In his approach to the problems of his country, Mr. Marcos made it clear that he
sees the insurgency as a military challenge that can be defeated on the
battlefield. This contrasted with the calls of his American critics for
political and economic changes.

Mr. Marcos said his contacts with Americans on these issues had been friendly,
and said: ''I wouldn't call it pressure. They are not pressuring us.'' Asked if
the constant suggestions, even if friendly, did not become irritating, he said,
''a little,'' and added: ''It at one time was irritating.''

Mr. Marcos said he told his most recent visitor, Sen. Paul Laxalt of Nevada, who
brought him a letter from President Reagan, that care must be taken in the
public tone of discussions.

''If our enemies ever think that you and I are quarreling,'' he said he told the
senator, ''and that we are not going to support each other in total, they might
be tempted'' to step up subversive activities in the Philippines. He mentioned
the Soviet Union, Vietnam and Middle Eastern nations.

Military Aid

''This idea of enticing this kind of intervention is something that is always in
our minds,'' he said.

Of prime concern to him now, he said, is a Congressional reassessment of
American military aid promised to the Philippines as part of the compensation
for the use of Clark Air Base and Subic Bay Naval Base.

Under a five-year agreement that will run until 1991, the United States is to
pay the Philippines $900 million, approximately half of it in military aid.

If the United States does not consider this an obligation, ''then let us know,''
he said. ''This means we will have to review the national security and defense
plans of this part of the Pacific. We cannot play our role.'' His remark
appeared to be a hint that his position of support for the bases could change.

Views on Isolation

Mr. Marcos said that he is not isolated from his people and has popular support
for his program of land redistribution. He said isolation ''is a danger for any
leader; there are people who want to polish up the apple with you and curry
favors.

''But a cordon sanitaire, no,'' he added. ''I have a telephone. I can get in
touch with any governor, mayor or battalion commander, and I do.''

He said he believed the tide had turned against the Communist insurgents because
the Philippine armed forces had ''more ingenuity, more capability'' and ''are
committing less mistakes than the rebels.''

''In one year we'll wipe them out,'' he said, ''if we get the proper backing
from both Governments and the compensation military package.''

Argument for Aid

Congress has been debating a possible cut in the military portion of the aid,
which Mr. Marcos said is essential to the fight against the insurgents.

He said the money was needed because ''we have to keep our land mobility; right
now it's deficient.'' In addition, he said, ''we have to repair our helicopters,
communications need to be improved. We have to work out other logistics that are
required.''

Mr. Marcos denied American assessments that the New People's Army is growing. He
said he accepted an assessment last week by the acting Chief of Staff, Gen.
Fidel S. Ramos, that the rebels number 12,500. He rejected American estimates of
15,000 or more.

''Yes,'' he said, ''12,500 possibly - 70 per cent armed, training very poor,
morale going down, quarrels between commanders increasing and surrenders of
regulars increasing, with losses of camps and command posts.''

Despite the confidence he expressed in these assessments, Mr. Marcos said the
possibility haunts him that he could be mistaken.

But he said he considered the fact that some insurgents are surrendering to be
particularly significant.

''It's easy to say they are increasing in numbers. It's easy to say they are
increasing in strength,'' he said. But if so, he added, ''why are they running
away from our soldiers now? Before, they used to confront the soldiers, ambush
them.''

Mr. Marcos said the high-level review of the military was called for because
''some of our generals may be overage, and initiative is the peculiar domain of
the young.''

Comments on Health

Mr. Marcos said he believed one reason for Senator Laxalt's visit was to see
whether ''I'm a doddering old man who can barely issue orders.''

''I am not sick with any serious ailment,'' said Mr. Marcos.

He denied that he had had a kidney transplant or that he suffers, as has often
been reported, from lupus erythematosus, which can affect the kidneys.

But he said one kidney works at 70 to 80 per cent of capacity because
microscopic bits of shrapnel from a World War II wound are embedded in it.

He said doctors had decided not to operate to remove the shrapnel because of his
age. Last November, he said, he suffered through a painful session in which some
of the shrapnel was passed like gallstones with his urine.

He denied that he receives regular medication for his kidney ailment but said
that at one point, ''there were trials with the implanting of cells, pancreas; I
don't know if they included the liver, I didn't ask any more.''

''All I asked,'' he said, ''was, 'How am I doing? Am I going to be able to
urinate?' And they said, 'Why don't you try it?' And I did and I was able to
urinate as much as 3,000 c.c. in one day, which is more than normal, thanks be
to God.''

''If you'd seen me going to the comfort room,'' he added. ''People with kidney
trouble don't do that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Marcos (Gamma Liason/Casio Barrat) (page A10)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE TALK OF HANOI;
VERVE ON VIETNAM'S AVENUES, SATIRE ON THE STAGE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


A resident ambassador calls it Hanoi's ''simply lovely'' season - the weeks
between the stifling months of summer and winter's dismal, bitter chill. The sky
is blue, the air fresh, and the streets are full of activity.

In the morning people jog, exercise in parks and squares and seem to dawdle on
the way to work. By evening, a magician has appeared on the steps of the Central
Bank, where an energetic band has swung into ''Besame Mucho.'' Couples draw
closer in the dusk.

''Streets very bicycle,'' a pedicab driver explains cheerily as he swerves in
the twilight to avoid a pedaling teen-ager wearing a T-shirt that says ''Cheech
and Chong.'' On a downtown corner, a vendor with several dozen mugs is selling
beer from a tub.

This year the change in atmosphere may be more than just seasonal, some longtime
residents of the city say. Visitors returning after six months or a year of
absence tend to agree.

Lipstick Is Back

There are still bullock carts where other Asian cities would have cars, but
there are also more motorbikes, more fashionably dressed young people, and more
women in rainbows of soft ao dais, the traditional Vietnamese tunics and
trousers that were once seen less frequently among the black pajamas. Lipstick
and jewelry are making comebacks.

Some of Hanoi's new look has to do with the city's celebration in September of
the 40th anniversary of the declaration of independence from France. Squares
were repaved, buildings painted, and a cluster of picturesque but derelict shops
around the city's central lake removed to make more room for grass and park
benches.

Other changes grow out of new economic policies that appear to be taking into
account, at least for the moment, the grumbles of long-suffering consumers.

Many North Vietnamese have gone south over the last decade to have a look at
Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, and have come back fascinated by its looser and
more prosperous-looking way of life. Is the Grass Greener in China?  A lot of
people, diplomats say, also have an eye on China's ''modernizations.'' Foreign
visitors are often asked for details about developments there, and whether life
has improved as much as they have heard.

In one of those chance encounters that seem more frequent in Hanoi these days, a
senior army officer in uniform struck up a conversation in French with a visitor
in a city park. After talking a little about his relatives in Texas and
California, he suddenly began to muse about his impending retirement and how,
after nearly 40 years in the army - he joined at the age of 17 to fight the
French - he could look forward to only more hardship in old age.

''There is never enough food,'' he said, patting his lean rib cage. ''We live
five in one room, and there is no peace. Something is wrong with our economy.''

The runaway hit of the theatrical season is ''Me and Us,'' a satire on
petty-minded bureaucrats who get in the way of progress. Tickets, like
everything else, are for sale on the black market, and there are reports that
the company is looking for a bigger theater.

The play, by Luu Quang Yu, got by the censors, the knowledgeable say, because it
is essentially in line with criticisms made by Hanoi's economic pragmatists, who
have been in the ascendancy since a party meeting in June.

The play, which originated in Ho Chi Minh City (where it won an award) and has
been televised nationally, ridicules the sycophancy of party officials,
make-work jobs, endless political meetings and ritualistic jargon.

Audiences seem to empathize with the tragic hero who is clobbered by the system
for showing initiative. As a line in the play puts it: he was ''wrong to be
right too soon.''

It is a lively season in literature, too, with the most popular books said to be
stories of life in the countryside, where the successful policies of the
pragmatists coexist with unpopular political drives to collectivize.

A reporter asked a Vietnamese official to describe a particular book that is
making the rounds among Vietnamese in Bangkok.

''It's about how everything goes wrong,'' he said with a wan smile.

There is a building boom of sorts in progress in Hanoi. A diplomat said it was a
result of the Government's decision to loosen controls over construction
materials, and release bricks and other long absent items for private purchase.
On several streets piles of waiting bricks and cement were destined to become
restaurants, workers said. In the countryside, farmers build bigger houses.

The freeing of construction materials came at about the time the central
Government decided to make some drastic changes in the way its employees, a
large percentage of the work force in this srictly controlled Communist economy,
were paid. Ration coupons to be exchanged for goods were abolished and wages at
least theoretically increased.

Civil servants are sometimes wary of new policies and divided about whether they
will work. Several said they now had more money to spend and valued the greater
freedom of choice in making purchases. Others said they did not expect
significant improvement in their lives.

''We still all have to have two jobs,'' a Government interpreter said.

A young Vietnamese woman from Europe, back for the first time in more than 12
years to visit her elderly father, said she was saddened that life was no easier
than it had been in wartime.

''My country is beautiful,'' she said. ''But the people have no time to look at
beautiful things.''

Having a foreign connection is becoming as much an asset in Hanoi as it has long
been in the south, where relatives abroad supply many luxuries and sometimes the
necessities of life.

In Hanoi some commodities that find their way to market stalls are from the
Soviet-bloc countries, where young people go to work or study.

Vietnamese laugh at Western reports that they are sent there as forced labor to
repay the country's mammoth debts to Moscow and its allies. On the contrary,
they say, so popular are the work assignments that people pay bribes to get
them. Going to Poland or Czechoslovakia can mean a down jacket or tape deck at
the very least.

More Western goods are also finding their way here from Thailand, Japan, Europe
and the United States.

In an embroidery shop, where a visitor startled the sales staff by saying she
had come to buy a blouse, not change money - the real business of most private
traders, it seems - stylish dresses made of American fabric were produced from a
back room. So were T-shirts embroidered with American cartoon characters.

The shop manager, spurred by the customer's comments on the high quality of the
work, plunged into a display cabinet, scattering bits of cloth, and emerged with
a pile of fashion catalogues from Frankfurt, Stockholm and Los Angeles.

''Everything comes from the West or Hong Kong,'' he said. ''Many Russian ladies
shop here.''

Sometimes Hanoi's two societies, the secretive Government and the curious
people, intersect jarringly for a brief second. One recent morning, a bicyclist
pulled up alongside two Americans in ''cyclo'' pedicabs and began the litany of
''where from'':

Russia? Sweden? Germany? America! ''I used to teach physics in Newark, New
Jersey,'' he said in English. ''I came home in 1971,'' he added, doffing a smart
straw hat as he cruised along.

He had begun drifting animatedly into reminiscences of New York, when he
suddenly halted in mid-sentence and pedaled off, his face without expression and
his eyes straight ahead as if he had never seen the strangers.

Beneath the next shade tree was a policeman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hanoi residents (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM ANSWERS BY PHILIPPINE LEADER IN INTERVIEW

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 31


Following are excerpts from President Ferdinand E. Marcos's answers to questions
in an interview here today, as recorded by The New York Times:

On Gen. Fabian C. Ver This is something we will take care of when the time
comes. There is agreement among the officers that you should do justice where
justice is due. You don't condemn anybody who is acquitted; if he is acquitted
he goes back. But we will see what arrangements will be made. I want to get the
armed forces together and come to an agreement about what we should do about the
armed forces, and not just General Ver. The entire armed forces is to be
restudied.

Reinstating Ver

Yes, to start with, but it would be after several studies made on what to do
with the entire armed forces. This is a decision which we have not made up to
now. I would be merely speculating if I answered it. Secondly the decision
should be made in collaboration with the senior officers and for that matter
with the younger officers.

Insurgent Recruits

Oh come on, let's not kid ourselves. These recruits are mass-based recruits, two
weeks' training, shooting air rifles, etc. etc. How can you train recruits when
all the training camps have been taken, except one or two. It's easy to say
they're increasing in numbers. It's easy to say they're increasing in strength.
But if they are increasing in number and increasing in strength, then why are
they running away from our soldiers now? Before, they used to confront the
soldiers, ambush them. There are less rebel-initiated encounters than
Government-initiated encounters now.

To say that we are not committing errors, that's ridiculous. But we have reached
a point where we are committing less mistakes than the rebels.

Turning the Tide

Oh I think we have. I will not reveal to you our sources, but our sources are
very accurate. They say the morale is very low, there is quarreling in the high
ranks of the elite commanders, there is a quarrel between the ideologues and
militarists. The militarists want to accelerate and the ideologues laugh at them
and say how can you accelerate when you are losing all the battles.

The American Bases

It's something that we probably should study very well. But I am one of those
who always thought that the Philippines must contribute its own share, no matter
how modest, in maintaining peace in the region and about the world. I don't talk
about contingency plans, but we do have contingency plans. But we are not about
to talk about them.

Comparisons With the Shah

The Shah of Iran was so far above reality that the people really did not know
him. The big difference is all the reforms that we conducted were approved by
the people. They supported them. Being above reality is a danger for any leader.
There are people who want to polish up the apple with you and curry favors.

But a cordon sanitaire, no. I have a telephone. I can get in touch with any
governor, mayor or battalion commander if necessary, and I do. When I receive a
report and it sounds funny, it's too good, I immediately have it checked. I
check it myself.

Changes in the Military

We are going to strengthen the command-making process, accelerated and defined
functions, get the garrison troops that are not doing anything now except
perhaps some of them being godfather to gambling syndicates, take them out,
retrain them. We admit that there are scalawags, scoundrels in almost every
organization. Some of our generals may be overage, and the initiative belongs,
is a peculiar domain of the young. We need a few more officers who will keep on
striking, hitting, who are restless when they are not in combat and not doing
anything when they know that there are some urgent missions to accomplish.

I know many of my enemies personally. I have dealt with them. I know them not
only personally but in some cases they were with me in battle. I know their
habits. There are some good officers there in the N.P.A. But they are weak in
many ways. They are overambitious. They keep quarreling like the opposition
also. The Filipino trait of factionalism is one of their defects.

Prediction on the Rebels

In one year we'll wipe them out. If we get the proper backing from both
Governments, and the compensation military package. We have to keep our land
mobility; right now it's deficient. We have to repair our helicopters.
Communications have to be improved. We have to work out the other logistics that
are required. These are the usual weaknesses of any small developing country.
Land mobility, air support, counterinsurgency support, then naval mobility, and
especially because we are an archipelago. All of these have to be improved.  I
think we've got more ingenuity, Senator Laxalt's Visit If our enemies ever think
that you and I are quarrelling, and that we are not going to support each other
in total, they might be tempted to go all over the same scenario in 1972. I
don't know if we can talk about this openly. I did tell them that we should not
do anything that would invite support from outside. And of course it is
something that has been ever present in my mind, and apparently in their minds.
And this is why all this ambivalence on both sides.

Is it an obligation of the United States to pay this or not? If so, let us know.
This means we will have to review the national security and defense plans of
this part of the Pacific. We cannot play our role.  Outside Forces No, no signs.
The indications are that the local indigenous Communists are raising their own
funds. In fact there is starting to become a serious problem in the matter of
the division of the spoils. How much goes to the central committee and how much
goes to the local front.

They think this is the flash point, or crucial point. If at all there are going
to be any changes, it will be because we have wiped out the N.P.A., or because
they have surrendered. We are asking some of their leaders now to make a
decision, come in and help us.

His Health

I'm supposed to have lupus, which is supposed to affect the different organs of
the body, and I am supposed to die in six months. This story, as Mark Twain
said, is slightly exaggerated. I am not sick with lupus or any such similar
disease, which I understand is a form of malignancy. I am not sick with any
serious ailments. If I ever get sick to the point where I can't work as
President, I will inform our people without hesitation.

My kidney apparently was hit by small microscopic shrapnel. As you know I was
wounded five times, and one of them was a mortar wound that hit my right side.
But they were able to eliminate all of this. They were ready to operate, they
told me, but one said, 'Let's take out these microscopic things. Open it up,
take them out. You're healthy, your heart is strong, you have a 120/80 pulse
rate, you are exercising regularly, but you are still 67,' and they said
operations like this may last longer than you expect.'

They were taken out with the urine. How they did it, you ask them.  And
incidentally, there were also trials with the implanting of cells, pancreas, I
don't know if they included the liver, I didn't ask anymore. All I asked was how
I am doing, am I going to be able to urinate, and they said, 'Why don't you try
it,' and I did and I was able to urinate as much as 3,000 c.c.'s in one day,
which is more than normal. Thanks to God. If you'd seen me going to the comfort
room, people with kidney trouble don't do that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICER CHARGED WITH BRUTALITY WINS SUPPORT ALONG UPPER WEST SIDE BEAT

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words


When the night shift replaces the day shift at the 24th Precinct, and policemen
gather in front of the station house on West 100th Street, Officer Leon Flowers
is lately the target of good-natured heckling.

One fellow officers shouts, ''Hey, Leon, you need a spokesman?''

Another chimes in with ''Hey, Leon, can you autograph my nightstick?''

The needling is a result of Officer Flowers's celebrity along a stretch of
Broadway between 100th and 110th Streets, where it seems that just about
everyone knows his name.

Outsiders may have wondered about the banners that spanned the avenue for a few
days last week, until wind or vandals tore them from the lampposts. But
neighborhood residents and merchants did not need to be reminded that this was
''Flowers Country,'' with interlopers advised to ''Leave Your Guns and Drugs at
the Border.''

For almost two years, until his re-assignment last week by the 24th Precinct,
Officer Flowers walked a foot patrol along the avenue and gained the devotion of
people in the area, who refer to him affectionately as ''Leon'' or, more often,
''our cop.''

During his first year on the beat, in 1984, Officer Flowers was twice charged
with brutality, and his departmental trials are scheduled for this winter. That
did not daunt the local citizens, however, and rather than doubting Officer
Flowers, they scoffed at the charges, hung supportive banners, raised money for
his legal defense and sent testimonial letters to police officials.

Officer Flowers's supporters are concentrated on Broadway near 103d and 104th
Streets, where the east side of the avenue is notorious for unseemly types
loitering outside welfare hotels, littering and urinating in the street and
dealing or using drugs in doorways and telephone booths. The neighborhood
citizens say it was their cop who chased the troublemakers and returned the mean
streets to the people who live and work there.

Now, these citizens are outraged because the new commanding officer of the 24th
Precinct, Deputy Inspector Frank Biehler, suddenly removed Officer Flowers from
his beat last week, informing him of the reassignment, to a variety of duties,
on the day he returned from a two-week vacation in Mexico.

Many of the merchants and residents express fear that the reassignment will be
viewed by other officers as a punishment for vigorous law enforcement, and they
wonder if Inspector Biehler is jealous of Officer Flowers's popularity.

The precinct's commander denies both suggestions. The reassignment, he said, was
primarily a result of matters relating to the brutality charges ''that I am not
at liberty to discuss'' and also a result of changing patrol needs in the Upper
West Side precinct.

''This was not a cavalier decision,'' Inspector Biehler said. ''I didn't just
snatch a cop off Broadway to aggravate these merchants. There are two sides to
this story.''

Officer Flowers said the community's attitude - including supportive remarks by
Ruth W. Messinger and Carolyn B. Maloney of the City Council -has ''made the
bumpy road a lot easier to travel.'' He noted that the response was particularly
cheering at a time when the public is attentive to police behavior because of
the trial of six transit officers charged in the death of Michael Stewart and
allegations that prisoners were tortured at a Queens station house.

''For them to stick by me is the ultimate,'' said Officer Flowers, a 35-year-old
Vietnam veteran with a college degree in criminal justice and 12 years of police
experience, including 5 as a teacher at the Police Academy. ''These people are
like family to me. I looked forward to coming to work and they looked forward to
seeing me.''

Officer Flowers's lawyer, Raymond J. Aab, a former police officer, said he was
confident that his client would be vindicated on both charges, although he
called the second ''more problematic.''

Brutality Complaints

In the first complaint, Officer Flowers's accuser was a known drug dealer,
subsequently slain in East Harlem, who charged that the officer had used
''unnecessary force'' while arresting him.

In the second complaint, the accusers were a man and woman, both joggers, whom
Officer Flowers encountered in Central Park. That complaint alleges, among other
things, that Officer Flowers ''struck a female about the face with his
nightstick.''

Officer Flowers said he had done nothing wrong.

The first charge, he said, was an attempt to remove him from his beat by the
drug abusers who had congregated unmolested on the corner of Broadway and 103d
Street until he began foot patrol after a series of neighborhood murders.

''There were winos and junkies out there who respect me,'' Officer Flowers said.
''In spite of their stupor they understood I had a job to do and said, 'O.K.,
officer, we'll move along.' Then there were others who don't believe fat meat is
greasy. They are adamant that this is their territory. Those that were hard
rocks, tough guys, I arrested.''

No 'Verbal Gymnastics'

The second incident, according to Officer Flowers, who is black, began when the
couple in the park directed a racist remark at him and he responded.

''It ended up as an arrest situation,'' he said. ''You can't just stand there
and go through verbal gymnastics with people. We need respect. People can't use
police officers as punching bags, to vent their frustrations.''

''It's very ironic that I'm in this situation having taught these dynamics,''
Officer Flowers said. ''I was always emphatic about de-emphasizing force,
telling my students that we were out here to enforce the law and not to punish
anybody. If an officer exceeds the bounds of authority, he should be questioned
about it. Recourse is not a privilege, it's a right. But, let's not be
nit-picking and generating things that don't exist.''

In interviews with about a dozen residents and merchants in the vicinity, none
reported ever having seen Officer Flowers manhandle a person in custody. While
those interviewed were not privy to details of the charges, most of them said
emphatically that this was a man they had grown to know and admire, a man they
considered incapable of brutality.

Support for Aggressiveness

Within the community, however, some of the merchants condone a certain level of
aggressiveness when an officer is charged with controlling street crime.

''How's he supposed to treat these bad people?'' asked Louis Lagonia, who works
at the Oppenheimer butcher shop on 98th Street and visits five blocks uptown
with his friend John Ortiz, the owner of the New York Meat Market. ''If he says,
'Oh, excuse me,' they'll spit in his eye, hit him in the head with a bottle. As
far as I'm concerned these bums, these vagrants, have lost their rights.''

''I never saw him push anybody, even people who deserved to be pushed,'' Mr.
Ortiz said. ''He'd just go, 'O.K., Let's break it up.' He's a little, skinny guy
but when they saw him they'd take off.''

There are merchants in the area not involved in the movement to reinstate
Officer Flowers, but they join their neighbors in lamenting the absence of a man
who made his rounds on foot with a wave and a smile and an interest in passing
the time of day.

''A patrolman who is always moving, always saying 'Hi,' '' said H. C. Ahn, who
runs a newsstand at 103d Street. ''In New York City that doesn't happen every
day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Police Officer Leon Flowers; photo of Fay Leeper; photo of
John Ortiz; photo of Deputy Inspector Frank Biehler (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHAPIRO'S LONG-SHOT CAMPAIGN OFFERS 'NEW IDEAS'

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1894 words

DATELINE: NEWARK


Twelve years ago Peter Shapiro, a junior at Harvard who was determined to have a
career in journalism, went to Washington to work as a reporter for The Wall
Street Journal for the summer.

He wrote several stories, including one that appeared on the front page on the
impending visit of the then Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev. But he left the
capital, soured by what he called the ''rat pack'' mentality of the press corps
and the ''mediocrity'' of the politicians he had covered.

Rather than cover the politicians, he said, he decided to try to upgrade the
profession by running for office.

''I was driving up to Canada at the end of college with a friend, and I said,
'I'm going to run for office,' '' Mr. Shapiro recalled. ''He said: 'You're
crazy. You have to put up with all kinds of compromises.' ''

Beating the Old Guard

Mr. Shapiro ignored his friend's cynicism, and ever since he has been scaling
the political ladder, usually by running - and winning - against the old guard.

Next Tuesday, as Democratic candidate for Governor, the 33-year-old Mr. Shapiro
faces his toughest political fight, a race against Governor Kean. The most
recent polls show Mr. Shapiro trailing by 40 to 50 points.

At 23, his political career began successfully when he was elected to the State
Assembly. Two years later he defeated a well-entrenched Democratic machine in
Essex County to become County Executive. He easily won re-election in 1982. Last
June he plucked the Democratic gubernatorial nomination from a crowd of party
veterans in the primary election.

This fall, however, the telegenic Mr. Shapiro, whose unruly shock of dark hair
and boyish looks often give him the aura of a student-body president, finds
himself pitted against a modern and popular incumbent who is just as skilled as
he in the techniques of television.

A Lonely Campaign Trail

It is this long-shot quality of Mr. Shapiro's candidacy that shapes his campaign
days, infuses his rhetoric and colors his humor.

He regales audiences - sometimes hard to find, since most statewide unions have
deserted him for Governor Kean - with self-deprecating stories about the
loneliness of his quest.

He likes to tell about a visit to a fishery in Cape May County, one of the most
remote areas of the state.

''After half an hour of looking at the fish, I said it would be great to meet
some people,'' Mr. Shapiro recently told a group of newspaper executives.
''Someone on the way to the freezer said: 'Hey, Peter Shapiro, I come from Essex
County.' I ask, 'Why is an Essex County person working in Cape May?'

'' 'Well, sir, I'm on a work-release program from Leesburg State Prison.' Which
meant he couldn't vote at all.''

Taking a leaf from the Presidential effort of Gary Hart, Mr. Shapiro has
attempted to project himself as the candidate with new ideas. He concedes that
New Jersey is in better shape than it was 10 years ago. But he believes the
public should start thinking about the future rather than being satisfied with
the present. He has been labeled a neo-liberal, a Democrat who believes that
government should do more with less.

Progress in Essex Cited

To make this point, Mr. Shapiro delights in showing what a fiscal tightwad he
has been in Essex County.

''I had a battle with the Sheriff,'' he said one morning as he eased into the
passenger seat of his campaign car, a stack of newspapers beside him and the
back seat awash with discarded issues. ''He wanted a Buick for himself. I said
he could only have a Chevy. Then I said he could have the Buick if he could get
a model for the same amount of money as a Chevy. He did.'' After being elected
County Executive, Mr. Shapiro set about paring the size of the government he had
inherited. With the help of two White House aides lent by President Jimmy
Carter, he reorganized the county government's unwieldy web of 68 divisions into
eight departments.

''Carter called me within a week or two of winning the election and said he'd
like to help out,'' Mr. Shapiro said. ''I tend to take people at their word, so
I said the Federal assumption of welfare would help the most. He said he wasn't
sure about that. So I said how about sending some people to help.''

Mr. Shapiro also persuaded Western Electric, based in New Jersey, to lend him
the company's fleet manager. With his assistance, Mr. Shapiro pruned the number
of county cars and introduced computerized gas allocation for the remaining
ones.

A Drive to Manage

''My own greatest thing is how you make things work,'' Mr. Shapiro said in a
recent interview. ''There are two big roles in government: the executive and the
legislative. Having served a little of each, serving as an elected manager is
very rewarding.''

It was that drive to manage, combined with his sizable margin of victory when he
was re-elected in 1982 that propelled him into the Governor's race, he said.

''After winning with the biggest margin in Essex County, I said, 'Gee whiz, I
ought to spread my wings.' It made me think about going after it aggressively.
If you're looking for a can-do job or one you can turn into a can-do job, it's
the governorship. It has never been held by anyone who had any experience
managing.''

In these waning days of the campaign, Mr. Shapiro is picked up each morning at
his converted carriage house, hidden from a South Orange street by tall trees.
He is often bursting with the latest bulletin on his 7-month-old son, Samuel,
born three months' premature. The baby is now healthy enough to be photographed
with his parents for a campaign brochure designed to look like People magazine.

At Ease With Television

At times, he appears captivated by the technical aspects of television and the
inner workings of the newspapers that cover New Jersey. Unlike the old political
guard he has defeated over the years, he talks the jargon of television as
easily as he boasts about the county budget.

When a television reporter on the campaign trail asked Mr. Shaprio to stand
still a little longer so her crew could take more shots of the reporter asking
questions, Mr. Shapiro knowingly inquired, ''You need some cutaways?''

Mr. Shapiro's familiarity with the media comes in part from a generally
inquisitive nature that took him on several lengthy overseas trips before he
turned 21 and that leads him now to read literature about faraway places, like
Eric Newby's ''A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush,'' see plenty of movies and
occasionally try $55 bottles of wine.

''Politics is far from my main interest,'' he said, as his car took off for a
Sunday parade. ''Politics is my work.''

An Adventuresome Bent

Before starting at Harvard, he hitchhiked through Asia for a year and traveled
by sea on merchant marine papers that he had wangled through family connections.

In college he devoted much energy to The Harvard Crimson, hoping to become
president of the daily campus paper as it began its transformation in the
mid-70's from the confrontational stance it had adopted during the Vietnam War
to a more quiescent tone. He went to Angola on a Harvard-sponsored trip and came
back so appalled by the Portuguese colonial regime that he urged in The Crimson
that Harvard get rid of its shares in Gulf Oil, a company with large holdings
there.

Though he lost the newspaper presidency to a more radical colleague, he was
chosen managing editor, the No. 2 post, overseeing the news operation.

Like many of his classmates, Mr. Shapiro was ambitious, but some colleagues on
The Crimson said they found him aggressively so, a quality that earned him the
nickname of ''the snake'' around the newspaper's offices.

''Everyone was intensely ambitious, but it wasn't cool to show it,'' said Evan
Thomas, now an associate editor at Time magazine. ''Shapiro was guilty of
expressing what everyone else felt.''

Back to His Roots

Unlike many of his classmates who pursued their ambitions in Washington or New
York City, Mr. Shapiro went back to his roots in Essex County, a place of
well-to-do suburbs astride pockets of deep poverty. ''He was impressed with the
idea that decent people should run for office,'' said his father, Dr. Myron
Shapiro, an ear, nose and throat specialist.

As a way of initially sizing up the political landscape in the state capital, he
worked with Alan Sagner, a longtime family friend, then in Trenton as
Commissioner of Transportation in the administration of Gov. Brendan T. Byrne.
Eight months later he was running for the Assembly. ''I told him he could get
his name out, but he couldn't win,'' said Peter Schecter, then an organizer with
the American Civil Liberties Union, who has worked with Mr. Shapiro ever since.

But Mr. Shapiro singled out 25 of the 114 election districts, methodically
knocked on doors in only the targeted area, and got his friend from college,
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., to accompany him on election eve.

Victory by 183 Votes

Mr. Shapiro keeps the tallies of the election in his desk drawer on the fifth
floor of the Hall of Records in Newark. He scraped by with a margin of 183 votes
of the 8,530 cast.

In those giddy days of youthful power, Gina Glantz, then his chief of staff,
recalled that Mr. Shapiro's ''life was politics, government and a good time.''

In 1981 he married Bryna Linett, a schoolteacher. They met 17 months before, he
said, strangers dining at separate tables in a Greenwich Village restaurant. ''I
was an active single man at the time,'' he recalled. ''I picked up a
conversation.''

Miss Linett, 36, plays a significant behind-the-scenes role in the campaign for
governor, which is essentially run by the candidate and his close friend and
peer, Paul Bograd, who has the title of campaign manager. Miss Linett attends
strategy meetings at their home and gives advice.

It was she, Mr. Shapiro said, who persuaded him to stay in the primary when
their newborn son was given little chance of living. They like to hike together,
and before their son was born, went to the movies, often three times a week.

Strong Opinions on Movies

Indeed, Mr. Shapiro's opinions on movies run so deep that The Crimson's movie
critic at the time, Michael Sragow, now a critic for The San Francisco Examiner,
remembers a scuffle with Mr. Shapiro in the newsroom over Mr. Shapiro's
''condescending'' view of the movie ''Deliverance,'' which Mr. Sragow liked.

Friends say it seems apt that it should be Mr. Shapiro, fascinated by the power
of the media and riveted by movies, who would adapt the movie ''The Candidate''
to his campaign during the primary.

In the spring some of Mr. Shapiro's campaign commercials carried the tag line
''A Better Way,'' the actor Robert Redford's slogan when he portrayed a
presidential aspirant, Bill McKay.

Mr. Shapiro enjoys ethnic foods, prodding his advance man to stop at Japanese,
Indian or Thai places for on-the-road meals. Whenever he can while campaigning,
however, he stops by David's Cookies to buy the yogurt and cookies that he likes
and that are popular with the baby-boom generation his candidacy is aimed at.

Like Governor Kean, Mr. Shapiro enjoys playing tennis, and the Democrat
sometimes takes on journalists or other politicians. Two years ago, at a time
when Mr. Shapiro was thinking aloud about running for Governor, Mr. Kean invited
him for a match. It was doubles, and Mr. Shapiro's side won.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Shapiro with Samara Green (NYT/Edward Hausner)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHANISTAN'S OTHER FRONT: A WORLD OF DRUGS

BYLINE: By ARTHUR BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: GHURBAND, Afghanistan


Soviet soldiers in Afghanistan use drugs extensively, and some Russians sell
gasoline, ammunition and stolen guns to support their habits, according to
several Russian defectors living with Afghan rebels.

In addition, several rebel commanders say that they have captured Russians while
the soldiers were drugged or while they were trying to buy hashish or heroin
from village merchants.

According to Western diplomats and analysts of the Afghan situation in Pakistan
and elsewhere, Russian troops in Afghanistan have turned to drugs for the same
reasons that many Americans did in Vietnam: They are young, away from home
constraints, bored, frightened and under fierce pressure to prove themselves.
And many of the Russian soldiers in Afghanistan are said by the defectors to
have a 10th-to-12th-grade education.

Golden Crescent Opium Trade

Afghanistan is one of the world's major production centers for opium and its
derivatives, according to American narcotics agents in Pakistan and elsewhere in
Asia. It is part of the so-called golden crescent extending from Iran to
Pakistan and Afghanistan, an area that the agents said accounts for more than
half of the world's opium output.

Afghanistan is also a major producer of marijuana-based drugs like hashish that
are consumed throughout South Asia and the Middle East. The profits from these
drugs are great; according to the narcotics agents, Afghan hashish can be
smuggled out of Pakistan, where it costs $25 a pound, for sale in Saudi Arabia
at $1,500 a pound.

Rahmatullah, a Soviet defector interviewed in Afghanistan who was previously
named Aleksei Ivanovich Olenin, discussed the drug situation among Soviet
soldiers. He said that at the Soviet base at Qiligai, Afghanistan, where he
worked as a truck driver before his defection, ''there are 10,000 Russian
soldiers there, and a lot of times they have nothing to do.

''Half of them smoke hashish,'' he said. ''The officers get drunk on vodka.''

Selling Guns for Hashish

''The soldiers are paid in rubles and never have enough money to even buy
cigarettes,'' he said. Referring to the afghani, the Afghan currency, he added
that if the Russians ''want to buy from the Afghans, they need afghanis, and so
they sell gas and ammunition and anything else they can.''

Naik Mohammed, another Russian who has defected to the rebels, said in a
separate interview, ''That is true.''

''They sell gas and ammunition,'' said Mr. Mohammed, who said he was previously
known as Gennadi Anatolyevich Tsevma.

''They steal guns from a storeroom and sell them,'' he said. ''They use the
money to buy hashish.''

Another report came from Ahmed, a Russian who said he defected from the Soviet
base at Abadan and was formerly called Aleksandr Yuryevich Levenets. ''They sell
gas and ammunition to get money to buy hashish,'' he said. ''If a soldier is
killed, someone would try to steal his rifle to sell it for money for hashish.''

There are many opium poppy fields in northern Afghanistan. Generally, there are
about 50 poppy plants in a small plot mixed with plots of other crops such as
tomatoes and okra. Tall marijuana plants grow everywhere.

The rebels say they are opposed to both alcohol and drugs because the Koran is
against them. They say they are fighting a religious war and will do nothing to
violate Islamic teachings. When questioned about drug use, rebel commanders
refuse to comment other than to say that their men do not use drugs.

The reason for this appears to be that the commanders do not want to divert
attention from fighting the Russians and do not want to do anything that might
hurt their relationships with Afghan villagers, on whom they depend for food,
shelter and information.

All rebel sources acknowledge, however, that groups of heavily armed men who
travel the same routes they rebels travel may well be smugglers or drug dealers.
Drug dealers can roam freely in much of Afghanistan, calling themselves rebels,
and can hire bodyguards with Kalashnikovs and horses and camels for transport.

Groups Pass Silently

In traveling with rebel convoys from Pakistan into Afghanistan, armed groups
pass each other on trails and will not ask questions; to do so might mark a
person as a spy either for the Russians or for some other hostile group.

Sulfi Finder, a rebel commander in northern Afghanistan, said he had heard many
reports of rebels' catching Russians while they were drugged.

About two years ago, he said, a platoon of Russians was making a sweep through
villages, mostly deserted, near a highway. Some rebels from his group were
hidden in one of the houses to prepare for an ambush, he said, and ''eight
Russians came in looking for food.''

''They put their guns in a corner and began smoking hashish,'' Mr. Finder said.
''After a while our men took their guns and captured them. There were so many of
them and so many other Russians in the area they could not take them away, so
they killed them.''

Mohammed Salim, a rebel commander in the area of the Qiligai base, recalled the
story of one Russian seized by the rebels. He ''would not listen,'' to the
rebels, ''and was alway trying to get hashish from the villagers.''

Sales Not Discouraged

Mohammed Sabir is a rebel commander at Ghurband, in Parwan Province, about 20
miles west of the Russian base at Pul-i-Mattak and some 50 miles north of Kabul.
He was asked what he knew of Russian transactions for hashish. He said he did
nothing to discourage such sales because the sales helped demoralize the
Russians.

''There is a shop near the Pul-i-Mattak base where they go to say they want to
buy hashish,'' he said.

Young boys make the exchange, he said, because the Russians feel it is safer to
deal with them than with adults. ''One boy has done this so often he has learned
some Russian,'' he said.

In another incident, Mr. Finder said, ''We captured a Russian near Kenjan who
was wandering around out of his mind because of hashish.''

Mr. Finder said he had made an arrangement with sympathetic shopkeepers in the
area that if Russians come to them seeking to buy hashish, the shopkeepers would
tell him.

Russian Seeking Heroin

''About nine or ten months ago,'' he went on, ''a Russian who could speak some
Persian asked for heroin. He was sent to one of our men.''

This man, Mr. Finder said, did not wear a beard like the rebels and looked like
an ordinary person in the bazaar, although he had a pistol under his shirt.

He told the Russian that the heroin could be obtained in another village, and
the two got into a truck.

The rebel ''tried to take out his pistol to capture the Russian, but the Russian
fought him,'' Mr. Finder said. ''Other mujahedeen came and pulled the Russian to
the ground. They took his Kalashnikov and pointed it at him.

''He shouted: 'Why are you doing this? I am your friend.' They shot and killed
him right there and left his body for the Russians to find.''

More recently, Mr. Finder said, a Russian officer asked for heroin in the
bazaar. ''We decided we would capture him alive to use in exchange for some of
our men who had been taken prisoner,'' he said.

But the Russian became suspicious and reached for his gun, Mr. Finder said, and
the rebels shot him dead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Russians in Afghanistan Last of three articles

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PROPOSES U.S.-SOVIET ACCORD ON MOBILE MISSILES

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 1


President Reagan has proposed that the United States and the Soviet Union
abandon plans for the deployment of mobile, land-based nuclear missiles under a
new arms-control proposal offered in Geneva, Congressional and Administration
officials said today.

Mr. Reagan's proposal would require that the Russians scrap plans for their
mobile SS-24 and SS-25 missiles. In return the United States would abandon its
development of the Midgetman mobile missile.

The President's proposal is part of a new arms control package Mr. Reagan
announced Thursday in response to a Soviet plan that calls for a 50 percent cut
in nuclear arsenals. Senior Administration officials briefed Congressional
leaders on the proposal today.

Scientific Exchange Offer

Congressional sources said Mr. Reagan had also proposed several ''confidence
building'' measures in the latest offer, including having the two countries
exchange scientists and make visits to research laboratories where work is under
way on strategic defense systems. The Russians have strongly opposed the
Administration's effort to develop a space-based missile defense, commonly known
as Star Wars.

In addition, officials said, Mr. Reagan indicated a willingness to discuss
limits on submarine-launched ballistic missiles to underscore his commitment to
reducing first-stike abilities by either country.

The latest Administration arms proposal came as officials said Secretary of
State George P. Shultz, in his talks with Soviet leaders in Moscow next week,
would discuss the idea of more meetings between Mr. Reagan and Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, after their meeting in Geneva on Nov. 19-20. A
White House official said if the Geneva meeting proved successful, the two sides
were likely to make such meetings regular events, rotating between each capital.

In The Hague today, Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers announced that the Netherlands
would join four other Western European nations in accepting new American
medium-range nuclear missiles. The decision follows almost six years of
demonstrations, debate and vacillation. [Page 4.] Congressional sources said
Robert C. McFarlane, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser, had been pressing
for months in the Administration for a ban on mobile missiles, arguing that such
a ban was the only way to insure that limits on land-based missiles could be
enforced.

In a speech in New York tonight, Mr. McFarlane said Mr. Reagan regarded Moscow's
proposal as a step to pave the way for ''concrete negotations'' between the two
countries.

''The President believes it gives us a basis for getting down to concrete
negotiations promptly,'' Mr. McFarlane said. ''Yesterday, he directed our
negotiating team in Geneva to present new ideas for closing the gap.''

Mr. McFarlane said Mr. Reagan remained ''strongly committed'' to the development
of a strategic defense against incoming nuclear missiles, despite strong Soviet
opposition.

''He believes that the world will be a safer place if we can rely on nonnuclear
defenses against nuclear-armed ballistic missiles,'' he said.

The State Department was said to have opposed the ban on mobile missiles,
arguing that it would be never win Soviet acceptance and would amount to a
reversal of the Administration's support for less vulnerable basing of missiles.

Pentagon officials, who have had misgivings about the high cost of Midgetman and
have been alarmed about the SS-24 and SS-25 missiles, supported the proposal.

A Pentagon official said today: ''The only way you're going to get a real
verification on mobiles is by monitoring production at the factory. And with
something like the SS-25 it's almost too late for that.''

Senator Praises Offer

Senator Pete Wilson, Republican of California, who has been the most vocal
critic of the Midgetman program on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said
tonight that a ban on mobile missiles would save the United States billions of
dollars and greatly increase the likelihood that limits on nuclear missiles
could be verified.

''It is a hell of an interesting gambit,'' he said. ''It really tests the mettle
of the Soviet Union in terms of their commitment to arms control.''

Mr. Wilson said one argument the Administration could use to make the idea more
attractive to the Soviet Union would be to point out that American scientists
were working on new sensors and maneuverable missile warheads to hunt down
mobile missiles. Such weapons, if they are developed, would make Soviet mobile
missiles far more vulnerable, he said.

The Midgetman, known formally as the Small Intercontinental Ballistic Missile,
is scheduled for its first flight tests in 1988 and for initial deployment in
1992. It is to roam military reservations in heavily armored trucks.

Missile Called a Hedge

President Reagan's Commission on Strategic Forces, chaired by Brent Scowcroft,
who was national security adviser to President Ford, said in April 1983 that a
single-warhead, mobile missile that could be deployed in fixed silos ''should be
pursued vigorously'' to make American land-based missiles less vulnerable to
attack and to ''serve as a hedge against potential threats to the submarine
force.''

Mr. Reagan's proposal to abandon mobile missiles reflects a growing concern in
the Pentagon and the National Security Council staff about what they see as a
new kind of Soviet first-strike threat. By this theory, Moscow could launch its
large SS-18 and SS-19 missiles against American silo-based missiles and then
disperse mobile SS-24 and SS-25 missiles to avert American retaliation.

This concern was first voiced publicly several months ago by Mr. McFarlane. In
deciding on that course, however, Mr. Reagan put himself at odds with some
American arms control experts, including those on the Scowcroft commission. The
commission included several former Secretaries of State and Defense.

Mobile Basing Abandoned

The plan that was discussed today will not apply to the MX missile. Early in his
tenure, President Reagan considered a mobile basing system for the MX missile.
But the idea of making the MX mobile was abandoned in favor of putting the
missile into existing Minuteman missile silos.

Before the Scowcroft commission's recommendation, a long political deadlock had
developed over the potential vulnerability of MX basing, with Congress rejecting
two Administration proposals.

Several Congressional leaders today questioned whether the commission's
strategic thinking and consensus should be abandoned by Mr. Reagan.

''This throws our consensus rationale for strategic planning into total
disarray,'' said Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, chairman of
the House Armed Services committee.

Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, a member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, said he would be ''deeply disturbed'' by such a proposal by
the Administration.

''In a democracy, one cannot carelessly discard something so fragile and
valuable as a strategic consensus,'' he said.

Concern Over Midgetman

Some in Congress and in the Administration have raised concerns that the
Midgetman might never be deployed because of a variety of potential roadblocks.
They include the missile's cost, its requirement for a large area to roam in and
some possible technical difficulties.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger accused the Russians last week of
deploying the SS-25 in violation of the 1979 agreement to limit strategic
weapons. Although the treaty was never ratified, both Governments have agreed to
observe most of its terms, including the stipulation that each side may have
only one new land-based intercontinental ballistic missile. The United States
contends that the Soviets have two in the SS-24 and SS-25.

Mr. McFarlane, speaking before the Swiss-American Association in New York, said
the ''prospects are good'' for movement on arms control in Geneva. ''For the
first time,'' he said, the two countries are ''entering negotiations where each
side has incentives and something to bargain about.'' He said that prospects had
not been so good in years past, referring to the times of Vietnam and Watergate.

He said the situation was now different ''and I think the Soviets can see
that.''

He cautioned that expectations from the Geneva talks should not be set on a
''signed, sealed and delivered document.'' He said, however, that ''it's a good
moment,'' and that the attitude of the Administration was ''hopeful, prayerful,
determined, optimistic.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 2, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Harold L. Oppenheimer, 66; Ex-General and Cattle Expert

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


Harold L. Oppenheimer, a retired brigadier general in the Marine Corps Reserve
and chairman of Oppenheimer Industries Inc., a cattle and land management and
investment company based in Kansas City, Mo., died of cancer Monday at the
Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, Calif. He was 66 years old.

He was one of the nation's leading authorities on cattle investments and was the
author of five books on agriculture, including ''Cowboy Economics''.

General Oppenheimer, who served in World War II, Korea and Vietnam, wrote of his
combat experiences in the book entitled, ''March to the Sound of the Drums.''

He was the son of Doris Jones Stein, whose husband, Dr. Jules Stein, founded the
Music Corporation of America.

General Oppenheimer, who lived in Kansas City, is survived by his wife, Daphne,
of Atchison, Kan.; four sons, Hamilton, Reed Jules, Harold Byrd and Eric, all of
Kansas City; a brother, Gerald, of Beverly Hills, Calif.; a half sister, Jean
Stein of New York City, and four grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RACE AND BLIND JUSTICE BEHIND MIXUP IN COURT

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: GAINESVILLE, Ga., Oct. 30


Here in Hall County last June one man was arrested as a thief and another as a
murderer. And last week, when the murder defendant was summoned to stand trial,
the other man was produced, and nearly convicted.

The fact that everyone assumed the wrong man was the right one, simply because
the system had placed him in the defendant's chair, has raised questions about
the ability of witnesses and officers of the court to make distinctions for
themselves. And in this case at least, that ability to distinguish was clouded
by racial difference.

Both men are Vietnamese of about the same height and weight, and none of the
white participants in the judicial process - not the prosecutor, the sheriff's
officers, the defense lawyer, or the witnesses - noticed the difference.

For that day and a half, Justice turned literally blind. While Hen Van Nguyen,
21 years old, smiled and quaked and told the court interpreter, ''Not me, not
me,'' the witnesses identified him as Nguyen Ngoc Tieu, 27, the man accused of
stabbing Debra Lynn Rollins to death. Mr. Tieu, meanwhile, remained three blocks
away in the county jail.

A mistrial was declared. It is still unclear whether the errant system corrected
itself or was stopped, as it began, by coincidence, when a woman who knew both
men happened into the courtroom and realized the wrong man was on trial. The
defense attorney, sure of a conviction, had already offered to plead his
uncooperative client guilty to a lesser charge.

'Every Prosecutor's Nightmare'

As Bruce Udolf, the District Attorney, says, ''It's incredibly scary - it's
every prosecutor's nightmare.''

To a degree, the miscarriage recalls the racial perspective that ruled an
earlier time in the South. ''It's like the colored race - most of them look
exactly alike,'' said Jeff C. Wayne, who was District Attorney for 33 years.
''I've seen this happen one time before.''

''The wrong colored boy had come up and sat down,'' Mr. Wayne said. Fortunately,
he added, ''the judge recognized him.''

But that was more than 30 years ago, and Hall County now is a different place.
Long proclaimed the chicken-producing capital of the world, the county is now
home to manufacturing plants, high-technology facilities and an increasing flow
of new residents from the booming population base of Atlanta, an hour southwest.
Mr. Udolf, the District Attorney, is a New Yorker, and the Sheriff, Richard V.
Mecum, the first Republican elected to that office in memory, is from Colorado.
And the Mayor of Gainesville, John Morrow, is black.

Three Ethnic Communities

And where there were traditionally two races, there is now a third ethnic
community: the Vietnamese. ''To me, they don't look alike,'' said Sheriff Mecum,
who visited Taiwan and Japan when he was in the Navy. ''Now my wife is Georgian.
She has more difficulty. I say, 'Can you tell them apart?' She says, 'No.' ''

In addition, most of the single men who dominate the Vietnamese work force here,
like the two defendants, speak no English. Their main interpreter is Dan Lam, a
Vietnamese-American who is a senior case worker for the Hall County Office of
Family and Children Services.

When Mrs. Lam and her six daughters were brought here by the First Baptist
Church of Gainesville almost six years ago, she said there were ''maybe 50''
Vietnamese. Now she thinks there are almost 600.

''They find it easy to find jobs here at chicken plant, poultry plant,'' she
said. ''That hard job. Hard. But easy to get into.'' The chicken-processing
plants pay about $5 an hour, but about 125 Vietnamese men have found work at up
to $8.50 an hour at Cottrell Inc, one of the nation's largest producers of
car-hauling trailers.

'They Miss Their Family'

The men save their money in hopes of bringing their families from Vietnam, Mrs.
Lam said. When they are not at work, ''they miss their family,'' she said.
''They miss their country. And they cook. Friends come to eat. They get drunk.
And sometimes they get into fights.''

But Mr. Udolf can recall only about six criminal cases against Vietnamese in the
last 18 months, with the murder case the most serious.

Mr. Udolf said he had never seen Mr. Nguyen ''except at arraignment, and I
arraign over 100 people at a time.''

In Gainesville, considered the legal capital of north Georgia, Mr. Udolf said,
lawyers looking for work show up on arraignment days in hopes of being appointed
to defend a case. There is no public defender system in Hall County.

At Mr. Tieu's August arraignment on charges of felony murder, Eddie Benton, a
lawyer in Commerce 28 miles away who is trying to start a practice here, was
appointed to the case.

A Forgotten Message

With Mrs. Lam interpreting, Mr. Benton interviewed Mr. Tieu for an hour on Sept.
12. That was the last time he saw his client - ''there wasn't a whole lot to
talk about,'' he said - and When the sheriff's office brought Mr. Nguyen to
court last Wednesday morning, he assumed it was Mr. Tieu.

Sheriff Mecum said that the jail staff had been told to add Mr. Tieu to the list
of defendants to be sent to the courthouse but that someone had forgotten to
pass along the message. Mr. Nguyen was already in the courthouse for his theft
trial. When the murder trial began first, ''the court officer went in there, and
there was a Vietnamese, and he assumed that was the defendant,'' the Sheriff
said.

As the trial proceeded, Mr. Nguyen was identified as Mr. Tieu by several
witnesses, including the officer who had overseen Mr. Tieu's statement to
investigators and the victim's roommate.

''Think about it as the witness might,'' said Mr. Udolf. ''She sees an Oriental
man over there. She assumes nobody is going to be tricking her or playing games.
So she says that's the right person.''

Both Mr. Udolf and Mr. Benton say that it was only when Cathy Pemberton, a
witness in the theft case, happened into the courtroom, saw Mr. Nguyen in the
wrong trial and sent a message to the prosecution table, that the mistake was
noticed.

Disagreement From Sheriff

But Sheriff Mecum contends his jail staff caught the error when asked to bring
Mr. Nguyen for his theft trial and the jailers discovered he was not there.

However the error was caught, the mistrial is the talk of Hall County. The
Vietnamese community, Mrs. Lam said, is not disturbed that they might all look
alike to white people here because it is the same in reverse. ''When I see
Americans, one and another, they look alike to me,'' she explained, smiling.
''They understand that. They not angry. But they think there is danger.''

Mr. Tieu's lawyer, Mr. Benton, however, sees an advantage, at least for his
client. At the next trial, sometime in November, Mr. Benton will be able to
confront a parade of prosecution witnesses with the fact that they all
identified someone else as the murderer. ''Nothing that has happened thus far
has injured my client,'' he said.

As for the hapless Mr. Nguyen, whose trial is to be rescheduled, Mr. Benton
said, it would do no good to tell the jury trying him for theft that he had also
been identified as a murderer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Nguyen Ngoc Tieu, Hen Van Nguyen, prosecutor Bruce Udolf and
defense lawyer Eddie Benton

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IS GIVING AMERICAN TOURISM A TRIAL RUN

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 29


Vietnam is ready to experiment with American tourism, and it has asked a Long
Island tour organizer to collect 10 people for a trial run, before the end of
the year if possible.

An experimental two-week itinerary has been prepared by the Vietnamese. It
includes visits to several cities, among them Hanoi, Da Nang, Hue and Ho Chi
Minh City, which its own tourist bureau still calls Saigon. The tour also
includes explorations of archeological and historical sites, a day at a beach
and river cruises by sampan, according to the tour consultant, Greg Kane.

Mr. Kane recently returned from Vietnam, where he took a delegation of war
veterans from New York State led by John L. Behan, a State Assemblyman from
Montauk who was the marshal of New York City's first Vietnam veterans' parade in
May, and Assemblyman Dennis Gorski of Buffalo. They were accompanied by Wayne
Jackson, sergeant-at-arms of the Assembly, and John Kilbride, a police officer
from Freeport, L.I.

This was the first such delegation to visit Vietnam, and Mr. Kane said that the
Vietnamese seemed pleased with the results of the trip.

'A Backlog of People'

Mr. Kane's company, the Indochina Consulting Group of Westbury, L.I., has in the
past specialized in dealing with Vietnam veterans' issues. Mr. Kane said he
would limit his first ''tourist'' group to veterans and their wives.

''I have a backlog of people asking how they could get to go,'' he said.

Unlike the veterans of other wars, Vietnam veterans have not had the opportunity
to return to battle sites to reflect on the war or mourn fallen friends.

Although the two nations do not have diplomatic relations, Americans are not
prohibited by the United States from visiting Vietnam. But in the past Vietnam,
which wants an American embassy in Hanoi, has denied Americans tourist visas.

Most tourists in Vietnam are from the Soviet bloc, although a few also go there
from Japan, Australia or other non-Communist nations that have diplomatic ties
with Vietnam.

Tourist Spots Are Scarce

On the whole, the country's tourist accommodations, where they exist at all, are
limited and well below the standards of those in most other Asian countries.
Transportation is scarce and basic, but food and accommodations are cheap.

Mr. Kane said that Vietnam, which lacks reserves of hard currency, seemed to
have no problem at the national level with the idea of tourism but that
security-conscious local officials had to be persuaded that opening the country
to even small numbers of Americans was safe.

For the American side, Mr. Kane said, the presence of Americans in Vietnam
always provokes a flurry of reports that living prisoners of war have been
sighted.

Mr. Kane, who has made many trips to Vietnam, says he regularly checks in on his
return with the Bangkok office of the Joint Casualty Resolution Center to tell
them where he has been and with whom, so that the center can then discount
rumors based on sightings of his groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS IN AFGHANISTAN: CHANGES IN TACTICS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 651 words


The continued, elusive resistance of the rebels in Afghanistan, mounting
casualties and poor performance by conscripts are forcing the Soviet Union to
review and revise its tactics and command system in Afghanistan, according to
United States and British intelligence sources familiar with the war.

Superficially the war, which will enter its sixth year in December, has gone
well for the Russians. They hold the cities and principal towns. Seven major air
bases, all within a bomber's flight of the Persian Gulf, have been expanded.
Afghanistan's Government in Kabul is amenable to Soviet direction.

The military investment has been relatively small for a country whose armed
forces total just over five million. Today, with its forces at their maximum,
the Soviet Union has 115,000 soldiers in Afghanistan. Five motorized rifle
divisions form the core of the army, and about 80 percent of the personnel are
young conscripts.

Special Forces

The failure of the regular divisions to deal decisively with the mujahedeen, as
the rebels are known, has forced the Russian high command to introduce
specialist forces. These include about 10,000 paratroops, 5,000 air assault
soldiers and Spetsnaz units, which are special forces trained in ambush,
assassination and infiltration.

Estimates of Soviet casualties vary. The muhjahedeen say the figure is 50,000
dead, but Western intelligence sources believe the Russians have lost 8,000 to
15,000 men killed in action. That would indicate the total number of Russians
killed, wounded or missing in action is probably from 24,000 to 45,000 men.

The insurgents' level of arms is improving slowly because of weapons filtering
in through Pakistan. As yet, however, the rebels have nothing to bring down the
helicopter gunships that accompany every Russian operation.

Of these helicopters, the Hind-24, a heavily armored aircraft with rockets and
guns, has proved to be the most effective. It follows insurgents fleeing into
valleys, attacks villages and engages fortified positions.

The Afghan Army's paper strength is 80,000, but it probably musters only about
30,000 men, according to intelligence sources. The Russians no longer use it in
battle, and its duties are restricted to guarding communications. The rate of
desertion is high. Drugs and Disease Drugs and disease, particularly hepatitis,
are also weakening the Soviet forces. Conscripts serve in Afghanistan for 18
months, and there is little opportunity for officers to form effective combat
teams.

Most foreign authorities and some Soviet officials say they believe complete
success has eluded the Russians because of their ponderous system of centralized
command.

Gen. Mikhail M. Zaitsev, who took command this summer, according to British
sources, says he believes more initiative must be given to battalion and company
officers if the army is to move more rapidly against the mujahedeen.

Basically, this would mean swifter exploitation of initial success in attack.
Recent operations in the Panjshir River Valley, the main avenue of military
supply traffic, have involved as many as 10,000 troops led by airborne forces
and air assault troops carried in helicopters.

Western sources assessing these operations report that, despite Soviet
superiority on the ground and in the air, the insurgents often were able to
elude the Russians and find refuge in the mountains.

The Russians are making a major effort, reminiscent of the American experience
in Vietnam, to win ''hearts and minds.''

Tens of thousands of young Afghan men have been sent to the Soviet Union for
study and indoctrination. These are expected to form the core of future
governments and industrial and agricultural organizations.

This will take time. But every comment by Russian officers and party officials
indicates to Western intelligence that the Soviet Union feels that time is on
its side in Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS REPORTS BRING SOUTH AFRICA'S TURMOIL INTO AMERICA'S LIVING ROOMS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


In the last nine months South Africa has penetrated the American consciousness
with a breadth that it rarely has during a quarter-century of racial strife in
that troubled country. Significantly, this turnabout has coincided with
sustained and vivid coverage of South Africa by American television.

Funerals and riots, overturned cars aflame and armored vehicles rolling through
black townships have all become familiar images. The names of Bishop Desmond M.
Tutu, the Anglican leader who opposes apartheid, and P. W. Botha, the South
African President, have practically become household names. Calls for
disinvestment and sanctions have sounded with wider and more foreful emphasis in
recent months from campuses to Congress. In both the power it exerts and the
controversy it excites, the television coverage of South Africa bears comparison
to the reporting by broadcast journalism on the civil rights movement and the
Vietnam War.

But South African officials have assailed television for emphasizing violence
instead of what the Government asserts are reform measures.

Until recently it was from the print medium that Americans obtained most of
their information about South Africa. Wide and consistent coverage has been
given to the subject by leading American dailies and the weekly news magazines.

But the rioting in black townships that led up to the proclamation of an
emergency in parts of South Africa, and the many clashes between blacks and the
Soputh African authorities since then, have provided the networks with dramatic
film footage that has gone directly into American homes.

Impact Assessed

The impact of print coverage has tended to work at a different, more subtle
level, quietly influencing those with power to bring about change in the way the
Government and business deal with South Africa.

But Randall Robinson, the executive director of TransAfrica, a group that has
been prominent in anti-apartheid activity in the United States, discussing the
broader impact of television, said, ''Americans have the impression something
doesn't exist unless it's on television. So I think a good deal of the concern
about South Africa now has been the result of electronic media attention.''

South African officials agree that such reports exert a powerful influence, but
maintain that they represent only one part of a complex reality. ''One cannot
generalize, but in many cases we have not had a fair chance,'' said Ulrich Ruch,
the South African Deputy Consul General. ''Sometimes we wonder what the
intentions of the American reporters are.''

Factors other than television have influenced American public opinion on South
Africa: the extensive coverage by the print media, protests at the South African
Embassy in Washington, the awarding of the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize to Bishop
Tutu. But just as the American civil rights and antiwar movements each traded
heavily on stirring images from the evening newscasts, so South Africa has
become linked with its own iconography.

Visual images create sympathy and anger - visceral responses - in a way the
written word rarely achieves.

With a few exceptions - a week of specials on ABC's Nightline, a series by Tom
Brokaw on NBC and another by Charlayne Hunter-Gault on PBS - the coverage has
centered on turbulence in South Africa's black townships. Of 39 ABC reports from
South Africa between Aug. 2 and Sept. 30, for example, 14 dealt wholly or in
part with funerals in the black townships.

Mr. Ruch, the South African diplomat, says such coverage is unbalanced. He
argues that television has given more coverage to Bishop Tutu, whom he perceives
as a radical with an uncertain constituency, than to ''moderate blacks who are
meeting with the Government.'' He also says television covers rioting in the
townships without illustrating the simultaneous quiet in much of the nation.

The violence depicted in the television coverage is reflected in photographs
published by the print media, but newspapers and magazines usually include more
detailed assessments of general developments.

American correspondents in South Africa, both print and electronic, have in
turn, felt official displeasure in both direct and indirect ways.

Except for South African officials, few observers accuse American television of
bias. But television scholars and some correspondents acknowledge the difficulty
of telling an intricate and many-sided story while providing compelling pictures
and working within the medium's time limits.

Some television reports, particularly the longer ones, have captured the South
African complexities and contradictions. But all news, print or television,
follows action more than subtlety. What promises to return South Africa to news
primacy is continued violence there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS;
VIETNAM ORDEAL

BYLINE: By Richard Haitch

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 53, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


VIETNAM said Willam M. Mathers was spying. Mr. Mathers, who had sold a
dock-construction company that he ran in Singapore for 14 years, said he was
going to Hong Kong to sell his 88-foot schooner when the Vietnamese seized him
36 miles at sea on July 22, 1984. He was imprisoned.

Mr. Mathers spent nearly nine months in solitary confinement. He was freed last
April, after his father, William H. Mathers, a Manhattan lawyer, paid the
Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, $10,000 in American cash.

The 42-year-old former prisoner, still suffering from intestinal parasites that
he picked up in prison, is between careers in New Haven. He divides his time
between music and archeology studies at Yale, his alma mater, and a new design
for a sailing vessel that he hopes to use in underwater salvage and film work.

He believes strongly that there is a lesson about Vietnam to be learned from his
experience: ''You can't trust their Government for anything.''

''They knew I wasn't a spy,'' he says. ''There's absolutely no question in my
mind. But I also think that they thought it would be a nice gesture to the
American public to release me on the eve of their 10th anniversary.''

Accompanying him on the schooner, he notes, was a 21-year-old Australian man and
four French citizens - two women and two children, 9 and 15 years old. Hardly a
crew for spying, he observes. The payment of ''fines'' led to the release of
all.

''They treated me exactly the way they treated the American prisoners of war,''
Mr. Mathers says, ''except that they did not torture me. They isolated me and
tried to break me down. They offered to release me if I would go to work for
them - they wanted me to spy for them.

''They wanted information on what was going on in the refugee camps in Singapore
and Thailand. And they wanted information - all the details - on the offshore
exploration programs carried out by U.S. companies during the war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES TO U.S. SAID TO HELP ECONOMY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4328, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


It is a myth that the most recent refugees to this country live on welfare and
displace Americans from scarce jobs, according to the chairman of the
International Rescue Committee.

Instead, the chairman, Leo Cherne, said Friday at a conference on refugees and
employment, these newcomers have made significant contributions to the economy
by bringing their ingenuity and high standards to the workplace.

''Starting from scratch, refugees have to be more inventive as well as more
determined; they have to be more frugal and work harder,'' Mr. Cherne said.
''This is the secret of their success, success which over the years has been the
trademark of all identifiable refugee groups, starting with the displaced
persons of the post World War II years.''

Hiring of Refugees Urged

Mr. Cherne, who is also executive director of the Research Institute of America,
a group that provides information to businesses and governments on economics,
management and foreign affairs, urged the audience, many of whom represented
metropolitan-area businesses, to hire refugees who have fled oppression in their
homelands.

The conference - ''Employers and Refugees: Partners in Economic Progress'' - was
organized by the New York City Refugee Employment Project, a nonprofit agency
working to resettle refugees in New York City, and was held at The New York
Times.

The employment project, in addition to providing language and job training, has
placed more than 5,000 individuals in positions with 400 businesses in the last
five years.

Since 1975, about 33,000 refugees have settled in New York State, about 23,000
of them in New York City, said Bruce O. Bushart, state coordinator for the
refugee entrant assistance program of the Department of Social Services. The
largest number who came in 1984 were from Rumania, followed by Vietnam, Poland,
Cambodia, the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.

'A Special Energy'

These refugees are ''model Americans,'' said Mr. Cherne.

''For the Vietnamese, Laotians and Cambodians, ingenuity and perseverance are
not only qualities of adjustment once they have made it to our shores, ingenuity
and perseverance were essential for getting out of their own countries,'' he
said.

Businesses should hire ''these refugees because they're good employees,'' Mr.
Bushart said. ''They bring a special energy and tenacity to the jobs because of
who they are.''

About 57 percent of the refugees had blue-collar jobs and 21 percent
white-collar jobs in their homelands, he said. But, in this country, many of the
latter accept blue-collar positions.

Mr. Bushart said that rarely do these people use the welfare system. The few who
have usually have been women supporting large families and older people who
cannot work. But most who do need assistance pass through the system in a short
time, moving on to regular jobs and self-sufficiency, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INVESTMENT TIPS FROM TAROT CARDS

BYLINE: By Joanne Kaufman; Joanne Kaufman is a New York freelance writer.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 19, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 575 words


CHRISTIAN DIOR reportedly visited a psychic to determine the best day to show
his collection and when to go on vacation. Fellow designer Diane Von Furstenberg
takes a more skeptical approach to her psychic, Yolana. She does ask her
business-related questions, but says, ''She has as much or as little influence
as my lawyer or my mother. I'm not sure I would change my mind in respect to
some things she said, but she is a point of reference.''

Yolana, who has been practicing her trade in Manhattan for three years, claims
to play a similar role for lawyers, engineers, brokers, and whole hosts of other
business people. If someone wants to sell property, ''I may come up with the
name of the buyer,'' she said. If a client wants to know headquarters
scuttlebutt, ''I'll tell them if there's a merger and what the people involved
are like.''

Although Yolana states unequivocally that ''what I've predicted has happened,''
few parapsychologists claim that the psychic arts are infallible. Most psychics
use tarot cards, psychometry (touching an item such as a stock certificate to
tune into the appropriate vibrations), or simple concentration to predict the
future. And none of those methods are foolproof.

''It is hit and miss, but it's more than nothing,'' said Mr. Holzer of New York
Institute of Technology. Added Carol Jayson-Koerber, a psychic in Yonkers: ''No
one is absolute; people have to take responsibility for their lives.'' Even
Yolana concedes that ''Nobody's 100 percent - otherwise, I'd be walking on
water.''

Part of the difficulty in tracking a psychic's accuracy is that few business
people admit to relying on one. To muddy the waters even more, much of the
advice dispensed by psychics is in the form of investment tips. Many psychics,
for example, pride themselves on having told clients to put their money into
American dollars rather than British pounds last year - yet any number of
investment counselors gave the same advice without benefit of tarot cards.

Some psychics, in fact, eschew direct stock recommendations, concentrating
instead on whether it is a favorable time for a client to play the market at
all. Richard Kubeil, manager of treasury documentation at U.S. Steel and a
client of Miss Jayson-Koerber's, says that she will tell him whether to buy
stock or keep his money in the bank. ''She doesn't tell me to buy a particular
stock - I wish she would,'' he said.

Miss Jayson-Koerber will get specific when she feels the questions warrant it,
though. John Leboutillier, a former Nassau County Congressman who now does
commentary for ABC News, went to Miss Jayson-Koerber for guidance in raising
money to buy the freedom of Vietnam P.O.W.'s.

''Carol advised me which overseas projects to put money in,'' he says. ''I was
dealing with professional fund raisers and she told me which ones would do well
for me and which ones wouldn't - some by name.'' For the most part, he says, she
was on target.

Psychics will give specific predictions, but most steer clear of telling clients
how to apply the information. They claim that fosters a tendency to view the
psychic as a panacea in a chancy world.

''I try not to tell people what to do,'' said Beatrice Rich, a New York psychic.
''It's not my place to say 'You must do this, you must not do that.' '' In fact,
she discourages clients from coming for readings more than twice a year. More
frequent sessions, she said, ''take away their independence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT SEA WITH 'THE SILENT SERVICE'

BYLINE: By Richard Halloran; Richard Halloran, of The New York Times's
Washington bureau, covers military affairs.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 68, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3934 words


AS THE SLEEK, BLACK NUCLEAR-POWERED SUBMA-rine City of Corpus Christi passes the
100-fathom line off Montauk Point, the tiny bridge on the ship's tower is
cleared. The officer of the deck, Lieut. Comdr. Joseph A. Walsh, secures the
hatch and goes below to make his final checks. Satisfied, he asks Capt. Frank L.
(Skip) Bowman for permission to take the ship down, then orders ''dive, dive.''
The klaxon sounds twice and the submarine slips beneath the sea.

The ship steadies below the rolling waves but there is no sensation of sinking.
Only the depth gauge and the tilt of the deck say the submarine is diving. The
first few minutes under water generate an alert, quiet tension in the crew.
Anxious eyes watch gauges that tell whether hatches are secure, valves are
closed, and the life-support system is working. When packing around the
periscope drips water, a sailor is immediately hoisted into the maze to take
several turns with a wrench.

The Corpus Christi settles into the deep, her Richard Halloran, of The New York
Times's Washington bureau, covers military affairs. natural element. She was
designed and built to patrol, and, if necessary, to fight, under the sea. For
the crew, however, this will always be an alien world.

LIFE IN THE SUBMA-rine, in this realm of the sea without light but filled with
sound, is a world of tight spaces and innate danger.

Because nothing can be seen from inside the submarine, the Corpus Christi is a
blind leviathan. She depends on sensitive ears of sonar to stalk her prey.
Conversely, in an ocean where a ticking engine can be heard for thousands of
yards, she relies on stealth to evade her enemies.

The ship is cramped. Half of the tapered, cylindrical submarine, which would
span the length of a football field, is taken up with a nuclear reactor and
propulsion plant. The rest is crammed with devices to maneuver, navigate and
communicate. The sonar complex absorbs space, as do more than 20 torpedoes, each
weighing 3,500 pounds.

That doesn't leave much room for the crew, and close living can fray nerves.
But, over coffee in the mess, the chief petty officers who run the ship say they
calm young sailors - the average age is 23 - by reminding them that, literally,
they are all in the same boat.

Cohesion is enhanced by a sense of shared danger. The sea on the surface can be
unforgiving, and even more so in the deep. Petty Officer 1st Class Thomas
Clouthier, standing in the control room lit only by the glow of red gauges and
green consoles, says: ''Every one of the guys on this ship knows that he holds
127 heads on a platter. If any one of them screws up, we could all die.''

The Navy calls its undersea fleet ''the silent service.'' Not only must
submarines operate quietly, but submariners don't talk much about what they do
as they seek an edge over their adversaries. In this instance, the Navy
permitted a rare look at life aboard the Corpus Christi on a run from her home
port in Groton, Conn., to a torpedo range in the Bahamas.

MOORED ALONG-side the dock, the Corpus Christi looks lethal, sinister, mean; her
hull bears no identifying marks, no name, no number. When she puts to sea, she
rides low, plowing up seawater over the deck - only the tower, called ''the
sail,'' is visible. She can dive to 1,475 feet and speed at more than 30 knots,
according to public references. Her arms can include torpedoes, antiship
missiles and cruise missiles.

Originally named the Corpus Christi for the city in Texas, the ship was in a
dispute even before she was commissioned in 1983. Several Roman Catholic bishops
objected to a warship with a name that translates ''Body of Christ.'' President
Reagan renamed her the City of Corpus Christi, but aboard ship she is the Corpus
Christi except to one officer who sometimes calls her ''the City of.''

The Navy has 96 nuclear-powered attack submarines. The Corpus Christi is among
32 in the newest, Los Angeles class that displace 6,900 tons of seawater,
compared with the 4,040 tons of the Nautilus, the first nuclear-powered
submarine, recently retired after 30 years on patrol. There are 37 bigger
submarines, ''boomers'' armed with ballistic missiles. Only four diesel-electric
submarines remain in the fleet.

Attack submarines roam the oceans searching for Soviet submarines. On a voyage
last year, the Corpus Christi sailed down the Atlantic and around South Africa
into the Indian Ocean, spending 83 days submerged. After taking on supplies at
the island of Diego Garcia, she returned to sea. The crew was given a week's
liberty in Perth, Australia. Then she sailed under the Pacific to the Panama
Canal and home. She was gone for seven months.

AS THE CORPUS Christi resumes her Patrol, Petty Officer 2d Class Donald Cox
stands in the dim, narrow sonar room and grumbles when he is instructed to use
active sonar to get the range of a ship on the ocean's surface.

''I don't like that,'' he says. ''It tells the whole world we're out here.''
Active sonar sends out a ping until it hits something and bounces back,
measuring range but revealing the sender's presence; passive sonar merely
listens. A sonar bulb in the submarine's nose and hydrophones along both sides
and trailed 1,000 feet behind give the Corpus Christi keen ears.

The sonar is so sensitive that even a novice putting on earphones can pick out
distinctive sounds: Chicka-chicka-chicka is a merchantman, chug-chug-chug a
diesel. Squeals, whines and a noise like the rattling of teacups come from
creatures in the sea. What's that tap-tap-tap?

''Carpenter fish, we call them,'' says Petty Officer Cox.

A sharp sound is a whale popping its jaw. Then comes a long, pleading moan; the
petty officer says the whale is close by.

Another sonarman, Petty Officer 1st Class Kenneth Anderson, says: ''You can hear
the dolphins and the shrimp out there and when the dolphins hit the shrimp,
there's a frenzy. The dolphins just flip out. Then you don't hear the shrimp
anymore.''

Inside the submarine, the sea slipping past can't be heard; the only persistent
sound is the hum of air conditioning. Reminders about quiet are everywhere. An
admonition posted by the captain reads: ''Our acoustic sonar advantage over the
Russian submarine is very small. Our shipmates who mindlessly slam doors and
hatches, drop tools, and otherwise make unnecessary noises are giving away that
very small advantage - they can hear us before we can hear them.''

Thus, the sounds of silence are the door eased shut, the hatch lowered slowly,
the wrench placed softly on a steel deck. Cables are fastened with rubbery
bushings, pipes are wrapped in soft material to deaden the sound of rushing
liquid, and red chains warning of open hatches have been dipped in plastic to
prevent rattling. Senior Chief Petty Officer J. E. Wade says cooks learn to
handle pots without slamming them around. ''We train them,'' he says, ''to think
quiet.''

If the submarine's passive sonar detects a potentially hostile ship, word is
passed to ''rig for ultra-quiet.'' The water evaporator is shut down, garbage is
stowed because the disposal device would make a dull thud, and soft-drink
dispensers are turned off. All sailors not on watch climb into bunks.

When an engineering officer reports a ticking in the drive shaft, Captain Bowman
curses and rushes to the engine room. He comes back an hour later, relief on his
face. ''They found it with a stethoscope,'' he says. A bushing had been
improperly lubricated by shipyard workers. How far could the ticking have been
heard? ''Thousands of yards,'' he says, grimly.

THE CORPUS Christi is at 60 feet, with the officer of the deck peering through
the periscope, when Captain Bowman strides 10 paces from the small stateroom
that is his office and living quarters, takes the periscope, swings it around
and commands: ''Merchantman bearing down on us. Emergency deep.''

No further orders are issued. The captain snaps up the periscope handles and
reaches over his head to spin the red wheel that lowers it. Diving planes like
small wings on the side of the submarine are set for deep dive. The helmsman
straightens the steering wheel to bring the rudder amidships to reduce drag, and
twists a dial to signal the engine room to make full ahead. All hands brace as,
within 45 seconds, the submarine plunges to 150 feet. After the drill, an
officer says: ''No ship afloat can reach down this far.''

Tactics in submarines have evolved as the technology of sonar and quieting have
advanced. Because attack submarines mainly hunt for other submarines, they no
longer just lurk, as in World War II, waiting for hostile warships to heave into
sight.

Since sonar cannot hear anything immediately behind the submarine because of her
engine and propeller, the officer of the deck frequently ''clears the baffles.''
He orders a 120-degree turn so that sonar can sweep the previously dead area.
''It's sort of looking over your shoulder to see if someone's there,'' says
Lieut. Comdr. Ronald Bart.

If the officer suspects the Corpus Christi is being followed, he orders
''counter detection,'' in which the submarine retraces her course to listen.
When another submarine is found, the Corpus Christi can evade or proceed warily.

In ''sprint and drift,'' the submarine surges at 20 knots, then slows to 5 knots
to be quieter and make it easier for sonar to hear. With Soviet submarines
ranging the Atlantic, Captain Bowman says, ''we're always looking for the chance
encounter.''

Evasive tactics are jokingly called ''angles and dangles.'' Petty Officer 3d
Class Ben Falcey, an accomplished helmsman, chuckles as a novice struggles to
turn the helm to right full rudder, set the diving planes by pushing the yoke on
which the steering wheel is mounted, twist the dial to signal the engine room,
and repeat orders - all at once. The submarine hurtles from 100 to 400 feet in
less than two minutes. Petty Officer Falcey and Captain Bowman lean like skiers
to keep their balance.

After several more maneuvers, a messenger approaches the captain on behalf of
Lieut. J. F. O'Dea, the sonar officer. ''Sir,'' he says, ''Mr. O'Dea sends his
respects and wants to know if you've secured from angles and dangles so that he
can get some sleep.''

The captain motions Petty Officer Falcey to relieve the helm. The novice recites
the prescribed course, speed and depth, then departs, shaken.

AT 11 P.M., QUAR-termaster 2d Class Gary W. Landreth hauls himself off his bunk
and stumbles into the stainless-steel head to splash cold water on his face. He
pulls on blue coveralls, called a ''poopy suit,'' and goes to the mess to munch
pizza at ''mid-rats'' or midnight rations. Then he climbs the ladder to the
control room. At 11:30, he takes over the mid-watch to plot the course of the
Corpus Christi until 5:30 A.M.

A submariner's life at sea runs in 18-hour cycles, six hours on watch and 12
hours for training, chores and the ''three M's:'' meals, movies (shown in the
mess) and mattress. But the Corpus Christi observes day and night; at sundown on
the surface, the ship is ''rigged for red'' by switching from white to dim red
lights. This provides enough illumination for work, but adapts eyes to the dark,
so that submariners can operate if an accident forces the ship to surface at
night.

In the crew's quarters, the three-deep bunks are shelves covered by thin
mattresses, with barely enough headroom to turn over. There aren't enough bunks
to go around, so junior enlisted men must ''hot bunk,'' with three sailors
rotating through two bunks. Storage space is a wide tray under each bunk and a
small locker for valuables. In that space go clothes, candy, cigarettes and
toilet articles for three to six months at sea. The shower stall is smaller than
a telephone booth. ''To get clean,'' says a sailor, ''you soap the walls and
turn around.''

Elsewhere, no passage is wide enough for two men to pass shoulder-to-shoulder.
When a torpedo is eased into a tube, a sailor lies on the deck to check it with
no more than three inches above his head.

But tight spaces foster ingenuity. Shelves for paperbacks or music tapes are
rigged with cardboard and masking tape. Chief Petty Officer C. P. James straps a
computer monitor above his bunk and plays video games with the keyboard on his
stomach. Cramped quarters also breed manners. No one talks to a man in his bunk
when the curtain is pulled. ''That's his space,'' says Chief Petty Officer P. J.
Dunday. ''It isn't much, but that's his.''

In this close community, the most demoralizing offense is theft. When a thief is
caught, he is put off the boat as soon as possible. On a long voyage, he may be
given the silent treatment. Master Chief Petty Officer P. J. Melher explains:
''If that guy steals, we don't know if he'll turn that valve on time. And if he
doesn't turn the valve, he could do us all in.''

Submarines don't have room for a doctor, but Chief Petty Officer D. M. (Doc)
Sarley, the medic, treated a sailor suffering a ''hot'' appendix with
antibiotics and cold packs for two weeks in the Indian Ocean until the ship
reached Perth. There, a doctor took out the appendix and the recovering sailor
was flown home.

Doc Sarley, who was wounded while a medic with the Marine Corps in Vietnam,
treats colds and bruises suffered in narrow spaces, and tries to prevent
seasickness with medicated pads that sailors stick behind their ears (the
submarine has no keel and rolls in a heavy sea on the surface). The medic also
watches radiation registered on the small meter each sailor wears on his belt.
In most cases, four years of exposure produce less radiation than a single
X-ray.

The submarine loads food for at least two months whenever she goes to sea, even
on a training run, so she can be diverted to operations without returning to
port. Dry stores, mostly in big tins, are placed in a standup locker, last day's
meal in first. A frozen locker with meat is loaded the same way.

Each of two cooks, in turn, prepares three meals for one day, while a night
baker prepares mid-rats and bakes bread and pastries. Sometimes other sailors
give the cooks a break and put on an Italian or Mexican night.

At dinner time, Petty Officer 1st Class R. D. McClellan looks at the posted menu
-fried chicken, mashed potatoes, three vegetables, salad, and peach pie - then
sticks his head into the galley to tell the cook what he'd like. He takes his
plate - no paper plates or tin trays here - and draws a soft drink into a cup.
The dining table is covered with rubbery green mesh to hold things in place
during angles and dangles.

After meals, garbage is packed into weighted plastic bags; other trash is
compacted into metal tubes. Both are loaded into a disposal going to the bottom
of the hull. The upper hatch is sealed, the chute flooded, a lower hatch opened,
and the contents expelled to the floor of the sea.

During operations at sea, danger is never far from mind. Supervising a team
loading firing tubes in the torpedo room, Chief Petty Officer Guy Morton recalls
a mishap on another ship, in which water in a torpedo tube flooded into the
torpedo room before quick action brought it under control. ''Submariners,''
Chief Morton says wryly, ''don't like water in the people tank.''

ONE DAY AT LUNCH, Captain Bowman takes a glass of fresh milk and says: ''We run
out of this pretty fast; then we have to drink that powdered stuff. It's the
thing the crew misses most.'' A young officer down the table says softly: ''No,
captain, it's the thing the crew misses second most.''

Clearly, a difficult part of submarine duty is the long, repeated separation
from wife or girlfriend, and family. After the Corpus Christi leaves Groton,
submariners don't communicate with the outside world until they reach port
again. Sailors give birthday cards to the base chaplain to drop in the mail when
they're due, and florists take orders for Easter flowers months in advance.
Lieut. Comdr. Paul M. Higgins, the executive officer, leaves tapes for his wife
to play for his children.

While the ship is on a long deployment, families can send a 40-word
''family-gram'' by satellite once a month. Bad news is a dilemma, with some
sailors telling their families and the captain they don't want to hear it
because there's nothing they can do about it.

Despite long months away from home, morale appears to be good. The crew is
highly trained; and all but a few sailors have earned ratings as radiomen,
machinists' mates, electricians. Those who work aft around the reactor have been
to a year-long nuclear school. Many have qualified for Dolphins, the badge that
may take a year to earn and signifies wide knowledge of the ship. On the Corpus
Christi, that training has paid off in coveted battle-efficiency awards two
years in a row.

Many submariners say their craft is as much art as science. Listening on
headphones to sounds from the sea and scanning monitors where noises have been
translated into squiggly green lines, Petty Officer Cox says, ''Sonar is a
combination of hearing, seeing and thinking. But the most important thing is
thinking and deciding.''

In the navigation center, Quartermaster 2d Class Ronald Peterson waves at the
navigation system that calculates the ship's position. ''I can sit here and
sometimes I can just feel where we are,'' he says, ''and I'll be closer than all
that gear.'' Petty Officer Clouthier, who operates an electronic panel to plot
torpedo runs, says his work is 90 percent instinct. ''You have to be smarter
than the machine,'' he says. ''You can't follow blindly because the machine
makes mistakes.''

Ask submariners why they endure the cramped spaces, the danger and the
separations, and a litany of reasons spills out. Adventure, a fascination with
life under water, pride in Dolphins awarded only to accomplished submariners all
count. Camaraderie ranks high. There are travel and liberty. Submariners regale
one another with tales, undoubtedly embellished, of visits to the ship's
namesake in Texas, to Fort Lauderdale in Florida and to Perth.

Perhaps most important, many submariners sense that what they do is real, and
not the rote training that is an inevitable part of military life. They are
aware of Soviet submarines around them, which they see as personal and national
threats, and derive from that a conviction that their service has genuine
meaning. Captain Bowman says he often reminds the crew: ''What we do is so
blasted important, whether the general populace recognizes it or not, that you
should be proud.''

W HEN NEWCOM-ers report to the Corpus Christi, Captain Bowman tells them:
''Chief petty officers are often referred to as the backbone of the Navy. I
believe this.'' First among those noncommissioned officers is the chief of the
boat, Master Chief Melher. After 24 years in the Navy, he had risen to be master
chief of the submarine group to which the Corpus Christi is assigned when he
asked to return to sea.

Addressed as ''the Cob,'' he is a disciplinarian and counselor, barber if a
sailor neglects to get a haircut, and detective when necessary. At battle
stations, as the most experienced submariner aboard, he is diving officer. But
mostly the Cob keeps the ship squared away. ''If the boat is dirty, the
dungarees are dirty,'' he says, ''it's the Cob's fault, not the captain's
fault.''

The skipper, Captain Bowman, is both technician and leader. After graduating
from Duke University in 1966, he was commissioned and spent a year in nuclear
training. Later, he earned two Master of Science degrees from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, in nuclear engineering and in naval architecture.

The captain seeks a balance between strict discipline and a relaxed atmosphere.
''I would not call this a tight ship,'' he says, ''but I would call it a taut
ship.'' He insists on precise procedures in maneuvering the ship, where a
mistake could be costly. Sticking his head into a training session, he asks:
''What's the worst thing that can happen? Be thinking about what you would do
now if the worst happens.''

''I reserve the right to lower the level of formality,'' he says, to keep the
crew from tightening up under pressure. He jokes with the crew and laughs at
banter directed at him. But when things go wrong, the captain adds, ''I can rant
and rave with the best of them.''

Captain Bowman is eager for what he calls ''backup,'' in which all hands make
suggestions. ''Many submarine-force accidents could have been avoided if someone
in the watch party had professionally questioned the ordered action,'' he says.
''I never want to hear, 'I could have told him that was going to happen.' ''
After a battle drill, he announces: ''That was good backup. You people are
thinking. Those were good suggestions.''

Uniforms reflect the balance the captain seeks. At sea, all hands don blue
coveralls, with officers and chiefs wearing insignia. But footwear includes
sneakers, jogging shoes, work shoes, loafers and at least one pair of cowboy
boots.

BATTLE STATIONS, battle stations.''

The order over the intercom is almost laconic, the hustle to assigned places
swift but controlled. In the hushed control room, plotting boards are set up,
charts laid out, switches flipped to bring up diagrams on consoles. In the
torpedo room two decks below, where submariners have named the tubes Famine,
Pestilence, Plague, and Death, Senior Chief Petty Officer E. T. Ray runs a last
check on the practice monsters in firing position.

The Corpus Christi glides at 150 feet in a deep trench called the Tongue of the
Ocean that runs 75 miles alongside Andros Island in the Bahamas. Above, a range
boat launches a target that looks like a torpedo, but is programmed to simulate
a Soviet submarine.

Captain Bowman, standing in the control room darkened so that consoles are
easier to see, sketches aloud his plan of attack. He sets maneuvers to measure
range. From sonar, Petty Officer Cox reports bearings. Quartermaster Peterson,
at the navigation table, pencils in a plot. The data goes into Petty Officer
Clouthier's torpedo control apparatus.

As it does in many military operations, Murphy's Law strikes - whatever can go
wrong, will. A computer supporting the sonar goes down. Amid a chorus of
aspersions on its ancestry, a flurry of hands flicking switches and spinning
knobs gets it fixed.

After a series of triangulations, Lieut. Randolph Easton announces: ''We have a
firing solution.'' He gives range and bearing. Commander Bart, the weapons
officer, reports: ''Weapon ready.'' The captain orders: ''Shoot on generated
bearing.'' Chief James turns a lever. In the torpedo room, there is a pop as a
valve opens, a thump as the torpedo is expelled from the tube, a hiss as
compressed air dissipates.

Petty Officer Clouthier watches the torpedo's trace coming back through a wire
paid out behind the streaking weapon. He announces: ''Active search'' as the
torpedo seeks the target. Then: ''Detect, detect'' when it spots the target. But
the guidance system loses the target and he again announces: ''Active search.''
A low groan from the submariners. Then, again: ''Detect, detect.'' At last:
''Homing, homing.'' Finally, over the radio from the range officer monitoring
the run: ''Bull's-eye.''

The control room, led by the captain, exhales: ''Yaaah!'' To evade retaliation
from another submarine, Captain Bowman orders a steep dive. As the submarine
plunges, Petty Officer 2d Class William Urban, at a plotting board, draws an X
across the target, scribbles ''die, commie'' and rolls up the paper to get ready
for the next run.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. Frank Bowman (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE THE PHILIPPINE INSURGENCY

BYLINE: By Steve Lohr; Steve Lohr recently completed a four-year assignment in
East Asia for The New York Times, as a correspondent based first in Tokyo, then
in Manila.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4685 words


IT WAS ABOUT 6:30 IN THE MORNING WHEN THE shooting started. On a jungle ridge
dotted with coconut palms, more than 50 members of the New People's Army, the
Communist rebels in the Philippines, were getting ready for breakfast at a
makeshift camp in Sorsogon Province, some 240 miles southeast of Manila (map,
page 42). They had finished a half-hour of calisthenics and drills, and the
morning meal, wild cabbage stewed in coconut milk, and rice, was cooking. Here
and there, the young guerrillas - an army without uniforms, wearing sneakers or
barefoot - were attending to chores, cleaning weapons, drying laundry and
washing in a nearby stream.

At the sound of gunfire, the piercing, staccato report of automatic rifles, the
rebels took up their weapons and supplies, breaking camp hurriedly but without
panic.

The Government troops, apparently marine and army units, were getting closer.
There were several brief exchanges of fire, with the guerrillas firing bursts
from their M-16 assault rifles and then pulling back. At one point, the military
shot from as close as 150 yards, and bullets creased a tree a few feet away.

Then the rebels, hugging the ground and crouching behind palms, returned the
fire in ear-splitting bursts. They fired their M-79 grenade launchers as well.
The explosions sent the Government troops scurrying for cover. The guerrillas
then broke into two groups and fled into the jungle, with the military in
pursuit.

A couple of days before, a New People's Army officer conceded that the
Philippine armed forces had some well trained and proficient fighters,
especially the marines and the army scout rangers. ''But in the local areas,
they are foreigners compared to us,'' he said. ''So they are deaf and blind.''
His claim was put to the test that morning and afternoon, as the detachment of
about two dozen rebels played a cat-and-mouse game for the next six hours with
the pursuing military. The escape traced a circuitous route over jungle terrain
and across rivers and streams. Guerrilla scouts, equipped with hand-held radios,
monitored the movements of the Government troops.

Eventually, the rebels found a gap in the military's encircling maneuver and
slipped through undetected. When one group of guerrillas came upon the isolated
bamboo-and-thatch hut of a local farmer, they found a welcome reception. There
was water, handfuls of rice, and shelter for as long as the fleeing rebels
wanted it. After the early exchanges, amounting to about 200 rounds, there was
no more gunfire. In the N.P.A. unit I accompanied, there were no casualties that
day.

HE SHOOTOUT AND CHASE IN SOUTHEAST-ern Luzon was but one minor skirmish in the
escalating warfare between Communist insurgents and the Government of Ferdinand
E. Marcos, the enduring strongman of Southeast Asia who has ruled the
Philippines for two decades. As recently as two years ago, the New People's Army
was generally dismissed by the Philippine Government and foreign analysts alike
as nothing more than the latest version of the insurgent groups that, under
various banners and ideologies, have come and gone for almost four centuries on
this 7,000-island archipelago. But that complacency has been replaced by alarm
as the Communist rebellion has grown rapidly in the last couple of years, aided
immeasurably by political and economic developments that have amplified the
appeal of the radical alternative the guerrillas espouse.

The August 1983 murder of the opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr. at the
Manila International Airport, as he returned from three years of self-imposed
exile in the United States, seriously undermined the credibility of the Marcos
Government and the Philippine military, which has been implicated in the
killing. Since then, the economy has plummeted, law and order have deteriorated
and military abuses have continued.

Washington, international lenders and the domestic opposition have all pressed
Marcos to allow a revival of democratic institutions and to relax his strong
hold on the nation's political and economic life. This message was reinforced in
late October, when President Reagan sent Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada to meet
with President Marcos in Manila. According to United States officials, Laxalt
expressed Reagan's ''serious'' concern over the situation in the country, and
urged Marcos to undertake urgent reforms.

The 68-year-old president, however, still retains most of his powers, including
the authority to make laws by personal decree. His political opposition,
weakened by internal rivalries, seems powerless to change that. And skepticism
is widespread as to whether most opposition politicians genuinely want to change
Philippine politics from being an exercise in personal enrichment or, as one
businessman puts it, they just want to take ''their turn at the trough.'' Today,
it isn't unusual to hear lawyers, doctors and corporate executives admit
privately that they are sympathizers of the N.P.A. because they regard it as
''the only real alternative.''

Violence, often amounting to the simple murder of government officials and other
perceived enemies, is a central part of the N.P.A. alternative. Yet the use of
such tactics seems to have gained increasing acceptance, even among many
affluent Filipinos. ''The violence is against my conscience,'' said a
42-year-old businessman who is a rebel sympathizer. ''But in our circumstances,
it is a way, a necessary evil, to reach a better end for this country.''

During the first half of this year, insurgency-related clashes left an average
of 14 people killed every day, including soldiers, guerrillas, targeted
government officials and innocent civilians caught in the crossfire. Once
limited to small raids on isolated outposts, the rebels now regularly mount
company-size and some battalion-scale operations against fortified military
facilities, usually to seize weapons, ammunition and equipment.

The strength of the New People's Army is difficult to measure precisely. Yet by
all accounts it has thrived and expanded its activities considerably in the
aftermath of the Aquino assassination. The Philippine Government now places the
rebel force at 10,000 to 12,000 -about twice the estimate just a year ago. The
Communists say they have more than 20,000 armed fighters.

''The N.P.A. is winning - it's that simple,'' one Western military analyst said.
''They aren't about to overthrow the Government now. But if the tide isn't
turned over the next three to five years, the Communists could be unstoppable.''

The growth of the N.P.A. insurgency represents the most serious challenge to
American foreign policy in Southeast Asia since the mid-1970's. ''The
Philippines could become another Vietnam,'' warns Stephen J. Solarz, chairman of
the House Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs: ''I doubt it would be
another Vietnam in the sense of committing large numbers of American troops in
the Philippines, but it could be another country lost to Communism.''

The headcount of armed regulars in the New People's Army seriously understates
the influence of the broader leftist movement of which the guerrillas are a
part, known as the National Democratic Front. An umbrella group embracing
various community, labor, church and other organizations, the National
Democratic Front claims to have a membership of one million and the support of
10 million Filipinos, out of a population of 54 million people. Its constituent
organizations are committed to supporting the guerrilla warfare of the New
People's Army and to a vaguely Marxist economic program calling for the
nationalization of selected industries.

The National Democratic Front advocates an anti-American for-eign policy,
demanding the removal of the two large United States military facilities here,
Clark Air Base and the naval base at Subic Bay, and the expulsion of most
American corporations. The two Philippine bases are an essential part of United
States military capabilities in Southeast Asia, and most analysts agree that
their loss would be a major setback to American security interests. This concern
has been heightened by the expansion of Soviet military activity in the region,
centered around the former American facilities at Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam.

Still, the leftist revolution gaining ground in the Philippines seems to be a
home-grown phenomenon. It is a third-world nationalist movement preaching
nonalignment, although critics point out that, as with the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua and other rebel movements elsewhere in the third world, the N.P.A.'s
true orientation may not be revealed until it has succeeded in gaining power.
Its revolutionary ideology is borrowed from Marx, Lenin and Mao, but its leaders
say they are adamantly opposed to falling under the imperialistic sway of any
superpower. Moving into the Soviet orbit, they insist, will never be a part of
their program.

According to State Department officials, there is no evidence of ''material''
support from foreign governments. However, there is evidence, they say, of
financial support from sympathetic leftist groups, mostly in Europe. The biggest
sources of funds, according to these officials, are organizations in the Eastern
bloc, Scandinavia and West Germany. Where those groups, in turn, get their money
is unknown - leaving open the possibility of indirect Soviet financing.

The Philippine revolutionaries appear to be skittish about direct Soviet
support, in part because N.P.A. leaders believe that any overt connections
linking their group to Moscow would invite American intervention in the
Philippines. And Chinese support of the N.P.A. is unlikely, State Department
officials say, because the Chinese seem willing to tolerate the Marcos
Government and American bases as a counterweight to Soviet activity in the
region.

T ODAY, THE NEW People's Army is active in nearly all of the country's 73
provinces. Western analysts estimate that the N.P.A. effectively controls 20
percent or more of the villages, or barrios, in the Philippines. The Marcos
Government claims such estimates are exaggerated. But barrio residents,
businessmen and hacienda managers in some areas of N.P.A. strength report that
the percentage is far higher, with Communist shadow governments, called Barrio
Revolutionary Councils, controlling as much as 50 percent of the barrios in many
towns.

The group's members are young, 19 or 20 years old, on average. Judging from
interviews with more than two dozen N.P.A. fighters in three different units in
southeastern Luzon, most are the sons and daughters of impoverished tenant
farmers. The majority never finished high school. Without the alternative
offered by the New People's Army, they faced the same fate as their parents,
working long hours to scrape a subsistence from the coconut stands they farm.
They are the underclass in a feudal agrarian world of two classes - the
hacienderos and the tenants.

The hacienderos, or landlords, frequently live in Manila, and their farms are
run by hired supervisors. The tenants work the land, but the hacienderos take
most of the crop, with the tenants making do with what is left. It is enough for
a dirt-floor dwelling of a couple of rooms with no plumbing. If there is
electricity, it is typically supplied by a car battery wired to a naked
lightbulb or two.

N.P.A. fighters speak of the injustice of Philippine society, and they defend
their movement as an attempt to improve the lives of disadvantaged tenant
farmers like their relatives and neighbors. But few of them talk of the other
two main elements in N.P.A. doctrine - opposing imperialism and ''bureaucrat''
capitalism.

All the rebels in the outlawed movement have adopted a nom de guerre. The ''Ka''
is short for ''kasama,'' the Tagalog word for comrade or companion; a first name
or Filipino nickname follows. Ka Nestor, a 28-year-old who became a guerrilla
seven years ago, conceded that his early knowledge of the group's doctrine was
limited. ''In truth,'' he said, ''when I joined I did not really understand the
objectives of the movement. I had only a general idea that this was for the good
of the people.''

Nineteen-year-old Ka Andy, a veteran N.P.A. guerrilla who bears the scars of
seven bullet wounds suffered in battle, is now a member of an N.P.A. ''sparrow
squad,'' which specializes in assassinations of local officials and military
officers. ''I don't pray anymore,'' he says, in a statement typical of many
N.P.A. fighters, most of whom, like 85 percent of Filipinos, were raised as
Roman Catholics. ''I don't believe in God anymore. The N.P.A. is my family now
and the movement is my religion.''

To its members and to the local communities where it is strong, the N.P.A. has
sold itself as a kind of ''social police.'' It maintains peace and order,
administers its brand of rough justice, collects taxes and carries out its
version of agrarian reform. In the N.P.A. program of land reform, the
traditional crop-sharing arrangement on tenant farms, which gives the landlord
two thirds of the crop and the tenant one third, is reversed.

There have been signs that once the N.P.A. is powerful in an area, it tends to
abandon its ''Robin Hood'' image and use force to extort funds from villagers
and gain support through coercion. Yet for the most part, the N.P.A. is still
widely perceived as a benevolent organization, performing tasks for the
community that the Government should but does not.

This image has imbued most of the rebels with a sincere belief in the
righteousness of their revolutionary movement, despite the violence and hardship
that guerrilla life involves. The N.P.A. preaches abstinence and discipline.
Drinking is banned. There are strict rules guiding courtship (including the
pointed suggestion not to marry outside the movement). Premarital sex is
outlawed.

Like soldiers in any army, the N.P.A. fighters have lengthy periods of empty
time. They fill it playing volleyball, telling stories and jokes, strumming
guitars and singing. All activities seem to include people in groups of three or
four or more. Few individuals are left to themselves. Asked what she liked about
being a member of the N.P.A., Ka Totoy, a 21-year-old guerrilla, replies: ''The
principles, the discipline and the camaraderie.''

The rebel movement, for security reasons, is intentionally vague about its
command structure, both at the national and regional levels. Two former campus
activists at the prestigious University of the Philippines in Manila, Rodolfo
Salas and Rafael Baylosis, are identified by Government authorities as the
chairman and secretary general of the party. For their part, the guerrillas will
not identify anyone by title, except to say someone is ''senior member'' or a
''responsible officer'' in the N.P.A.

T HE SLIGHT 36-year-old man, with a pencil-thin mustache and heavy-lidded eyes,
is known as Ka Oggie. He is one of the most senior members of the N.P.A. in the
Bicol region, or nationally, for that matter. An anti-Government activist in
Manila, he joined the rebels in the hills in early 1970. That was 15 months
after 11 young revolutionaries, in a split with the ineffectual, Soviet-oriented
Huk-balahap rebel group, formally created the Communist Party of the
Philippines, on Dec. 26, 1968. The young radicals pledged to re-establish the
party ''guided by Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong thought.'' In keeping with the
Maoist edict that ''power grows out of the barrel of the gun and the party
controls the gun,'' the New People's Army, the party's military wing, was
established on March 29, 1969 - one year before Ka Oggie joined up.

Seated on the floor of a tenant farmer's dwelling one night, smoking and
speaking by the light of a kerosene lamp, Ka Oggie said that the N.P.A.'s first
decade had been marked by mis-takes and setbacks. The group's ideological fervor
did not translate into combat effectiveness. ''We didn't know anything about
waging a war,'' the rebel veteran said, ''and we had to learn with many lives,
unfortunately.''

In the 1970's, the movement's agrarian reform was more radical than the current
program, and mistakenly so, in the view of today''s rebel leaders. ''It was 90
percent for the tenant and 10 percent for the landlord,'' Ka Oggie said. ''If
the landlord did not accept, there was confiscation. That extreme approach lost
us the support of the middle forces -landlords and small-business men. Now, we
recognize that we need their support.''

Indeed, the N.P.A.'s ability to recover from its early setbacks is largely
attributable to its flexibility. It has adapted Communist revolutionary theory
to Philippine conditions, broadening its support.

Militarily, the party has also fashioned a Filipino variant of the Maoist model,
tailored to the nation's geography. The blueprint for its brand of guerrilla
warfare was presented in a 1974 tract entitled ''Specific Characteristics of Our
People's War,'' by Amado Guerrero, thought to be a pen name for Jose Maria
Sison, a founder and first chairman of the Communist Party of the Philippines.

''In a small, fragmented country like the Philippines,'' Guerrero wrote, ''it
would be foolhardy for the central leadership to ensconce itself in one limited
area.'' Instead, he declared, the N.P.A. should set up a series of decentralized
''guerrilla fronts,'' each spanning several adjacent towns and villages and
including a party organ, an N.P.A. unit and a network of civilian organizations
supporting the revolutionary movement. At present, the rebels claim to have more
than 60 such fronts scattered across the country.

Building popular support is the foremost consideration of the revolutionary
movement, Ka Oggie stressed: ''We are doing things in the countryside that any
decent government ought to be doing - helping poor people meet their basic needs
and giving them justice.''

''What we do is like pouring water into an empty glass,'' he continued. ''We
give them something, while the government gives them nothing.''

Government officials dismiss such claims as self-serving romanticism. The
N.P.A., President Marcos asserts, is less concerned with improving life in the
Philippines than with justifying the actions of a membership that is made up
largely of ''plain criminals, local bandits, or bored young people seeking
adventure.''

The movement's foreign policy is still developing. At this juncture, it seems to
be a leftist amalgam of nationalism, Marxism and opportunism. According to the
Communists and the members of the National Democratic Front, their objection to
the American military bases in the Philippines is primarily nationalistic. They
don't want any foreign bases in the country, they say, adding that the
Philippines should be a neutral, nonaligned nation.

Yet the June 1985 edition of Ang Bayan, the underground publication of the
Communist Party of the Philippines, declared: ''It is the duty of the Filipino
people to forge links of solidarity with the other peoples of the world. Our
principal enemy is U.S. imperialism, which is also the principal enemy of the
peoples of the world.''

Virtually every observer of the Philippine guerrilla movement is watching
closely for signs of outside sponsorship, but the Philippine military says it
has not yet found evidence of support from any foreign government.

For his part, Ka Oggie, the Bicol guerrilla officer, says that the rebels want
the backing of governments that are ''friends of our revolution,'' though he
declined to name any candidates. ''It will be difficult to win without foreign
support,'' he admits. The overseas backing that the N.P.A. needs, he says, would
be mainly weapons shipments, including artillery. So far, the rebels' arms are
mainly high-powered rifles, with M-16's by far the most common. They also have
carbines, and some machine guns and grenade launchers. Much of what they carry
bears the legend ''property of U.S. Government'' or ''U.S. Army,'' having been
seized from the Philippine military in ambushes or, occasionally, purchased from
corrupt officers.

To benefit from foreign backing, Ka Oggie said, the Philippine guerrillas must
first increase their strength enough to control large sections of the nation's
shoreline so that weapons shipments can land easily. The N.P.A. should reach
that threshold in ''a couple of years,'' he figures.

T ALL, LEAN, WITH close-cropped gray hair, Col. Rodolfo Biazon stands at the
forefront of the Philippine Government's effort to stem the growth of the
Communist insurgency. The 50-year-old marine commander heads the
counterinsurgency drive in the area around Davao, the sprawling port city of
Mindanao. In Davao, the New People's Army is so active with its organizing, tax
collections and selective liquidations of police and other officials that
Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile has called the city a ''laboratory for the
N.P.A.'' It is Biazon's job to make sure that the Communist experiment in Davao
and the surrounding countryside is not a success.

Following the declaration of martial law in 1972, the Philippine mili-tary
acquired a reputation for being corrupt, abusive and top-heavy with officers
personally close to President Marcos. Biazon epitomizes the other side of the
military - the professional soldiers. He is a graduate of the Philippine
Military Academy, which is modeled after West Point. He is intelligent,
articulate and respected both by supporters of the Government and by its
strident critics. The marines under his command are also highly regarded in the
community. They are disciplined, well trained and well equipped troops.

Biazon commands military sweeps in the hills surrounding Davao to capture
guerrilla units, but he spends most of his time talking to civilians, usually in
small groups. He talks to students, local businessmen, opposition politicians,
anybody who will listen. ''The military side of the N.P.A. is often
overstated,'' Biazon says. ''The real danger is their teach-ins, their so-called
education program. That is what I work to counteract, and that's where the main
counterinsurgency battle has to be fought and won.''

''This insurgency problem,'' he went on, ''is not going to be solved by body
counts. The important thing is to change the thinking of the people. They have
to be convinced that their grievances against the Government may be temporary
and that Communism is the real enemy.''

Biazon views himself as a kind of evangelist. In his lectures, he sides with
institutions, not personalities. ''I teach for democracy and against
Communism,'' he explains. ''I don't promote the Government.'' At times, in fact,
he sounds like an opposition politician: ''If you take away the opposition
groups, you have a dictatorship. They are the alternative for a peaceful change.
We need them.'' To the opposition, his admonition is to beware of the ''danger
of Communist infiltration'' - a warning he presents as the lesson of the
Nicaraguan revolution.

During the last year, more than 20 barrios in Davao that were once heavily
influenced by the Communists have been returned to Government control, thanks to
the counterinsurgency campaign. But in some of these, the marines are nothing
more than an occupying force, and the civilian population is neutralized. ''If
the marines are there, the villagers support them,'' noted Prospero Nograles, a
Davao human-rights lawyer. ''But if the N.P.A. comes in, they will cooperate
with them.''

Another important factor is the presence of less-disciplined Government troops
in the area. The marines under Biazon account for only about one third of the
regular military troops in the area. These 4,500 regulars are far outnumbered by
the 7,000-strong contingent of the paramilitary civilian home defense force.
Poorly paid, badly equipped and often undisciplined, these units occupy the
lowest rung of the Philippine military. They are known as trigger-happy bad boys
who are frequently little more than guns-for-hire, and whose side businesses
include theft and extortion. So, though Biazon and his charges are impressive
and respected, they are not the face of the military that most people see. T HE
N.P.A.'S STRUG-gle has been promoted by it followers not as a coming Communist
takeover, but as a nationalist revolution. The nationalist theme has broad
appeal in the Philippines, which was a Spanish colony for nearly four centuries
and then, from 1898 to 1946, was controlled by the United States, except for the
Japanese occupation during World War II. In their small-group indoctrination
sessions, the leftists rarely mention the word ''communism.'' In fact, many
full-time members of the movement, including some in the armed units, insist
they are not Communists, but merely part of the National Democratic Front.

Whether this is a distinction with a difference is dubious. In ideological
terms, the Philippine Communist Party and the National Democratic Front are
virtually indistinguishable, blaming ''American imperialism'' for most of the
problems in their country and elsewhere, and advocating the necessity of armed
rebellion.

Still, many middle-class Filipinos who support the left-ist cause do not believe
they are backing Communism and, perhaps naively, do not believe that their
business interests and property will be taken from them if the rebels win. A
38-year-old lawyer who is a landowner in southern Luzon says: ''I don't think
this will be a Communist country, even after the revolutionary movement takes
over. It is because democracy has been subverted in this country that I support
this revolutionary movement.''

Even some longtime party members explain the Communist element in the movement
more in terms of pragmatism than as an unshakable faith in Communist doctrine.
Ka Cesar, a rugged 35-year-old with a stocky physique, is a senior party cadre
in the Bicol region. At the home of a large landowner sympathetic to the
movement, he said: ''We believe that radical change is needed in this country,
and we need an ideology. We have seen that the Marx-Lenin-Mao approach has been
effective in waging and winning revolutionary struggles elsewhere.'' ''But,'' he
continued, ''that doesn't mean it will have that character here. We are open to
all elements of other ideologies as long as they help us win.''

Yet many Filipinos wonder whether the movement's tactics as it strains to
increase its base of popular support are only that - tactics, to be cast aside
as its strength increases. This kind of reservation is frequently heard among
other opponents of the Marcos Government, especially moderates seeking
nonviolent change.

One of these is Jaime V. Ongpin, a Harvard-trained corporate executive in Manila
and a persistent critic of the Marcos Government. In Ongpin's view, the growth
of the New People's Army is largely a symptom of the nation's problems - an
authoritarian regime, a bloated and abusive military and a prostrate economy
riddled with corruption and favoritism. The communist insurgency, he believes,
will wither away if the Philippines gets rid of Marcos and then sets about the
tasks of reviving democratic institutions and re-forming the military and the
economy.

''The rise of the N.P.A. is alarming but not overpowering,'' Ongpin says.
''There is still time. Ninety percent of the guerrillas are not committed to the
Communist ideology. They are just people reacting to circumstances - poverty and
military abuses. At present, with Marcos's power, they are not given a decent
alternative to joining the N.P.A. But the Filipino is not a Bolshevik. He
doesn't want that much. He wants to be left alone, to earn a decent living and
have enough to send his kids to school.''

Ongpin may not want Communism in the Philippines but, like a growing number of
moderates, he doesn't want the American military bases in the Philippines
either. Ongpin favors the departure of the American presence as a pragmatic
nationalist: he does not think the bases serve the Philippines. And asked if he
would stay in the Philippines if the nation turned Communist, he replies: ''Yes
I would. I am Filipino and this is my country, regardless.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW NEW YORKERS

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN; Samuel G. Freedman is a reporter on the culture
staff of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6830 words


THEY BEGIN ARRIVING HOURS EARLY, as they always do, filling the Brooklyn
courtroom. A woman in a sari, a man in the black cloak of Hasidism, people in
denim and people in silk, faces of every hue from ebony to alabaster - all are
assembling to take the oath of citizenship.

In the second row sits Fritz Potier, formerly of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, and
currently of Flatbush, Brooklyn. He wears a double-breasted gray sport coat, a
knit tie and a blue shirt with a white collar, the fruits of his job servicing
air-conditioners.

Mr. Potier came to New York seven years ago for the same reasons immigrants have
come here for more than a century, to be free and to make money. Not all of his
dreams have been realized, he acknowledges, and he surely had not counted on
muggers and cold winters. But here he is. ''I have lots of hope,'' he says.
''Hope is American.'' The courtroom quiets as Judge Mark A. Costantino of the
United States District Court enters. Judge Costantino's parents arrived in New
York in the 1890's in steerage. His father shoveled coal on the ferries for 25
years, and his mother, an unschooled woman, filled her children's heads with the
possibilities of the new land. ''In America, you get out what you put in,''
Judge Costantino recalls her saying. ''The people who make it, they work hard,
they get an education. You don't get something for nothing.''

There are 400 people in the courtroom, and it is unlikely that Judge Costantino
knows Fritz Potier as more than just another right hand held aloft, another
voice reciting the Pledge of Allegiance. But the men are connected in the most
powerful way, bound by the history and the continuity of New York City. Judge
Costantino personifies the influx of European immigrants in the late 1800's and
early 1900's, Fritz Potier the third world tide that has swept into New York
since the Federal immigration laws were amended in 1965. It is no coincidence
that Mr. Potier, like the others, is becoming an American citizen in a courtroom
adorned with a mural that once hung in the Aliens' Dining Room on Ellis Island.

Ellis Island, long closed, is now a domain of shadows and ghosts. Today's
newcomer is more likely to get his first impression of New York from the baggage
claim area at Kennedy Airport. But more than at any time in a half-century, New
York is a city of immigrants, which is to say a city of dreams, some fulfilled,
some not. New York accepts them all - the poor, the ambitious, the elegant - and
in return the immigrants offer the city their minds and their muscles, their
spices and their songs. From this bargain come the spirit and vitality and
hunger that make New York unique. For anyone descended from the men and women
who passed through Ellis Island, to see and hear today's immigrants is to make a
hajj, a pilgrimage, a journey into one's own past and into the very core of New
York.

Due largely to immigration since 1965, 1,675,000 foreign-born residents in New
York City were counted in the 1980 census; adding an estimated 450,000 to
550,000 illegal aliens, the city's foreign-born population approaches the 1930
record of 2,359,000. Nearly one in three New Yorkers, counting the illegal
aliens, is an immigrant. Put another way, there are now more foreign-born
residents in New York than total residents in Warsaw, Manila, Budapest or
Philadelphia.

The greatest number of new immigrants come from the Caribbean, Latin America and
Southeast Asia. (Puerto Ricans do not count as immigrants; their island is part
of the United States and they are citizens at birth.) The Department of City
Planning reports that the largest groups of newcomers by nationality are
Dominicans (98,420 settled here between 1965 and 1980), Jamaicans (76,280) and
Chinese (62,420). Randomly gazing down the list, one can also find 29,420
Guyanese, 20,680 Indians and 10,760 Poles. And that doesn't even touch on the
Albanians in the Bronx.

While the Albanians, like many other ethnic groups, may not show up in great
numbers, they make their presence known in classic immigrant fashion by
invigorating a neighborhood (Bedford Park) and by clustering in a particular
occupation (managing apartments). Indeed, the new New York is as apparent on the
street as in the Census Bureau's computer printout. Queens, once Archie Bunker's
stronghold, is now the most polyethnic borough, home to more than 110 different
nationalities. 2d Spread In countless ways life here is defined, and enriched,
by the newcomers. ''This is everyone's metropolis,'' Jan Morris wrote in a 1979
essay on New York, ''for there is no nation that has not contributed something.
. . if only a turn of phrase or a category of bun.'' More than 60
foreign-language newspapers and magazines are published in New York, from
Nuestro magazine to Ukrainian Engineering News. The Chinese Racing Daily, said
to be the first foreign-language newspaper devoted to the track, even appeared
briefly. Each year, the city holds a Spanish-language spelling bee; last year
one of the semifinalists was Chinese.

ROM THE DAYS OF YIDDISH THEA-ter on Second Avenue and Toscanini in Carnegie
Hall, immigrants have animated the cultural life of New York; the contemporary
evidence includes an Asian-American film festival on Canal Street, a Mother's
Day calypso concert in the Felt Forum and the publication of Ararat, an Armenian
literary journal. There is a Ukrainian museum in the East Village and a center
for Tibetan art on Staten Island. The Cultural Association of Bengal, the Center
for Bulgarian Culture in America, the Association of Hispanic Arts, the Alliance
Francaise and the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research all call New York home.

At City College, once the great educator of Jewish, Irish and Italian
immigrants, 50 percent of the current students were born abroad and 58 percent
speak a native language other than English. The valedictorian of the class of
1984 was Chi Luu, one of the Vietnamese ''boat people.'' The co-athlete of the
year for 1985 was a soccer player, Assad Nawabi, who is an Afghan refugee.

The arrival of the Chi Luus and Assad Nawabis has reshaped virtually the entire
ethnic landscape of New York. Woodside, once German and Irish, is now heavily
Latin and Korean. The old Irish and Jewish neighborhood of Flatbush now sports
the reggae record stores and feuilles (herbal medicine) shops of a burgeoning
West Indian community. As Chinatown devours Little Italy, a new Little Italy, a
neighborhood where men listen to Italian soccer games on the radio at sidewalk
cafes, rises in Bensonhurst. Cambodians near Prospect Park, Soviet Jews in
Brighton Beach, Indians in Flushing, Poles in Greenpoint, Iranians in Kew
Gardens, Dominicans in Washington Heights - hardly any corner of New York has
been left untouched.

This is the personal face of transition: Ewa Zadrzynska is a journalist who fled
the martial-law regime in her native Poland two years ago. Not long after moving
to Washington Heights, she noticed an old steamer trunk abandoned on the street.
Mrs. Zadrzynska opened it and found inside the artifacts of a family named
Mueller, part of the German-Jewish community that settled in Washington Heights
after escaping Hitler 50 years ago. Before the trashman arrived, Mrs. Zadrzynska
rescued a few items. A locket belonging to one of the Mueller women now rests in
her purse, and a portrait of the family, pride and fright in their immigrant
eyes, hangs in Mrs. Zadrzynska's apartment.

Many of the new ethnic neighborhoods are polyglots, mixes of many nationalities,
in a way that the enclaves of the early 1900's rarely were. Today, within two
blocks of West 85th Street and Broadway in Manhattan, one can find a Greek
coffee shop, Italian, Chinese and Turkish restaurants, an Egyptian barber, a
bakery staffed by West Indians, a discount store managed by Lebanese and, on
sunny days, an Ecuadorean man selling balloons. In New York, such concentrated
diversity is not the exception; it is the expectation.

Just as immigrants have redefined neighborhoods, they have transformed the
working world. Some 200 Cambodian refugees, for instance, clean offices for the
Allied Maintenance Company in Manhattan. In the traditional manner of such
things, one Cambodian was hired in 1981 and word spread rapidly on the refugee
grapevine. For Allied Maintenance, the Cambodian refugees are hard and diligent
workers; for the Cambodians, the company provides well-paying jobs for which
they need not speak English. Similarly, Kapoor Brothers Inc., a company founded
by two Indian immigrants that holds the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's
newsstand concession, employs newcomers from India to run 80 percent of its
newsstands.

Other immigrants go the route of Civil Service. A random round of conversations
at the Transit Authority's Brooklyn offices turned up Raza Khan and Mandan Naik,
engineers from India, Samson Dada, an architect from Nigeria, and Mei Too, a
management analyst from Hong Kong. Miss Too's parents work in the garment
factories in Chinatown, and their warnings played a large role in her choosing a
profession. ''They kept stressing how important education was,'' she says.
''They said, 'Look around you, look at Chinatown. Everyone works in factories or
restaurants. If you don't want to be like your parents, study.' ''

Those words underscore the appeal of New York to its newcomers - economic
opportunity and the chance to educate their children for a better life. Such
attractions draw the middle class as much as the impoverished; the city's
post-1965 immigrants are arriving with more skills and more education than did
their predecessors in the 1880-1924 period. ''These people are coming with
abilities,'' says Andrew Hacker, a professor of political science at Queens
College. ''Most people can't imagine a middle-class Colombian. They think
they're all peasants in sombreros. And that's only prejudice, blind prejudice.
You take a Filipino nurse. That's someone who's coming here skilled, with
middle-class values.''

Twenty percent of the newcomers who came to New York between 1965 and 1980 hold
white-collar jobs here, according to Elizabeth Bogen, the director of immigrant
affairs in the Department of City Planning. The figure does not include
immigrants who have similar skills but who are underemployed. Even immigrants
without a profession or an education form a sort of elite because they possess
such great drive to succeed. A foreign-born New Yorker is about half as likely
as an American-born New Yorker to go on welfare, Miss Bogen has found, and is
more likely than a native to hold a job.

''The old Irish song 'The Streets Are Paved with Gold' is still true,'' says
Frank Vardy, a demographer for the Department of City Planning. ''If you come
from a country where the per capita income is $1,000 a year and you find a job
for $250 a week scrubbing floors, no matter how hard the work is, it's a
godsend. These are the chosen people in a sense. There are people like them back
home without the gumption to come to America. So what we see are the select few,
the most driven.''

EW YORK MEANS BACKBREAKING and demeaning work for many newcomers. In the garment
factories of Chinatown, where the average annual wage is $6,000, women hunch
over sewing machines in the glare of fluorescent lamps.

Some of the women's husbands work in restaurants hours outside New York, seeing
their families only one day a week.

Many immigrants who held professional jobs in their homeland must settle for
menial labor here because they do not speak English or because their foreign
credentials are not accepted. Chaim Sverdlik was a heating engineer in Russia;
in New York he drives a van for a yeshiva. Alejo Conde was an accountant in
Colombia; in New York he works in a knitting factory.

''People come with the economic know-how to enter right into the society,'' says
James Shenton, a professor of history at Columbia University, ''and at the same
time they're terrified the society won't recognize those talents. There's a
certain resentment that builds up sometimes, a feeling of 'Did I make a mistake
in coming here?' ''

Yet most of the immigrants sacrifice willingly, hoping someday to regain a
position of stature or to give New York's opportunities to their children. It is
almost impossible for a nativeborn American to appreciate the appeal of this
country, this city, to foreigners. In Haiti, people hear about the riches of
THIRD SPREAD ''Bouklin-lan,'' the Creole word for Brooklyn. Rural Chinese call
America ''Gum San'' - ''The Golden Mountain,'' a term coined by the Chinese who
came to California during the Gold Rush. Perhaps the best explanation of New
York's allure comes from Jose A. Tejeda, a Dominican who in 15 years went on
from a $2.10-an-hour factory job to become the leading Latin music promoter in
New York. ''New York is like a nest,'' Mr. Tejeda says, ''where everyone wants
to come and lay the golden egg.''

It would be saccharine to suggest that every newcomer to New York lays that
golden egg, or even finds much of a nest. Many parents never learn English
fluently or really come to think of New York as home. With 113,837 public school
children eligible for bilingual study or courses in English as a second language
- up 67 percent from only two years ago - there is a chronic shortage of
qualified instructors. New York's escalating rents strike hard at immigrants.
''It's worse now than when I came,'' says Fong Chin, a garment worker in
Chinatown. ''It's $400 a month for a three-room tenement for six people. When I
got here in 1974, rent in that kind of place would've been about $100. You need
two months' rent as deposit and money for the broker. Some people pay $5,000 for
key money. And because they don't speak English, they don't know how to take the
subway and live anywhere but Chinatown.''

As always, there are people, often countrymen, ready to prey on the greenhorn.
The Rev. Peter W. Zendzian, the associate director of the Diocese of Brooklyn's
Catholic Migration and Refugee Office, tells of brokers selling phony work
permits and Social Security cards; marriage to an American, and with it instant
citizenship, fetches as much as $3,000. In some cases, Father Zendzian says, a
broker informs a newcomer he can apply for citizenship by appearing at the 12th
floor of 26 Federal Plaza -the deportation office. Some immigrants turn to
crime. The police have spoken of a ''Russian Mafia'' in Brighton Beach. An
outbreak of gang violence in Chinatown last spring left seven people wounded by
gunfire. Latin American immigrants have been arrested periodically in connection
with narcotics.

There also are people, like Conrado Mones, who cannot surmount the cultural and
linguistic barriers and the awesome sense of dislocation. In 1982, Mr. Mones
climbed into the polar bear's cage in the Central Park Zoo and the animal killed
him. At first, he was presumed to be just another of New York's sad, anonymous
street people. But he turned out to be an educated man, a professional man, who
had slowly unraveled after coming to New York following the 1980 Mariel
boatlift. In his native Cuba, Mr. Mones had been a biology teacher.

HERE IS A POIGNANCE TO DASHED dreams, even in subtler shades. Consider the
Karistinos family of Astoria, Queens.

Evangelos Karistinos brought his wife and two sons to New York from Greece in
1981 for the usual reasons - stories of money and opportunity and college
educations. From his first weeks here, he realized those tales were inflated.
His wife, Anastasia, had to work as a seamstress to supplement his income from
managing an apartment building. His sons, Andreas, 19, and Costas, 16, were each
mugged twice. ''It's like a cloud of fear envelops the city every night,'' he
says. ''This is more of a decadent place than a democracy. People don't help
each other.''

So Mr. Karistinos and his wife talk of returning to Greece. The boys, however,
want to stay, Andreas to study at Hunter College and Costas to finish St.
Demetrios High School and to go on to college. It is the classic schism in an
immigrant family, between young and old, the assimilated and the traditional.
For Costas, particularly, the family's dispute resonates with the clash of Old
World and American values. As the younger of the two boys, in Greece Costas
would be subordinate to Andreas; in New York he is free to outshine his older
brother. When their father talks about going back to Greece, Andreas gazes out
the window and Costas stares at the floor. It is clearly a familiar subject and
an agonizing one.

For even the most enthusiastic newcomer, New York can raise a welter of fears
and doubts. Archer Dong, the principal of Intermediate School 131 in Chinatown,
recently judged an essay contest on the topic ''What It Means to be a
Chinese-American.'' One of the most common themes, he says, was a dread of
getting lost outside Chinatown and being unable to speak enough English to ask
for help. Maria and Alejo Conde of Colombia, who were illegal aliens for their
first five years in New York, stayed away from Latin American neighborhoods for
fear of being caught in an Immigration and Naturalization Service raid. ''I
remember we always watched the Spanish channel on TV,'' says their daughter,
Adriana, a student at Queens College, ''and they used to have reports all the
time on Immigration raids in Jackson Heights or somewhere. So we wouldn't even
go out of the house much. When the man came to read our gas meter, my mother got
nervous.''

EW YORK, WHATEVER ITS DRAW-backs, is more than just a magnet for the poor and
hopeful; it is also the ultimate destination of highly skilled and wellborn men
and women from around the globe, lured by its critical mass of ideas, creativity
and cash. Increasingly, the wealthy and ambitious seek out the business
opportunities and pizazz of the city's fast-paced social and intellectual life.
Others embrace New York as the cultural capital of the world, the place of high
stakes and high standards.

In the Soviet Union, Joseph Brodsky, an esteemed author and a political
dissident, was jailed, confined to a mental hospital and finally, in 1972,
ordered to leave on 10 days' notice. In New York, he sits in the garden behind
his Greenwich Village apartment, with cigarettes, magazines, a typewriter and a
Russian-English dictionary spread on the table before him: portrait of the poet
as Manhattanite.

''In terms of freedom,'' Mr. Brodsky says, ''America doesn't invite any
comparison to Russia. It would be silly to make one. Every line that I care to
write, I can have printed. There is no point to even talk about degrees.'' At
the same time, as behooves a survivor of the gulag, Mr. Brodsky can be stoical,
clearly nested in New York but not given to effusion. ''A writer,'' he says,
''is seldom satisfied with the condition he finds himself in. We're all given to
fretting a lot. And when you leave the old country you travel with that - how do
you put it? - illusion that you'll be as well known where you arrive. Then you
find it's not the case. But it's more fun to start new, from scratch.''

Like most newcomers, Joseph Brodsky has made New York manageable by learning his
corner of it intimately. His landlord is a professor of Russian history. One
neighbor is a fellow exile who teaches Russian language and literature. Down the
hall is a woman who came from Russia after World War II. ''If this is a
village,'' Mr. Brodsky says, ''then I'm a peasant. One has one's radius.''

James Wolfensohn, the Australian-born financier, has his radius, too, and a wide
one it is: presidency of his own investment banking firm; chairman of the board
of Carnegie Hall; board member of CBS Inc. And that's the short form. What makes
Mr. Wolfensohn's resume so striking - even to himself -is that he only moved
here 15 years ago. He came to New York because of its centrality in
international finance, but now he speaks much more about New York's confluence
of economic and artistic pursuits, and about its acceptance of outsiders.

''The unique thing for me is the openness to immigrants,'' Mr. Wolfensohn says.
''I lived here for 10 years before becoming a citizen, but I was always accepted
as an American. No one asked where I was from. I was welcomed into the New York
scene. Everything was possible - in finance, in science, in the arts. The
opportunities, well, there is no limit. The other thing about New York is the
voluntarism, the private philanthropy. You can link the corporate individual to
social affairs. That nexus between business and culture, the ability to move
easily between one and the other, is heavily New York.''

The city draws its energy, its soul from the entire spectrum of immigrant life,
from Club A and Avenue A, from the wealthy expatriates who live in Olympic
Towers and dine at Sandro's and from the everyday people who clean houses and
drive cabs and sell newspapers so their children may do something better. The
revitalization of New York, the city behind the Golden Door, is nothing if not
the sum of a million individual stories. And each of them, like all immigrant
stories, is a kind of epic.

O N THE ISLAND OF St. Vincent, Molly Thomas worked in a flour factory for $12.50
a week. When she left for New York, she told the manager she would own a house
here within two years. Instead, her first home was a rented room in
Bedford-Stuyvesant. After her 18-month tourist visa expired, Mrs. Thomas lived
the furtive existence of an illegal alien, afraid to make friends here or to
risk a visit to her family. Letters and phone calls and money from her job as a
domestic had to suffice.

''It was very frightening,'' says Mrs. Thomas, who is now 54. ''I used to cry
all the time. I didn't know anyone here except one friend. I did not know who to
trust, who to talk to. People hear you're illegal and they threaten to call the
Immigration. The only people I could trust were the other illegals. But I knew I
had to make it. I came here with one intention - to get my kids to America.''

It took her 11 years. Mrs. Thomas's first house-cleaning job paid $60 a week;
now she makes about $250 a week, though it means long commutes between Manhattan
or New Jersey and her Crown Heights apartment. She became a citizen in 1980 and
brought three of her children from St. Vincent in 1982 and the other four in
1983.

''All those years apart were hard because in the West Indies family is
important,'' says the eldest child, Michael, who is an engineer. ''But we knew
the sacrifice was made for a purpose. We always hoped one day we would see our
mother again.'' And there she sits, across the living room, resting after a day
on her feet.

Yonj Joon Choi was willing to leave his job as president of a small electronics
company in Seoul, Korea. Three of his four children were daughters and he felt
that in male-dominated Korean society they would not have a good chance at
college and a profession. For 100 days before the family came to New York, Mr.
Choi arose at 4 in the morning to pray. ''You know when the Israelis went to
Canaan?'' says his daughter Ye Kyung, acting as translator. ''He felt God was
sending him to a new country for a reason.''

Twenty days after arriving here, in November 1976, Mr. Choi put his life savings
of $10,000 into a greengrocery in Inwood. He had never before seen honeydew,
cantaloupe, plantains or cilantro. The former owner of the store, a fellow
Korean, had to teach him how to pronounce the names. When masked children came
trick-or-treating on Halloween, a holiday unknown in Korea, Mr. Choi thought he
was being robbed. And there were serious troubles - he was knocked unconscious
by an assailant at the Bronx Terminal Market, and he was sued for $1.5 million
by a man whose car had collided with Mr. Choi's van.

The children, too, had problems with their new city. ''When I came to New
York,'' Ye Kyung recalls, ''I knew how to say only 'Hello' and 'Thank you.' I
felt bad because in Korea I was a valedictorian and here I was just another dumb
kid who didn't speak English. The only thing I did well in was math, because I
didn't need English there. I remember when I got 100 on a test - all the kids
thought I was cheating.''

But with years of 15-hour workdays the Choi family's life improved. Yonj Joon
Choi sold his first store to a fellow Korean and bought two more in the Bronx.
Three years ago, the family moved from an apartment in Inwood to a house near
Van Cortlandt Park. Ye Kyung, at 23 the eldest child, attends City University's
medical school. Un Jin, 21, is a voice student at the Manhattan School of Music.
The two younger children, Eugene and Michelle, are still in high school.
Michelle is a gifted violinist and not long ago she was selected to perform as
part of a documentary about the Statue of Liberty.

T HE PERSONIFICA-tion of Asian-American achievement in New York is a Vietnamese
refugee named Chi Luu. After being jailed twice for trying to escape from
Vietnam, then robbed by pirates on the tiny boat that took him to Malaysia, he
joined his two brothers in New York in 1979. In four years, he rose from selling
candy on the streets of Chinatown for $3 an hour to graduating as the
valedictorian of his City College class. He has won a fellowship for graduate
study at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and he has met President
Reagan at the White House. His Americanization has been rapid, and is evident;
describing conditions in Vietnam, he quotes the funk song by Rockwell
''Somebody's Watching Me.''

But Chi Luu's rapid ascent is atypical, particularly for a refugee. Immigrants
generally have made a conscious decision to come to New York. At best, a refugee
has spent years chafing under oppression and plotting a way out; more often, he
has been thrown into the outside world by war or revolution. The passions of the
old country often animate the new. The editor of a Haitian newspaper in Brooklyn
who criticized the Duvalier regime was mysteriously slain several years ago. On
a recent evening, an Iranian exile, driving a cab, pulled out a looseleaf
notebook with photos of those tortured by the Khomeini Government and asked his
passengers for a contribution to the opposition. ''In the Chinese newspapers,''
says Professor Shenton, ''you get every point of view, from the Gang of Four to
the restoration of the Manchu Dynasty.''

Some refugees - Cambodians, Vietnamese, Poles, Russians, Cubans - automatically
qualify for welfare and food stamps under Federal laws. (Others who consider
themselves refugees from repressive regimes, such as Iranians, Haitians and
Salvadorans, have not been granted refugee status, or such instant eligibility,
by Congress.) Material aid, however, cannot eliminate the other barriers that
refugees face in New York. Unlike immigrants, they are not necessarily the most
skilled or the most ambitious of their country; they are simply the hardiest
survivors. Some refugees arrive in New York illiterate in their native tongue.
Many of them carry psychological baggage. Chi Luu's father, an amateur painter,
has found it too painful to do scenes of Vietnam since coming to New York. A
former high school principal, he lives on welfare. Tun Savoeung, a Cambodian who
fled his homeland after being caught with resistance pamphlets, had to leave
behind his wife and childen. Hokhy Tan, a bank officer in Manhattan who is
president of the Cambodian-American Society, lost five of his children to the
Khmer Rouge.

On May 1, 1980, the Cuban Government gave Daniel Ponce one hour to leave the
country. Mr. Ponce was doubly offensive to the Castro regime. He refused to join
the Communist party and he made his money on the black market. His real skill
was music, but major bands in Cuba, like Irakere, demand political purity from
their members; they represent their country abroad and the Government fears
defections. Mr. Ponce had to settle for playing his drums on the streets of
Havana during carnival.

When the order to leave arrived, Mr. Ponce's girlfriend asked Cuban officials if
she and their son could join him. No, they were told. Then Mr. Ponce considered
going into hiding. Finally, he turned to his grandmother for advice. ''I'll
never forget it,'' he recalls. ''She said, 'Go, because no one knows what'll
happen here. There are thousands of people here who want the chance to go. You
have it. Take it.' '' Soon Mr. Ponce and 13 other Cubans were bobbing in a small
boat bound from Mariel for Key West.

After three months in Florida, Mr. Ponce headed north. He arrived in Newark
Airport with $200, a suitcase of clothes and two bottles of brandy, and he spent
his first two nights sleeping on a street in Union City, N.J., a Cuban enclave.
A fellow Cuban, whom Mr. Ponce knew only by the nickname El Chino, found him and
invited him into his home. El Chino took him to hear a Latin band one night.
''This is beautiful,'' Ponce said as he saw all the lights downtown. ''But this
is Newark,'' El Chino told him.

Before long, Mr. Ponce was living with friends in Manhattan, where he met Jerry
Gonzalez, one of the major Latin-jazz musicians in New York. Mr. Gonzalez
introduced him to Verna Gillis, an ethnomusicologist who was to become his
friend and manager of sorts. Miss Gillis is a woman with an affinity for
newcomers that derives from an awareness of her own Eastern European Jewish
roots; her bookkeeper is a Soviet Jew and her music assistant is a Chinese who
grew up in Brazil. Miss Gillis gave Mr. Ponce some of his first paying jobs and
let him live for two years in Soundscape, her loft club in Hell's Kitchen. She
was privy to much of his pain and astonishment - a year of trying to get a call
through to his girlfriend and son in Cuba, his incredulity at public pornography
and loose-joint entrepreneurs. The first time Mr. Ponce saw subway graffiti,
Miss Gillis recalls, he said, ''Fidel would have a cure for this - one year in
jail.''

As a musician, though, Daniel Ponce had no trouble fitting in. He played in the
acclaimed band of Paquito d'Rivera, a saxophonist who defected from Cuba in
1980, and led his own group, Jazzbata. He emerged as one of New York's most
in-demand sidemen, hired for recording sessions and live dates by Mick Jagger,
Yoko Ono, Herbie Hancock and Laurie Anderson. He has built a new life here,
marrying a Dominican woman and sharing a home with her in South Ozone Park,
where Cuban tourism posters hang alongside his gold record for Herbie Hancock's
''Future Shock.'' Mr. Ponce recently made his first record as a leader. Although
his English is spotty, he wanted it to have an American title. He chose ''New
York Now.'' On the front is a photograph of the Manhattan skyline. On the back
is a picture of his grandmother.

F OR CHAIM SVERD-lik, the greatest gift of New York is the freedom to practice
his Jewish faith openly. In Riga, Latvia, where Mr. Sverdlik was an engineer in
a sugar factory, the city synagogue was permitted to open only for a few major
holidays. Mr. Sverdlik's daughter, Ganat, and her husband, Gary Goldin, had to
marry surreptitiously because they wanted to wed under a chuppa, the ritual
canopy. Their son, Eli, had his bris, the religious circumcision ceremony, in
similar secrecy.

A month after the Sverdlik family arrived in New York, in 1979, someone broke
into Mr. and Mrs. Goldin's apartment, two floors above Mr. Sverdlik's own. As
police officers were inspecting the apartment for clues, one noticed Mr.
Goldin's tallis, his prayer shawl, lying crumpled amid the debris on the floor.
The officer picked up the tallis, carefully folded it and kissed it, as is the
Jewish custom, then placed it softly on the sofa. ''That is the thing I will
never forget,'' Mr. Sverdlik says. ''In Russia, if a policeman comes, everyone
is scared of him. You know he's going to make trouble for you. Here a policeman
is our friend.''

For all the dynamism immigrants and refugees have brought to New York there is
one potentially volatile side effect. As these newcomers proceed into the middle
class, or at least the working class, some are leapfrogging over segments of the
longtime black and Puerto Rican populations. A few incidents already have
underscored the tension between immigrants and native-born minorities. Some
blacks in Harlem last January called for a boycott of Korean-owned stores on
125th Street, charging that the Korean merchants were siphoning money out of the
neighborhood. As the Koreans saw it, if they were not running the Harlem
groceries no one else would be.

''It's an awful combination,'' says Nathan Glazer, a Harvard professor and the
co-author with Daniel Patrick Moynihan of ''Beyond the Melting Pot.'' ''On the
one hand you feel pride in how America is open to people and how immigrants can
get ahead. On the other hand, you see the groups that can't get ahead and you
despair.'' As Mr. Glazer himself points out, one major conclusion of ''Beyond
the Melting Pot'' has not come to pass in the last 20 years - the belief that
with civil rights legislation blacks and Puerto Ricans would move from poverty
into the middle class, as had most white ethnic groups before them. Prof. Andrew
Hacker of Queens College shares the sense of frustration. ''As we all know,'' he
says, ''black America is the American tragedy.''

A T KENNEDY AIR-port, however, there is only hope one recent afternoon. A plane
carrying 71 Polish refugees, many of them Solidarity members and sympathizers,
has just landed. Thomas Roland, the Area Port Director for the Immigration and
Naturalization Service at Kennedy, walks out to the customs room. Mr. Roland has
more than a professional interest in the newcomers. The grandson of German and
Irish immigrants to New York, he sees in them a reflection, a recreation, of his
own history. ''Sometimes I think they ought to put the Statue of Liberty in
Jamaica Bay,'' he says, ''because that's the first part of New York these people
see.''

The refugees fill the customs room. Ellis Island always looked gritty, the color
of dusk; this room has the shiny walls and sharp angles of a fast-food
franchise. But bewilderment is bewilderment for any immigrant. One little girl
zips her teddy bear inside her coat. A boy clutches his roller skates. Each of
the Poles holds a plastic bag containing his documents and bearing the family's
name in big block letters - STANKIEWICZ, JURECKI, OKON, BUJAK, KRYSZTOF.

Mr. Roland watches as they slowly file through customs and into baggage claim
and finally out the metal doors and into New York and their new lives. ''We all
come from somewhere,'' Mr. Roland says, starting to walk back to his office. He
pauses, then speaks again. ''I don't know if native-born people can really
appreciate an immigrant coming into New York - a new country, a new culture, a
new economy. They're leaving all their roots. It takes a kind of courage most of
us don't have anymore.''

For many of the new New Yorkers, the pivot of their visions for the future is
work. Finding a niche in the city's marketplace is a different experience for
each newcomer, but often a pattern emerges that was set by earlier tides of
immigrants.

In a place where everything is new, many immigrants cling to a thread of
familiarity by finding jobs similar to those they had in the old country. At the
turn of the century, the pasticceria owner from Palermo became a grocer in
Pelham Bay Park and the cabinetmaker from Oslo became a carpenter in Bay Ridge.
Today, the dressmaker from Hong Kong becomes a seamstress on the Lower East Side
and the shopkeeper from New Delhi opens a fabrics store in Flushing.

Eventually certain ethnic groups cluster in specific trades, sometimes by
capitalizing on particular skills or by agreeing to work at jobs disdained by
others. By hard work and sacrifice they come to dominate that trade, and as they
prosper they strengthen their hold by employing family, friends and even
strangers from the old country.

But not every immigrant can find something familiar. Often, they move into
fields left open by the upward mobility of a different ethnic group. Newcomers
from Greece who now stitch pelts into fur coats work in some cases for Russian
Jews who once labored in those same factories and who now own the companies.

For most immigrants, success is possible only after the enigma of language and
culture is solved. But increasingly newcomers to New York are arriving with both
skills and an enviable knowledge of English, a combination offering them better
choices in the job market. And some immigrants, like the Japanese violinist or
the Russian dancer, can circumvent language barriers.

Unfortunately, people whose professions are inextricably linked to language and
technical training - professors, lawyers, doctors - are often forced out of
their realms and into jobs where the only requirement is raw, unskilled labor.
There are taxi drivers in New York who were engineers in the Soviet Union.

The album on these pages is a documentary of sorts - of New York's immigrants,
old and new, of their jobs, footholds and beginnings. The faces are different;
the dreams are the same. THE GARMENT WORKERAt the turn of the century, the
people who operated sewing machines by pressing knees to levers were often
Jewish immigrants from Poland, familiar with tailoring clothes, working long
hours and earning their pay piece by piece. Today, the people hunched over dress
collars and pant legs also have come with sewing skills and experience with a
long work day, but they are likely to be from Hong Kong. THE CAB DRIVERTaxi
driving is probably the occupation that most clearly reflects the latest
immigrant waves. It provides flexible hours in which to learn English and to
train for other jobs. The earliest cabbies were the Irish and the Germans, then
Italians and Eastern European Jews took their places. Now many drivers are Arab,
Israeli, Ethiopian, Hispanic and, like the men shown on the right, Haitian and
Russian. THE TRANSIT WORKERThe earliest trolleys were horse-drawn, privately
owned and usually operated by Irish newcomers. When New York developed a
city-owned transportation system, it was still the Irish who ran the trolleys;
and as the system was modernized, they became its bus drivers and subway
motormen. Those jobs are now held by more than 4,000 black and nearly 600
Hispanic workers. But the Irish have not disappeared from the transportation
scene: although no longer heavily represented in the rank and file, they are now
the leaders of the Transport Workers Union. THE FURRIERLeningrad is said to be
the biggest fur market in the world. So it is no surprise that many of Seventh
Avenue's fur companies bear the names of Russian Jews who arrived here some 80
years ago to fashion pelts into stylish fur coats. Today these companies employ
a significant number of Greeks - many from Kastoria, once a major fur-trading
center - who have a much-prized talent for converting scraps into usable
garments. THE GREENGROCERTheir lives in Italy had centered on food: they had
tended vineyards, grazed animals, raised crops. So when Italians arrived here,
many found it natural to become grocers. Today, neighborhood greengrocers are
likely to be Korean. Their attraction to the market, however, is a function of
entrepreneurship. Koreans in this city are organized; old-timers loan money and
offer advice to new arrivals. Their extended families, much like those of the
Italians, enable Korean greengrocers to staff their stores for long hours and
still rise early to shop the wholesale market. THE NURSEFor generations the
city's nurses tended to be from Ireland and England. The field was full of
opportunity, since American-born women were reluctant to accept such demanding
work that paid so little. Today, many of the city's nurses are Filipino and West
Indian women, familiar with English and eager for a profession with status, if
not overwhelming monetary reward. THE DIAMOND CUTTERThe diamond cutters who
practiced in America 125 years ago were immigrants from Belgium and the
Netherlands, where diamond cutting and polishing is said to have been discovered
and perfected. The number of European cutters in the city swelled in the 1930's,
when Hitler came to power and those Jews who could fled Europe. While most of
the cutters are still of Belgian or Dutch descent, many Indian and Hispanic
newcomers to New York have entered the field, including craftsmen from Puerto
Rico, home to several diamond-cutting concerns. THE MILLINERWomen constituted
almost the entire ranks of the millinery industry at the turn of the century.
Since being a milliner was considered more refined than being a seamstress, a
majority of the milliners - at least 60 percent -were American-born. The
remainder were mostly Jews from Russia, Germany, Austria and Hungary. Today the
milliner industry is still dominated by women, but most of them are of Hispanic
origin, predominantly from the Dominican Republic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISS PILGER'S ENGLISH CLASS

BYLINE: By Maureen Dowd; Maureen Dowd is a reporter on the metropolitan staff of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 33, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4150 words


THE SUBJECT IS SPINACH PIE.

''Spanish pie?'' Tony Rosa asks eagerly, thinking he has heard the teacher say a
familiar word.

''No,'' says Jean Pilger, the teacher. ''Spinach pie.''

''Ah-h-h,'' Tony says, a smile of understanding lighting his handsome young
face. Most of the other students in this ESL (English as a second language)
class are still puzzling over the topic of tonight's lesson. But Tony, a
26-year-old from Honduras who arrived in New York five months ago, knows all
about the leafy green vegetable that makes you strong. To improve his English,
he has been watching Popeye cartoons on television.

''Guess who uses spinach?'' he prints in his black-and-white notebook, his
question mark a proud flourish.

They come, some after long, hot days in factories, sweatshops and restaurant
kitchens, others after caring for their families all day and making sure dinner
is on the table.

Every Monday and Wednesday night from 6 to 9 P.M. in a classroom of Public
School 126 in Chinatown, there is a Babel of accents, with syntax flying, tenses
colliding, articles and pronouns mysteriously appearing and disappearing. Over
this grammatical game of bumper cars, Jean Pilger calmly presides.

The students call her ''teacher'' or ''Miss Pilger,'' although she has suggested
they all be on a first-name basis. An abstract artist in her spare time, Miss
Pilger draws pictures on the board to help illuminate the mysteries of ''chop''
versus ''shop,'' ''great'' versus ''grate,'' ''okra'' versus ''turnips,''
''beating eggs'' versus ''beating the clock.''

The students are tired when they straggle in, but as class begins, their mood
becomes ''jazzed up,'' as Miss Pilger puts it. It is her students' longing to
learn that draws the teacher. They evoke the notion of E. B. White that it is
the settlers who give the city its passion. ''The residents of Manhattan are to
a large extent strangers who have pulled up stakes somewhere and come to town,
seeking sanctuary or fulfillment or some greater or lesser grail,'' Mr. White
wrote in his 1948 essay ''Here is New York.'' ''The capacity to make such
dubious gifts is a mysterious quality of New York.''

The New York City Board of Education teaches English as a second language to
more than 18,000 adults in 300 classes all over the city - the highest
enrollment ever. Twenty years ago, when the courses first began, the students
were mostly Puerto Rican; now there are many Central Americans and Asians
enrolled, as well as a sprinkling of nationalities from other areas of the
world.

One of the students' lessons is the story of a saleswoman at Tiffany & Co. named
Mrs. Tsui, who polishes an expensive diamond pin and dreams of owning it.
Although most of them have never heard of Tiffany's, they empathize with Mrs.
Tsui. Emigrating from countries that are under Communist rule or in economic or
political turmoil, they seek freedom and jobs with that same winsome
anticipation. As Catarina Arqueta, a 53-year-old student from El Salvador, puts
it, ''There is too much opportunity here.''

Many other instructors would not be interested in teaching this demanding
course. And, with a bachelor's degree from Stanford University and master's
degrees in library science from Columbia University and in fine arts from the
University of the Americas in Mexico City, the 63-year-old teacher concedes she
is ''overeducated for this job.''

But she tried teaching high school and quit after a year. ''It was mostly
babysitting,'' says Jean Pilger, a rumpled, plain-spoken woman who rides a
bicycle about town and wears corduroy pants and Puma sneakers.

''I spent a lot of time making sure the kids didn't smoke in the cafeteria,''
she adds drily, looking over the black glasses worn low on the bridge of her
nose.

''I do this because I love working with foreigners,'' she says. ''They don't
come to study for fun. They are scrounging and really hustling to survive all
day, and then they come here at night to learn enough English to better
themselves. What these people want is a better life. That's what everyone wants.
They associate that with the United States. Economically and politically, it's a
big step up for them. They want to learn as much as they can, everything and
anything.''

ISS PILGER SAYS that she often gets backed into the same sort of comic corner
that plagued her fictional counterpart, Mr. Parkhill, in Leo Rosten's book ''The
Education of Hyman Kaplan,'' published in 1937.

In the humorous tale, known among many New York City educators as the bible of
adult education, Hyman Kaplan attends the ''American Night Preparatory School
for Adults.'' Although Mr. Parkhill does his best, Mr. Kaplan always manages to
outfox the earnest teacher with a maddening logic about such things as why he
made the plural of ''cat'' ''Katz'' and the plural of ''library'' ''public
library.''

Teaching the names of foods to her class, Miss Pilger spends several minutes
puzzling over what a young Vietnamese student means when he asks if ''shrimp
have any bood.''

After dissecting a shrimp on the blackboard, she figures out that he means
''blood.'' But then she spends several more minutes puzzling over the answer.
''I never realized before in my life that shrimp don't have blood,'' she says,
laughing. ''There should be some sort of saying, 'You can't squeeze blood out of
a shrimp.' ''

Even outside class, Miss Pilger enunciates each syllable, a habit developed over
her 18 years of teaching English as a second language for the city's Adult
Education Program. Her straightforward, somewhat gruff manner masks a gentle
concern and respect for her students. Along with words and pronunciation, Miss
Pilger tries to tries to teach them more subtle lessons about pride and social
mixing in the big city.

''They can't hide in their ethnic neighborhoods,'' she says. ''There's a lot of
competition for jobs out there, and they have to be willing to ask other people
to help them.'' Her lessons, such as the one about Mrs. Tsui, an efficient
saleswoman, or about Mr. Jenkins, a conscientious mailman, are geared toward
economic survival in New York.

Her work is complicated by the fact that the educational backgrounds of her
students vary widely. Some are well-educated professionals; others have had
little formal schooling. There are cultural variables to deal with as well. The
Asians, with their proper bits of British grammar, tend to be reserved, and she
must encourage them to show more initiative in class and not be drowned out by
the more exuberant Latins.

She tries not to correct the students too often, preferring to let them work at
the blackboard or in pairs and correct one another. She reckons they face enough
embarrassment over their English during the day.

''I feel sympathetic about that - it's disheartening for them,'' she says.
''Americans are not too tolerant of foreign accents. We don't have time to treat
people nicely here. When they are not understood, they get put down. 'What did
you say, dummy?' 'Why can't you get it right?'

'What do you mean?' ''

Wanting to shield her students from such ridicule, she concentrates on questions
and answers, trying to build their dialogue skills. ''Foreigners get insulted
when they are asked questions that they can't understand,'' she says. ''Take the
Asian women in the sweatshops, for instance. The boss picks up a pair of pants
off the floor and says, 'Why-didn't-you-finish-this-before?' All they understand
is the 'why' and the 'before.' So they stand there with their dumb faces hanging
out and the boss thinks they're ignorant and treats them as ignorant.''

The students gather in a circle, trying to hold a conversation about what they
did over the weekend. Miss Pilger is sitting at her desk peeling an orange,
listening but not interrupting.

Outside, the sounds of Catherine Street cascade: rock music blaring from box
radios, firecrackers exploding, teen-agers shouting and drunks carousing.
Inside, things are ominously quiet.

''I have nothing to say,'' announces Rosa Diaz, who always has something to say.

Rosa, 47, is a small, chubby woman with a warm personality who emits a staccato
stream of fractured English. She came from Puerto Rico 29 years ago, got married
and settled in New York, surviving outside her Hispanic circle with a smattering
of English. Now she wants to learn to speak properly, and in class she is
fearless, shouting out answers for nearly everything. She is thrilled when she
is right and nearly as happy when she is wrong.

''You have nothing to say?'' asks Shu Yi Yu, a delicate 29-year-old Chinese
woman who works in a garment factory in the neighborhood.

''No,'' says Rosa, energetically shaking her head. ''On weekend, I sick. I stay
home, have head cold. You know, cough, cough. I no went anywhere.''

''I didn't go anywhere,'' corrects Shu Yi.

''Me, too, I stay home,'' agrees Rosa good-naturedly.

Shu Yi tries another gambit. Turning her bright smile on Lydia Perez, a
37-year-old housewife from the Dominican Republic, she asks: ''Are you a
housewife?''

Not understanding the question, but assuming it has something to do with her
weekend, Lydia answers that she went to Passaic, N.J., to visit a cousin and
bought the turquoise chiffon blouse she is wearing.

Her smile starting to falter a bit, Shu Yi tries once more, this time asking the
older woman next to her, Catarina Arqueta, a nurse from El Salvador who has a
kind face and short coppery hair, if she has any houseplants that she tends on
weekends.

But Catarina is not sure what she means. ''Blintzes?'' she asks. ''Plans?''

''Plants,'' says Shu Yi. ''I have pepper, tomato. I put some water on them. They
open.''

''Oh, plants,'' says Catarina. ''In my house? No.''

Conversation dies. The silence stretches for several long moments. Finally,
Sigifredo Valladares, a 30-year-old factory worker from Peru who has been
consulting the Spanish-English dictionary in his lap, plunges in. ''Yesterday,''
he tells the group pleasantly, ''I was fishing in Sheepshead Bay. It was very
nice.''

Everyone nods and smiles in relief. ''Very nice,'' they agree. (bullet)
Alexandra Bobeczko, a willowy 26-year-old blonde from Poland, leans against the
window ledge in the hall during dinner break.

''Circles,'' she says, pointing to the smudges under her eyes. ''Terrible. All
the time, tired, tired. But I'd like to stay in America, and if I stay, it's
very important for me, I have to learn English.''

Alexandra was nearly finished with a law course when she left her home to come
to New York and stay with a Polish girlfriend 10 months ago. ''I thinking about
freedom,'' she says. ''I thinking about a lot of different people, everyone
making what they want of themselves.''

Now she works, along with her girlfriend, as a waitress at a Ukrainian
restaurant in the East Village, some days working an early shift that starts at
7 A.M. and other days a late shift that ends at 2 A.M. ''All the time, speaking
with customers about chicken cutlet, pea soup, lentil and nothing more,'' she
says, rolling her eyes. ''And when I come home, I have no time for reading.''

Sometimes she is too tired to come to school, and sometimes she chafes at the
slow pace of the class and her drop in status. ''My mother says all the time,
'Come back to the Poland.' I was rich in the Poland. I had free car and
apartment. It's very crazy, working in America so hard.''

The people are not always friendly, she says. ''And the Village is crazy! All
those punks and strange people.''

''But I like America,'' she adds with a shrug. ''I feel good in America.''
(bullet) They all have goals, some small, some grandiose, and English is their
yellow brick road.

Shu Yi Yu lives with her family in Brooklyn and sews pants in a Chinatown
factory. ''I no like,'' she says, her constant smile in place. ''Hard work. Many
dust.'' She leaves class early one night with a headache, explaining that her
boss won't install an air conditioner in the hot factory. She wants to learn
enough English to work as a saleswoman in a department store. Her friend, Kenna
Yu, a 25-year-old from Hong Kong, confides as she munches on dinner - a sesame
roll that she holds in a wax paper bag - that she, too, dreams of escaping from
the sweatshop and becoming a secretary.

Jose Antonio (Tony) Rosa and Sigifredo Valladares were both engineering
students, Tony in Honduras and Sigifredo in Peru. Tony left because he did not
want to get drafted into the Honduran Army. Now he lives with his aunt and uncle
near the school and stirs the dye in a Brooklyn factory that stamps slogans on
T-shirts. ''You know, things like 'I Love New York' or 'I Unhappy,' '' he
explains, as he accepts half a ham-and-cheese sandwich from Rosa during the
break. A friendly, easygoing young man who rides his bike from the factory, Tony
says he loves New York because of ''the music, the clubs and the beautiful
women.''

Sigifredo is more serious and always carries his Spanish-English dictionary. He
left Peru when the sol's value plunged and the jobs ''were only going to
ministers' sons and people with pull.'' Now he works in a factory downtown,
repairing the numbers and dials on watches. He says the job is not demanding and
lets him concentrate on English. Both young men hope to resume their engineering
careers.

Francisco Lopez, 25, a delivery boy at the fashionable Water Club restaurant,
has a hard time with the lessons, Miss Pilger says. But he studies doggedly,
brimming with determination to make a better life for his wife and 4-year-old
daughter. He hopes to move up in the restaurant if his English improves, first
to stockman, then to grander things. ''I like to be a waiter, a cook,'' says the
young immigrant from the Dominican Republic, smiling sweetly as he shows off a
tattered business card from the Water Club that he keeps in his wallet.

Catarina Arqueta wants to be a nurse again, as she was in El Salvador for 20
years. Since she came to New York, 6 years ago, she has worked as a home-care
attendant with elderly patients because her English is not good enough for her
to get a nursing license here. After class, she has a 40-minute subway ride home
to the Bronx, where she lives with two of her six children - her oldest, a
26-year-old son at City College, and her youngest, a 17-year-old daughter in
high school.

Her children speak English at home, but the family schedule leaves little time
for the conversation that Catarina needs to practice. ''They have no time to
speak to me,'' she says, shrugging. ''My son goes to school and work. My
daughter has homework. And I get home so late.''

Several of the Hispanic women in class have been in this country for more than
20 years, but, cloistered in ethnic neighborhoods and busy raising families,
they got along with ''street'' English. Now, as their children draw away from
their ethnic roots, these women want to learn how to read and write and speak
correctly, seeing this as an important link to their youngsters' lives and
futures.

Luz Gonzalez, 38, from Puerto Rico, began coming to class after her daughter
Josephine, a student in the fifth grade here at P.S. 126, refused to speak to
her in Spanish anymore. ''She say, 'No, you have to learn,' '' Luz recalls. The
oldest of her five children, Mary Lou, is at City College, and Luz's pride in
having a daughter at an American college is as deep as her frustration at not
having enough English to say what her major is. In Spanish, she explains that
Mary Lou is studying vocational work in the health field.

Luz was shy about her reading and writing skills at first, afraid to join in. So
Miss Pilger suggested that she take charge of serving coffee during the breaks.
Her confidence grew with her new task and now she is always one of the students
chosen to work at the blackboard.

''I want to learn English to help my kids,'' she says, as she sets up her coffee
pot in the back of the classroom. ''I go to doctors with them and I need an
interpreter. I can't help with their homework.'' Josephine, 11, and Mildred, 6,
sometimes come to pick Luz up after school.

She always comes to class, even when she is tired. ''It's a pleasure,'' she
says, her eyes downcast, her smile gentle. ''Every day I learn one word or
two.''

Her friend Rosa, who lives near Luz in a city housing project on South Street,
arrived here from Puerto Rico in 1956. As the students look at pictures of fruit
in class, she chatters to her seatmates about her days as a migrant worker in
Florida and Michigan, picking oranges and cherries and strawberries. In New
York, she worked in a clothing factory in Brooklyn, cutting material for
sweaters, before she married Ramon Diaz. Her husband has a job with the city's
Human Resources Administration ''filling in some paper, I don't know,''
according to Rosa.

''I marry, I have seven kids, one died, every year a new one,'' she says, when
asked why she waited so long to learn English. ''And, you know, I don't have
time for school. Cleaning house all the time. Now I have the time.''

A grandmother of two, she fixes a hearty dinner for her husband and the three
children still at home before she leaves for class at night.

Lydia Perez lives in a different housing project on South Street with her
husband and four children. She also wants to learn English for the sake of her
children, and for the time when she will go back to work. Her husband, who hurt
his back in an accident at the restaurant where he worked and had to have a
plastic disk implanted, is on disability. And her 9-year-old daughter has
scoliosis, a curvature of the spine. ''Every two weeks I go to the clinic with
my daughter but I no understand too much English,'' she says. Miss Pilger
admiringly calls her ''a gutsy woman.''

Sung Thach, a short, stocky man who was a lawyer, army colonel and congressman
in South Vietnam, seems to be the most grimly determined student. He had the
hardest time getting here and he has set the most ambitious goal for himself.

He was in prison in Vietnam for six years before escaping to Thailand in 1982.
He arrived in New York nearly a year ago and now lives on welfare, spending all
his time in different free English classes offered throughout the city and
studying every night until past midnight in the Bronx apartment he shares with a
Cambodian doctor.

''I don't have time to play,'' he says in his clipped English. ''I want to
learn. You know, I'm 51 years old. I don't have time. Very old.''

He travels an hour and 15 minutes each way on the subway to get to the Chinatown
class, believing that if he can become fluent in English, he can get a job as an
interpreter and send for his wife and five children, who are still in Vietnam.
He also hopes to give lectures in America and explain ''the true situation in
Vietnam'' under Communist rule, both to the public and to government officials.
He has written President Reagan twice but received no response, and he blames
his poor communication skills.

''If I could speak I would have a better chance to tell them,'' he says,
throwing up his hands. ''It is very bad there.'' (bullet) Miss Pilger is at the
blackboard, going over the lesson on spinach pie.

''Some people like to cook, but everyone likes to eat,'' she reads, adding,
''Eating is fun.''

''No,'' calls out Rosa, clutching her round stomach. ''Fat, fat, fat!''
Suppressing a smile, Miss Pilger continues the recipe: ''Beat until the mixture
is smooth.''

''Smooth'' is a rough one, both to pronounce and to understand. Sigifredo asks
if it is the same as gentle, and Miss Pilger, with the aid of a few Spanish
words, explains the difference.

'' 'Smooth' is no lumps,'' chimes in Rosa helpfully. ''Beat it! Beat it good!''
The recipe calls for greasing the bottom and sides of a baking dish, and Miss
Pilger asks if anyone knows the difference between oil and grease.

''Oil comes from the corn,'' says Rosa. ''Grease comes from the animal - from
the pig, the lard.''

When Miss Pilger gets to the section on cheddar cheese, the students have
problems with ''grater.'' So she draws the utensil on the board.

''Yes, like that,'' calls Rosa, admiring the art work. ''I'm using it at home.''
When Miss Pilger reads the end of the recipe, suggesting that the pie will serve
four people, Rosa shakes her head. In her view of hospitality, surely this
paltry pie, a staple of restaurants on the Upper West Side, will only be enough
for two. ''If somebody comes to my house,'' she says, ''I give them more.''
(bullet) The other students shy away from the beautiful young Polish woman,
thinking she is standoffish. And Alexandra confesses she feels uncomfortable
trying to join any of the clusters of students who are chattering away in
Spanish or Chinese. Sometimes her American boyfriend comes to talk to her during
the breaks.

''She thinks we're not swinging enough for her,'' says Miss Pilger. But as she
teaches, she is keenly aware of the undercurrent of cultural prejudices and
fears. ''One of the things you do that's really important when you have this
melting pot of different nationalities is to teach people to socialize in
class,'' she says. ''Different cultures don't know how to interact.''

She separates the various ethnic groups, who tend to cling together, and she
mixes the men and the women, who tend to divide. She is diplomatic with the
Asian men who look down on working with women. And she subtly reassures the
students who resist pairing with a member of the opposite sex that this will not
be misconstrued as romantic interest.

''I make the pretty girls talk to the homely boys, the old talk to the young,
the shy ones talk to the aggressive ones, the blacks talk to the whites,'' she
says. ''If the teacher assigns them to do that, then nobody has lost face by
making the first move and being rejected.''

Occasionally, the seating problems can reflect international tensions, with
Thais and Cambodians feeling uncomfortable around Vietnamese students, or
Vietnamese feeling uncomfortable around Chinese. But Miss Pilger tries to smooth
over such political divisions.

A feminist, she tries to avoid sexual bias in her classes. In the lesson on
spinach pie, she shows pictures of men cooking, and she quizzes the men, not the
women, about their culinary skills.

She also fights racial bias. She recalls intervening one night when Carmen
Pequero, a 40-year-old student from the Dominican Republic, winced at a remark
by one of the Asian women that blacks were lazy. ''Why are black people lazy?''
she asked. ''I'm lazy. You might feel lazy today.'' She hoped the woman would
think more carefully about her value judgments in the future. ''I hate
generalizations,'' Miss Pilger snaps.

The students begin responding to Miss Pilger's respect and gentle prodding by
trusting her with their broken English - and more.

Shu Yi asks her how to get the forms to apply for citizenship. And after Kenna
Yu tells Miss Pilger about the $300 fee she paid a lawyer to help her get
citizenship, the teacher intercedes with the local legal aid office in an effort
to get her student's money back.

Miss Pilger frets that many of her students are being exploited, working very
hard for little pay because they cannot speak English well, and her teaching
reflects her determination to give them the fluency they need to make their way
fairly in New York.

She measures her progress in more than vocabulary learned. ''The Board of
Education comes around sometimes and says the reading levels are not high
enough, we should show more progress,'' she says, in her typically blunt
fashion. ''And I feel like saying, 'Where are all the jobs for these people?' We
should combine English lessons with vocational training.'' (bullet) Several
students are working at the blackboard, writing out sentences from the spinach
pie recipe.

''Cottage cheese'' is problematic. Sung Thach writes ''cottage of cheese'' and
Luz Gonzalez writes ''cotter cheese.'' She also misspells ''spinach.''

''No e on 'spinach,' '' whispers Francisco conspiratorially from his seat in the
front row.

And, despite the helpful efforts of Shu Yi, her neighbor at the blackboard, Rosa
is having a devil of a time with ''tablespoons.'' It is coming out with extra
ps, extra os, and odd ms and bs.

Aside from these minor troubles, however, the students are feeling more
comfortable with the lesson and are filling up the blackboard, and their
notebooks, with reasonable facsimiles of the recipe.

Seeing her students fading after their long day, Miss Pilger decides to let them
leave 10 minutes early. Brusquely, she tells them they have done especially well
tonight.

Rosa, white with chalk, flushed with pride, puts on her sweater. ''Now I go
home,'' she says. ''I wash the dishes. I clean my, my, my, uh. . .'' She pauses,
stymied, and then breaks into a grin. ''My kitchen!'' she calls out
triumphantly, sailing out the door.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Jean Pilger and her pupils (Nancy Le Vine)

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUE SPELING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 132 words


To the Editor:

I was relieved to learn from Edgar Gregersen's essay that only 17 spelling
reformers attended the International Conference on Spelling Reform last July.
''Anti-intellectual, undemocratic and unscholarly'' though it may be, our
''cacography'' works at least as well as any of the other systems, which partly
explains their failure to catch on.

As for ''klasik''Nue Speling,'' the last paragraph of Mr. Gregersen's essay
reads so much like a Flemish-Polish discussion of Vietnam (''ov Dhe Nue York
Tiems,'' indeed!) that one is tempted to think he is joking. But then, I always
thought that's what Shaw was doing when he suggested spelling ''fish'' ''ghoti''
- ''gh'' as in ''enough,'' ''o'' as in ''women'' and ''ti'' as in ''nation.''

Susan H. Llewellyn, New York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Jack Sullivan

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


The Fraternity of the Stone. By David Morrell. (Marek/St. Martin's, $16.95.)In
his early thrillers like the post-Vietnam ''First Blood,'' David Morrell
demonstrated a talent for taut, violent narrative. Recently, however, in the
novelization of ''Rambo' First Blood Part II'' - which tells us on the frist
page where to purchase a ''six-inch 'Rambo throwing knife'' - he lurched utterly
out of control, and does not seem to have recovered. ''The Fraternity of the
Stone,'' involving massive terrorist attacks against the Roman Catholic Church
and ruthless counterattacks by secret intelligence operative within the clergy,
is clotted with a solemn, souped-up religiosity. Both clergy and laity are
continually rushing around killing people, then feverishly absolving each other
or praying for each others' soul - all without a trace of irony. The hero, an
agent named Drew, considers himself ''only an instrument'' of the Lord. Secluded
in a Vermont monastery to atone for past intelligence atrocities, he is soon
yanked back into committing new ones; that God is really on his side is
indicated by various signs and messages from above, including a snowstorm and a
dead mouse. Oddly, the inevitable scenes of violence - including a Rambo-like
sequence involving the hero hurling home-made napalm like ''an athlete'' - are
listless, with more loving detail devoted to descriptions of exotic killing
devices and stratagems than to real action or human drama. Indeed, the
characters are so remote, so soaked in piety and gore, that they scarcely seem
human, It's hard to care what happens to characters who are reduced to killing
machines, whether they're atoning or not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nothing to Fear In Bilingualism

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 32, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


Xenophobia means ''fear of strangers.'' Helen Bennett's article, ''Strength
Comes From One Language'' [Opinion page, Sept. 22], condemning the use of
Spanish on absentee ballots illustrates this feeling. Her dread of an impending
bilingualism borders on xenophobia.

I do not believe that anyone fears a few Greenwich Hispanic people who may need
a little help in understanding their ballots. To the xenophobic, there is a
shapeless monster lurking on our borders, ready to turn our neat suburbs into
jabbering ghettos. Once we accept any form of bilingualism, our way of life is
doomed. To this I say, ''hogwash.''

Ms. Bennett cites tensions and problems that exist in Belgium, where two
languages are official. I wonder why she does not mention Switzerland, where
German, French and Italian are all accepted. I have known French Swiss and
German Swiss, all strong-willed and individualistic. Never once have I heard one
of them badmouth the multilingualism of his native land. And who would belittle
that tough little country because it does not glorify one language and ban the
others?

When my father was representing the New England Milk Producers Association in
northern Maine, he had the membership contract handy in a French translation.
Why shouldn't an Aroostock County farmer of French Canadian extraction know what
he was signing? Milk is milk! Is this any different from translating the
absentee ballot?

In the matter of Spanish, the United States has a historic obligation. When we
''liberated'' Cuba from the Spanish oppressors, we gratuitously occupied Puerto
Rico. Later we turned Cuba over to the Cubans, but kept Puerto Rico. Its
residents are American citizens.

Has the United States made a great effort to teach English in Puerto Rico? Since
1898 there surely has been time to make every Puerto Rican passably bilingual if
that had been a national priority. Obviously, it was not.

Suddenly English-speaking citizens are shocked that Spanish-speaking citizens
might like to be able to read an absentee ballot. Strangely enough, no one is
shocked at seeing Spanish-sounding names on the Vietnam memorial in Washington
D.C.

As a foreign-language teacher, I know that language-learning can be difficult
for some children and is especially so for many adults. I will never understand
how the same American who will brag, ''I could never learn French'' or ''I was
terrible at Spanish'' will also sneer at a neighbor who speaks broken English.

We might be more charitable toward those who may be coping with extreme poverty
and are far too busy earning a living and finding decent housing to be able to
sign up for language classes.

Few kids want to be different. Give the present Hispanic children half a chance
and they will speak, read and write as well as the rest of us. Many are doing so
already. The poisons that can corrupt the country are fear, poverty and
prejudice.

In the meantime, Berlitz, anyone? CATHERINE L. BRIGGS Somers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: SENATOR JOHN C. STENNIS;
WISDOM IN JUDGEMENT, 38 YEARS IN THE MAKING

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


When Senator Richard B. Russell died in office on Jan. 21, 1971, he had served
in the Senate for 38 years and 9 days. That record placed the Georgia Democrat
second on the Senate's seniority list behind Carl Hayden of Arizona, who held
office for more than 41 years.

Today, Senator John C. Stennis of Mississippi occupies Mr. Russell's old office
and sits at Mr. Russell's old desk, a huge mahogany table that easily seats a
dozen Senators. The office building is named for Mr. Russell, one of the most
respected legislators of his generation.

On Nov. 15, Mr. Stennis will pass Mr. Russell's record, and while the
Mississippi Democrat takes pride in his longevity, he does not want any fuss
made about it.

'All-Around a Statesman'

''With all deference to everyone,'' Mr. Stennis said the other day, ''Russell
was the No. 1 man that I have been associated with in all this tenure in the
Senate. He was all-around a statesman and a gentleman and a very able man.''

Today, many legislators would use the same words about Mr. Stennis. He is the
undisputed patriarch of the Senate, a teacher to younger members and a
conscience for the entire institution. He seldom makes national headlines, but
he wields considerable influence in the Senate itself. And that influence comes
from the quality of his personal judgment, not from the quantity of his
television appearances.

Mr. Russell noticed Mr. Stennis in his first year in the Senate, when the young
Mississippian wrote a report on a civil rights bill. As a result, Mr. Russell
picked Mr. Stennis to lead off the floor debate for the Southern bloc, an
unusual honor for a junior legislator.

'It Was Unthinkable'

''Well, good Lord, the telephone went ringing around at my office, the press was
calling,'' Mr. Stennis recalled with some glee. ''The word had gone out that I
was going to open the debate. It was unthinkable.''

Within a year or two, Mr. Russell had found places for his protege on his own
committees, Appropriations and Armed Services. ''Well, the vacancies were there,
and he just filled them about the way he wanted,'' Mr. Stennis recalled. ''He
was a great worker, but he needed somebody of similar thought along with him, I
think.''

Those common ideas included unswerving support for the military, and for the
President, particularly in foreign policy matters. Mr. Stennis was shaped by the
post-World War II era, before Vietnam and Watergate soured the relationship
between the White House and Capitol Hill, and today he says that he never tries
to ''second guess'' a President.

'I Lean With the President'

''I lean with the President on our system of Government,'' said Mr. Stennis, in
terms that many modern Senators would consider old-fashioned. ''Makes no
difference who he is. I would back those fellows on a lot of things.''

Mr. Stennis also shared with Mr. Russell a Southern viewpoint on race relations,
and he did not vote for his first civil rights bill until 1982, when he was
running for re-election. But he has adjusted to the changing climate of his home
state and now runs well among black voters.

The Senator has also seen many changes in the Senate, and in his view, most of
them have been for the worse. He remembers the Senate of a generation ago as a
''well-ordered parliamentary body that operated strictly under the rules.''

More Time on Other Tasks

Today, Mr. Stennis asserts, the legislative load in fields like education and
health has grown enormously. Constituents are able to hop on an airplane and
demand a slice of their Senator's day. And the skyrocketing cost of campaigning
causes legislators to spend more and more time raising money.

''So we are not the deliberative body that we were,'' the Senator added. ''It is
a rush job all the time.''

Mr. Stennis came to a Senate dominated by barons like Mr. Russell, who had
patiently worked their way up through the seniority ladder. Now that he is at
the top of the ladder, however, Mr. Stennis finds himself surrounded by a new
breed of legislators, who refuse to wait their turn or hold their tongue.

''I am not blaming them,'' he said of his junior colleagues. ''They come here on
the average well-educated. But they don't have the maturity, if I may use that
term. They don't have the experience in public affairs that the old-timer had.
It takes time to mature.''

Now They're 'Bending Rules'

Moreover, Mr. Stennis added, some on these newcomers have become so adept at
''bending the rules'' that at times, the Senate seems paralyzed, a giant
enmeshed in its own traditions of unfettered debate.

Perhaps, the Senator mused, the lack of maturity on the Senate floor is related
to the changing atmopshere in the cloakroom, the private precinct just off the
Senate floor.

''Well, we used to be back there quite a bit and talk to each other, explain
bills to each other, ask each other questions about matters they saw in the
press, and we would train and educate each other,'' Senator Stennis recalled.
''Well, I was in there not long ago and there were about 14 Senators in there.
And there wasn't a soul talking to each other. They were all looking at the
television.''

He Got 60% of Vote in '82

Mr. Stennis faced a stiff challenge for re-election in 1982, but he raised
almost $1 million, made his first television commercials, and wound up winning
over 60 percent of the vote. Last year, his left leg was removed because of a
malignant tumor, but his health seems sound and if he wants to run again in
1988, his seat is probably safe.

Asked for his reflections on his impending milestone, Mr. Stennis replied:
''Well, I am proud that I did have the opportunity to become a member of the
Senate. I've expressed it one time that my work is my play, and my play is my
work. I used to think a man that was in his 80's was an old man, but I've
changed my mind about that.''

Then his weathered face crinkled into a smile. ''I may make a career out of this
thing yet,'' said the patriarch. ''I'm thinking about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John C. Stennis (NYT/George Tames)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
SIX-PART SERIES OF 'RIVER JOURNEYS'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 660 words


''RIVER JOURNEYS'' is in the grand tradition - of travel writing, stiff upper
lip and adventure in the heart of darkness. It looks wonderful, too. Judged by
its first episode, ''A River Journey by Christina Dodwell,'' the six-part series
is the best thing to happen to travel documentaries in years. It begins on
Channel 13 at 10 o'clock tonight.

To begin with, there is Miss Dodwell, who is tall and blonde, and wears a floppy
fedora and long batik skirt. She is wonderfully civilized. Papua New Guinea
villagers carve a diamond-shaped wound on her left shoulder with razors, making
her an honorary member of the tribe. ''Excruciatingly painful,'' she says
evenly, while blood courses down one arm. No Hollywood actress suffers this way
for her art.

Actually, ''River Journeys'' is in two parts. In the first part, Miss Dodwell, a
British writer, goes mucking about Papua New Guinea on her own. Not for her, she
says, is the country club where Australians in shorts play a game that looks
like boccie: ''That's not my style.'' Indeed it's not. Miss Dodwell boards a
small steamer heading up the Sepik.

If there is a question about the film, it is this: Is Papua New Guinea really
this beautiful? Soldiers on both sides in World War II hated the place. In
memoirs, it is always described as a pesthole. Miss Dodwell says the mosquitoes
are a nuisance, and that fever, foot rot and stomach aches take their toll. The
grand tradition, however, doesn't allow for real grousing.

Thus we see the Sepik. It may be muddy and weed strewn, but we are struck by a
lonely beauty. Mists rise; suns set; crocodiles thrust and parry. Clive Syddall,
the director, and the BBC camera crew play with us here, but that's O.K., too.
Miss Dodwell, leaving the steamer, paddles a dugout canoe to a remote village.
The last time anyone visited, she says, the villagers threw spears. Go then to a
man with a bone in his nose peering through the bushes. He doesn't throw a
spear, but it seems to have been a marginal decision.

All this, good as it is, is only a prelude. In the second part of the
documentary, Miss Dodwell joins some Californians at the Waghi, a river so
fierce the natives call it the ''eater of men.'' Each month or so it claims a
victim. The Californians intend to travel the torrent in rubber boats. As a
rule, this viewer takes a dim view of documentaries that show us how
Californians spend their leisure time, but ''River Journeys'' is something else.
You have not seen this before.  ''By the second day, it was clear that the river
was higher and rougher than we'd anticipated,'' Miss Dodwell says ingenuously.
In fact, the river looks like outtakes from a disaster movie. It boils and
churns like something gone amok. Miss Dodwell, the Californians and the camera
crew press on. Rubber rafts capsize and people disappear beneath the waters.
Hokum is not at work here. The people are saved, but it really has been a close
call.

Sensibly, meanwhile, the documentary - a BBC-RKO co-production -does not confine
itself to the Waghi. Miss Dodwell visits a cemetery where smoke-dried bodies
crouch against a hillside. She also reminds us that 500 planes that crashed in
Papua New Guinea during the war have never been found. Papua New Guinea remains
mysterious, and it is fitting that Miss Dodwell and the Californians never
complete their trip down the river.

''It was not a victory, neither was it a defeat,'' Miss Dodwell says, wisely
summing up. It was just that the river was too much. There is something
satisfying about this, a sign that we can't always have our way, and that there
are still unconquerable frontiers. It has been splendid, however, watching Miss
Dodwell and her colleagues try.

''River Journeys'' will continue on Monday nights with other writers traveling
on other rivers. Next Monday we get William Shawcross on the Mekong in Vietnam.
Meanwhile, ''A River Journey by Christina Dodwell'' sets an extraordinarily high
standard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM REAGAN'S INTERVIEW WITH 4 SOVIET JOURNALISTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 4


Following are excerpts from President Reagan's interview last Thursday with four
Soviet journalists, as recorded and transcribed by the White House Press Office
and made public today. The material in italics, between brackets, was omitted
from Russian and English versions of the interview distributed by the Soviet
Union.

New Soviet Proposal

Q. Mr. President, we have become acquainted with the answers which you furnished
to our written questions. They basically reflect the old U.S. proposals. They
have been evaluated - which have been evaluated by the Soviet side as being
unbalanced and one-sided in favor of the U.S. side. And you have not answered
concerning the new Soviet proposal. And this reply to the new Soviet proposal is
what is of greatest interest before the meeting in Geneva.

A. When this interview is over, later this afternoon at 3 P.M., I will be making
a statement to our own press - well, to all the press - to the effect that we
have been studying the Soviet proposal and tomorrow in Geneva, our team at the
disarmament conference will be presenting our reply which will be a proposal
that reflects the thinking of the original proposal that we had, but also of
this latest. Indeed, it will show that we are accepting some of the figures that
were in this counterproposal by the General Secretary. [There are some points in
which we have offered compromises between some figures of theirs and some of
ours. But that will all be - all those figures will be available tomorrow, and I
will simply be stating today that we have - that that is going to take place
tomorrow in Geneva. But it is a detailed counterproposal that - to a
counterproposal, as is proper in negotiations, that will reflect, as I say, the
acceptance on our part of some of this latest proposal as well as compromises
with earlier figures that we'd proposed.] U.S. Public Opinion Q. I would like to
have another question for you, Mr. President. According to a survey taken by The
Washington Post and ABC on Tuesday, it was found that 74 percent of the American
people as compared to 20 percent said that they would like the U.S. and the
Soviet Union to reduce their nuclear arsenals and not have the U.S. develop
space weapons. This seems to be the choice which the American people have made.
It seems clear that without stopping the development of weapons in space there
can be no reduction of nuclear weapons. This is the position of the Soviet side.
So how then will you react, Mr. President, to this opinion expressed by the
American public?

A. For one thing, it is based on a misconception. The use of the term ''Star
Wars'' came about when one political figure in America used that to describe
what it is we are researching and studying, and then our press picked it up and
it has been worldwide. We're not talking about ''Star Wars'' at all. We are
talking about seeing if there isn't a defensive weapon that does not kill
people, but that simply makes it impossible for nuclear missiles, once fired out
of their silos, to reach their objective -to intercept those weapons.

Now it is also true that, to show that this is a misconception on the part of
the people when you use the wrong terms, not too long ago there was a survey
taken, a poll of our people, and they asked them about ''Star Wars.'' And
similar to the reaction in this poll, only about 30 percent of the people in our
country favored it, and the rest didn't. But in the same poll they then
described, as I have tried to describe, what it is we are researching - a
strategic defensive shield that doesn't kill people, but would allow us one day
- all of us - to reduce - get rid of nuclear weapons. And over 90 percent of the
American people favored our going forward with such a program. [Now this is one
of the things that we will discuss. We are for, and have for several years now,
been advocating a reduction in the number of nuclear weapons. It is uncivilized
on the part of all of us to be sitting here with the only deterrent to war -
offensive nuclear weapons that in such numbers that both of us could threaten
the other with the death and the annihilation of millions and millions of each
other's people. [And so that is the deterrent that is supposed to keep us from
firing these missiles at each other. Wouldn't it make a lot more sense if we
could find - that as there has been in history for every weapon a defensive
weapon. Weapon isn't the term to use for what we are researching. We are
researching for something that could make it, as I say, virtually impossible for
these missiles to reach their targets. And if we find such a thing, my proposal
is that we make it available to all the world. We don't just keep it for our own
advantage.] Space Shield Q. Mr. President, with the situation as it stands today
in the international arena, attempts to create such a space shield will
inevitably lead to suspicion on the other side that the country creating such a
space shield will be in a position to make a first strike. This is a type of
statement whose truth is agreed to by many people. Now, it's apparent that the
American people have indicated their choice, that if it comes down to a choice
between the creation of such a space system and the decrease in nuclear arms,
they prefer a decrease in nuclear arms. So, it seems to be a realistic
evaluation on the part of the American people. And I would like to ask how the
American Government would react to the feeling of the American people in this
regard.

A. In the first place, yes, if someone was developing such a defensive system
and going to couple it with their own nuclear weapons - offensive weapons - yes,
that could put them in a position where they might be more likely to dare a
first strike. But your country, your Government has been working on this same
kind of a plan beginning years before we ever started working on it, which, I
think, would indicate that maybe we should be a little suspicious that they want
it for themselves.

But I have said, and am prepared to say at the summit, that if such a weapon is
possible, and our research reveals that, then, our move would be to say to all
the world, ''Here, it is available.'' We won't put this weapon - or this system
- in place, this defensive system, until we do away with our nuclear missiles,
our offensive missiles. But we will make it available to other countries,
including the Soviet Union, to do the same thing. [Now, just what - whichever
one of us comes up first with that defensive system, the Soviet Union or us or
anyone else - what a picture if we say no one will claim a monopoly on it. And
we make that offer now. It will be available for the Soviet Union, as well as
ourselves.] And if the Soviet Union and the United States both say we will
eliminate our offensive weapons, we will put in this defensive thing in case
some place in the world a madman some day tries to create these weapons again -
nuclear weapons - because, remember, we all know how to make them now. [So, you
can't do away with that information. But we would all be safe knowing that if
such a madman project is ever attempted there isn't any of us that couldn't
defend ourselves against it.] So, I can assure you now we are not going to try
and monopolize this, if such a weapon is developed, for a first-strike
capability.

U.S. Troops Abroad

Q. Mr. President, I would like to ask you about some of the matters which
concern mutual suspicion and distrust. And you indicated at your speech at the
United Nations that the U.S. does not extend - does not have troops in other
countries - but there are - has not occupied other countries. But there are
550,000 troops -military personnel outside of the United States. In 32
countries, there are 1,500 military bases. So, one can see in this way which
country it is that has become surrounded. And you have agreed that the Soviet
Union has the right to look out for the interest of its security. And it is
inevitable that the Soviet Union must worry about these bases which have - which
are around it.

The Soviet Union, in turn, has not done the same. So, how do you in this respect
anticipate to create this balance of security which you have spoken about?

A. Well, I can't respond to your exact numbers there that you've given. I don't
have them right at my fingertips as to what they are. But we're talking about
two different things - we're talking about occupying a country with foreign
troops, such as we see the Soviet Union doing in Afghanistan, and there are
other places, too - Angola, South Yemen, Ethiopia.

Yes, we have troops in bases. The bulk of those would be in the NATO forces -
the alliance in Europe along the NATO line - [there in response to even superior
numbers of Warsaw pact troops that are aligned against them.] And the United
States, as one of the members of the alliance, contributes troops to that NATO
force.

The same is true in Korea in which, at the invitation of the South Korean
Government, we have troops to help them there because of the demilitarized zone
and the threatening nature of North Korea, [which attacked them without warning.
And that was not an American war, even though we provided the most of the men.
That war was fought under the flag of the United Nations. The United Nations
found North Korea guilty of aggression in violation of the Charter of the U.N.
And, finally, South Korea was defended and the North Koreans were defeated. But
they still have maintained a sizable, threatening offensive force.] Other places
- we have bases in the far Pacific; we've had them for many years in the
Philippines. We lease those - those are base we rent. In fact, we even have a
base that is leased on Cuba that was there long before there was a Castro in
Cuba - a naval base. But this, I think, is a far cry from occupying other
countries, [including the nations in the Warsaw pact. They never were allowed
the self-determination that was agreed to in the Yalta Treaty - the end of World
War II. [So, I think my statement still goes - that there is a difference in
occupation and a difference in having bases where they are there in a noncombat
situation, and many where they are requested by the parent country.] Guantanamo
Base Q. If there's a referendum and the Cuban people decide that the base at
Guantanamo should be evacuated, would it be evacuated?

A. No, because the lease for that was made many years ago, and it still has many
years to run, and we're perfectly legal in our right to be there. It is fenced
off. There is no contact with the people or the main island of Cuba at all.

Russians in Afghanistan

Q. Mr. President, you have mentioned Afghanistan. I would like to say that in
Afghanistan Soviet troops are there at the invitation of the Afghan Government
to defend the Afghan revolution against the incursions of forces from abroad
that are funded and supported by the United States.

In the United Nations, you have indicated that the United States has not
attempted to use force, but has fostered the process of democracy by peaceful
means. How does this reply fit in with the use of force by the United States in
many countries abroad, beginning with Vietnam, where seven million tons of
weapons were dropped - seven million tons more than were in the Second World
War, and, also, Grenada? I ask this not to dwell on the past, but simply to
clarify this issue.

A. And it can be clarified, yes. [First, of all, with regard to Afghanistan, the
Government which invited the Soviet troops in didn't have any choice because the
Government was put there by the Soviet Union and put there with the force of
arms to guarantee. And, in fact, the man who was the head of that Government is
the second choice. The first one wasn't satisfactory to the Soviet Union, and
they came in with armed forces and threw him out and installed their second
choice, who continues to be the governor.] Now, there are no outside forces
fighting in there. But, as a matter of fact, I think there are some things that,
if they were more widely known, would shock everyone worldwide. For example, one
of the weapons being used against the people of Afghanistan consists of toys -
dolls, little toy trucks, things that are appealing to children. They're
scattered in the air. But when the children pick them up, their hands are blown
off. They are what we call booby-traps. They're like land mines. This is hardly
consistent with the kind of armed warfare that has occurred between nations.

The Vietnam War

Q. Vietnam?

A. Yes, when Vietnam - or let's say, French Indochina - was given up as a
colony, an international forum in Geneva, meeting in Geneva, established a North
Vietnam and a South Vietnam. [North Vietnam was already governed by a Communist
group and had a government in place] during the Japanese occupation of French
Indochina. South Vietnam had to start and create a government.

We were invited into - with instructors, to help them establish something they
had never had before, which was a military. And our instructors went in in
civilian clothes. Their families went with them. And they started with a country
that didn't have any military schools or things of this kind to create an armed
force for the Government of South Vietnam.

They were harassed by terrorists from the very beginning. Finally, it was
necessary to send the families home. Schools were being bombed. There was even a
practice of rolling bombs down the aisles of movie theaters and killing
countless people that were simply enjoying a movie. And finally, changes were
made that our people were allowed to arm themselves for their own protection.

And then, it is true, that President Kennedy sent in a unit of troops [to
provide protection.] This grew into the war of Vietnam. [At no time did the
allied force - and it was allied; there were more in there than just American
troops -] at no time did we try for victory. Maybe that's what was wrong. We
simply tried to maintain a demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam.
And we know the result that has occurred now.

And it is all one state of Vietnam. It was conquered in violation of a treaty
that was signed in Paris between North and South Vietnam. [We left South
Vietnam, and North Vietlnam swept down, conquered the country, as I say, in
violation of a treaty.] But this is true of almost any of the other places that
you mentioned. We - I've talked so long I've forgotten some of the other
examples that you used.

Invasion of Grenada

Q. Grenada? A. What? Q. Grenada?

A. Grenada. Ah. We had some several hundred young American medical students
there. Our intelligence revealed that they were threatened as potential
hostages, and the Government of Grenada requested help, military help, not only
from the United States, but from the other Commonwealth nations - island nations
in the Caribbean - from Jamaica, from Dominica, a number of these others. They
in turn relayed the request to us because they did not have armed forces in
sufficient strength.

And, yes, we landed. And we found warehouses filled with weapons, and they were
of Soviet manufacure. We found hundreds of Cubans there. There was a brief
engagement. We freed the island. And in a very short time, our troops came home
after rescuing our students, rescuing the island. [There are no American troops
there now.] Grenada has set up a democracy [and is ruling itself by virtue of an
election that was held shortly thereafter among the people, and of which we
played no part. [And there is the contrast: the Soviet troops have been in
Afghanistan for six years now, fighting all that time. We did what we were asked
to do - the request of the Government of Grenada - and came home.] '72 ABM
Treaty Q. Mr. President, with relation to the ABM Treaty, which was signed in
1972, Article 5 of that treaty indicates, and I quote, ''that each side will not
develop a test or deploy antiballistic missile components or systems which are
sea-based, air-based, space-based or mobile land-based. Now, some Administration
representatives say that the treaty is such that it permits all of these things
- the development, the testing, and deployment of ABM systems. Such an
interpretation of that treaty certainly cannot help achieve agreement.

What is the true position of the American Administration with regard to the
interpretation of this treaty? Will the U.S. abide by the treaty or not? And
certainly the results of your meeting with General Secretary Gorbachev will
depend a great deal on that fact.

A. There are two varying interpretations of the treaty. There is an additional
cluse in the treaty that would seem to be more liberal than that Paragraph 5 -
or Clause 5. The other hand, we have made it plain that we are going to stay
within a strict definition of the treaty. And what we are doing with regard to
research - and that would include testing - is within the treaty.

Now, with regard to deployment, as I said earlier, no, we are doing what is
within the treaty and which the Soviet Union has already been doing for quite
some time, same kind of research and development. But, when it comes to the
deployment, I don't know what the Soviet Union was going to do when and if their
research developed such a weapon, or still if it does.

But I do know what we're going to do and I have stated it already. [We would not
deploy - my - it is not my purpose for deployment - until we sit down with the
other nations of the world, and those that have nuclear arsenals, and see if we
cannot come to an agreement on which there will be deployment only if there is
elimination of the nuclear weapons.] Now, you might say if we're going to
eliminate the nuclear weapons, then why do we need the defense? Well, I repeat
what I said earlier. We all know how to make them - the weapons, so it is
possible that some day a madman could arise in the world - we were both allies
in a war that came about because of such a madman - and therefore, it would be
like, in Geneva after World War I when the nations all got together and said no
more poison gas, but we all kept our gasmasks. Well, this weapon, if such can be
developed, would be today's gasmask. But we would want it for everyone and the
terms for getting it, and the terms for our own deployment would be the
elimination of the offensive weapons - a switch to maintain trust and peace
between us of having defense systems that gave us security, not the theat of
annihilation - that one or the other of us would annihilate the other with
nuclear weapons.

So, we will not be violating this treaty at any time, because, as I say, it is
not our purpose to go forward with deployment if and when such a weapon proved
practical. #2 Sides as Allies Q. Mr. President, we've about run out of time
unless you had somethng in conclusion you wanted to state.

A. Well, I - we haven't covered - I guess I've filibustered on too many of these
questions here with lengthy answers. I know you have more questions there. I'm
sorry that we haven't time for them.

But I would just like to say that the Soviet Union and the United States -well,
not the Soviet Union, let us say Russia and the United States have been allies
in two wars. The Soviet Union and the United States, allies in one, the last and
greatest war, World War II. Americans and Russians died side by side, fighting
the same enemy.

There are Americans buried on Soviet soil. And it just seems to me -and what I
look forward to in this meeting with the General Secretary - is that people
don't start wars, governments do. And I have a little thing here that I copied
out of an article the other day, and the author of the article uttered a very
great truth. ''Nations do not distrust each other because they are armed. They
arm themselves because they distrust each other.''

Well, I hope that in the summit maybe we can find ways that we can prove by deed
- not just words, but by deeds - that there is no need for distrust between us.
And then we can stop punishing our people by using our wherewithal to build
these arsenals of weapons instead of doing more things for the comfort of the
people.

MOSCOW, Nov. 4 (AP) - The four journalists chosen for President Reagan's
interview with Soviet reporters are all experts on the United States.

The four men, in their 50's or early 60's, speak English and have spent several
years reporting from the United States.

Three of them - Genrikh Borovik of the Novosti feature syndicate, Stanislav
Kondrashov of the Government newspaper Izvestia and Vsevolod Ovchinnikov of
Pravda - often appear on Soviet television's weekly current affairs program,
''International Panorama,'' a 45-minute review of world events.

The fourth man, Gennadi Shishkin, is the First Deputy Director General of the
Soviet Government press agency, Tass. He writes foreign affairs commentaries for
Tass and has served as head of the Tass bureau in New York.

Mr. Borovik, in addition to his journalistic activities, has turned to the
theater in recent years. He is the editor of Teatr, the Soviet Union's
theatrical monthly, and is the author of ''Agent 00,'' a satirical play about a
Latin American country similar to Chile that has been playing to full houses at
Moscow's Mayakovsky Theater. Mr. Borovik, who has served in New York for
Novosti, frequently writes on Latin American affairs.

Mr. Kondrashov has reported for Izvestia from both New York and Washington and
regularly writes for the paper in Moscow on foreign affairs.

Both he and Mr. Ovchinnikov, who has reported from London and from Tokyo for
Pravda, wrote articles about President Reagan's speech last month to the United
Nations General Assembly.

Both refrained from personal criticism of Mr. Reagan, but attacked the United
States record in international affairs, in line with Soviet criticism of Mr.
Reagan's focus on disputed regions as a possible area of Soviet-American
cooperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan being interviewed by Genrikh Borovik,
Stanislav Kondrashov, Vsevolod Ovchinnikov and Gennadi Shishkin (AP))

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES E. GROPPI DEAD AT 54; EX-PRIEST LED RIGHTS FIGHT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, Nov. 4


James E. Groppi, the former Roman Catholic priest who led more than 200 marches
for open housing in the city in the tumultuous 1960's, died today. Mr. Groppi,
who had been ill since he underwent surgery for a brain tumor a year ago, was 54
years old.

Mr. Groppi died ''peacefully and comfortably'' at home with his family, his
wife, Margaret, said in a statement.

He had been partly paralyzed on the left side and used a wheelchair since a
tumor was removed on Dec. 12, 1984.

As an assistant pastor of St. Boniface Roman Catholic Church in a largely black
neighborhood, he was arrested more than a dozen times in his campaign for an
open housing law in the city.

The Milwaukee Common Council passed the open housing law in April 1968, and more
than 50 other communities in Wisconsin followed suit. Mr. Groppi then became
active in advocating the rights of welfare mothers, in protests against the
Vietnam War and in pressing American Indian rights.

Mr. Groppi was born Nov. 16, 1930, one of 12 children whose immigrant father ran
a small grocery store in an Italian neighborhood on Milwaukee's South Side.

Jailed in Rights Protests

In 1965, three months after marching with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in
Selma, Ala., Mr. Groppi was arrested for the first time when he and four other
clergymen formed a human chain in front of a Milwaukee school to protest racial
imbalances.

''Agitate, agitate, agitate is my motto,'' he said in an interview at the time.

In January 1975, after many protests and a number of arrests, he joined the
actor Marlon Brando as a peacemaker between the authorities and armed Indian
activists who had taken over the vacant Alexian Brothers novitiate in Shawano
County.

Often at odds with his ecclesiastical superiors, Mr. Groppi formally broke with
the church in April 1976, when he married the former Margaret Rozga, a fellow
activist. The couple had two children, Anna, now 6, and Christine, 4.

In his later years, Mr. Groppi expressed a desire to reconcile with the Roman
Catholic Church and return to some form of parish work, but he never did.

On June 9, more than 600 well-wishers, including the comedian and social critic
Dick Gregory, attended a dinner in his honor. From his wheelchair, Mr. Groppi
closed the evening by leading the audience in the singing ''Oh, Freedom.''

Mr. Groppi leaves his wife and daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Groppi (UPI)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TV'S COVERAGE OF SOUTH AFRICA

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


Comes now the challenge: South Africa has restricted the filming of ''any public
disturbance, disorder, riot, public violence, strike or boycott, or any damage
to any property, or any assault on or killing of a person.'' Everyone loses in a
situation like this, including, although Pretoria seems unaware of it, the
Government applying the restrictions. Meanwhile, a question arises: How will
television cover South Africa now?

It is not an idle question, and its answer will tell us something about the
maturity of television journalism. The images that television has relied on -
seething crowds, falling bodies, charging police - are precisely the ones the
Government now wants to erase.

The images are gripping; the paradox is that they may not be that important. In
a sense, R. F. Botha, the South African Minister of Foreign Affairs, was correct
when, on NBC on Sunday, he said of the foreign coverage, ''I'm telling you it's
not the truth.''

What is the truth? Its sum is not in the television images we customarily see;
it is not in Mr. Botha's vision of South Africa, either. Critical events, for
example, take place in the boardrooms in Johannesburg; television, other than
ABC's ''Nightline'' or public television's ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour,''
routinely gives us violence in the streets. When Mr. Botha denounced foreign
press coverage -''vicious, venomous'' - he seemed to have television, not print,
journalism in mind.

Visas Delayed

On the other hand, television journalism came late to South Africa. For decades,
apartheid was a newspaper and magazine story, and newspapers and magazines also
suffered restrictions. South Africa expelled one New York Times reporter, for
example, and delayed issuing visas to others. Television journalists were in -
although never on a sustained basis -and out of South Africa. The turning point
seemed to come last March.

In a spectacular example of television journalism, ''Nightline'' originated for
a full week from South Africa. Government spokesmen and their critics, some of
whom had never before talked publicly to one another, debated racial policies.
Much of the programming was also seen in South Africa. Whether by coincidence or
not, riots then broke out in black townships. Americans saw them that weekend on
the network news.

Since then, television has shown us South Africa more frequently. And this,
according to the South African Government, is the problem. Louis LeGrange, the
Minister of Law and Order, said the Government was ''concerned with the presence
of television and other camera crews in unrest situations.'' He said they were
''a catalyst to further violence.''

Pretoria is at least partly correct here, difficult as it may be for
anti-apartheid activists to admit. On the ''CBS Morning News'' yesterday, Allen
Pizzey, the CBS correspondent in Johannesburg, said cautiously, ''Certainly the
presence of cameras may encourage people to behave other than they would
otherwise.'' In fact, it is unreasonable to think that blacks living under
apartheid would not try to attract American television cameras. Television does
not necessarily tell Americans how to think, but it does tell them what to think
about. The growth of apartheid as an issue and television's increasing attention
have been simultaneous.

Questions of Authority

Meanwhile, it should be noted that South Africa's action is consonant with other
denunciations of television. Military men, ideologists and governments now
assign the medium an authority and power it does not have. Television supposedly
lost the war in Vietnam. Therefore, the British were right to keep
correspondents out of the Falklands, and the Reagan Administration had to keep
them from landing with the Marines and Rangers on Grenada. No matter how the
justification is stated, the free flow of information is lost.

How will television react now? The Grenada experience may be instructive; it may
also be cautionary. In retrospect, it's hard to remember much about the invasion
coverage on television except that anchormen and correspondents kept telling us
they weren't there.

Then, when surveys indicated that a majority of Americans seemed to support the
exclusion, television journalists (and many of their print colleagues) had a new
issue: themselves. Why didn't Americans understand the importance of a free
press? The invasion, hastily mounted, beset with intelligence, logistical and
communications problems, was virtually forgotten.

It would be a tragedy if something like this happened now. South Africa is too
vital a story. In a way, television must forget about itself. It has precedents
to follow. Two years ago, ABC gave us the one-hour documentary ''Adapt or Die,''
a brilliant examination of black labor unions in South Africa. It took us away
from street violence and, through interviews and solid reporting, into the
possibilties of non-violent change in South Africa. No network has done anything
this good since. Meanwhile, ''MacNeil/Lehrer'' and ''Nightline,'' forgetting the
visual rules that bind the 7 o'clock news, have relied on nothing more than talk
- opponents and apologists for the Government in conversation. Much of this has
been compelling. At the same time, Pretoria complains that television has given
far more coverage to Bishop Desmond M. Tutu, say, than to black leaders such as
the Zulu chief, Gatsha Buthelezei, who cooperate with the Government. The
Government has a point. Which network has done extended reports on the Zulus or
on Christian blacks not associated with Bishop Tutu?

An anomaly of the Government's position, meanwhile, is that it seems to see
television as consciously arrayed against it.

A Kind of Nonpartisanship

Presumably, Pretoria believes that television looks only to examples of blacks
being brutalized by whites. In fact, the recent coverage has shown that
television is equally attracted to pictures of blacks brutalizing blacks, or
blacks pursuing whites. There is a kind of nonpartisanship about television, and
what it craves mostly is action.

The Government restrictions, of course, now rule this out, but for the time
being this may not be as great a loss as it seems. Television correspondents did
not accompany the delegation of prominent South African businessmen who met
recently with members of the exiled African National Congress in Zambia. That
was a print story. Cameras have not paid much attention to left-wing Afrikaner
dissent, nor to right-wing gains in by-elections. South Africa is a more complex
news story than viewers have seen. Television may now be severely handicapped;
it can still get on to serious news.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A news analysis Tuesday about television reporting on South Africa stated that
television correspondents did not accompany the delegation of South African
businessmen who met recently with members of the exiled African National
Congress in Zambia. A CBS News correspondent went with the delegation, and his
report was included on ''The CBS Evening News With Dan Rather.''

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.N. Calls on Vietnam To Leave Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 5


The General Assembly called on Vietnam tonight to withdraw its forces from
neighboring Cambodia. The margin - 114 in favor, 21 against and 16 abstaining -
was the largest in seven years of voting on the resolution.

In the debate today the United States urged the Soviet Union to use its
influence to bring about the withdrawal of the Vietnamese troops. Vernon A.
Walters, the chief American delegate, said the United States was willing to play
an active role in achieving a settlement to the occupation of Cambodia.

Similar resolutions have been adopted in the Assembly since 1979, a year after
Vietnam invaded Cambodia. The margin last year was 110 to 22.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
A Position of Influence

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


The Congressional leadership post with the most influence and the least public
recognition of that influence is, almost certainly, the chairmanship of the
House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee. That panel makes the initial decision
each year on how much money the Pentagon will get and what it will be spent for,
setting a pattern that has impact on the final budget and the entire military
establishment.

Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, Democrat of Queens, has held the chairmanship
since 1979, but he was hospitalized with a debilitating kidney ailment last
August and is being discharged only at the end of this week, aides say. Since
Mr. Addabbo will then go to Florida for an indeterminate recuperation, House
leaders have quietly decided to select a standby subcommittee chairman who would
succeed the New Yorker in the event that he proved unable to reassume his
Congressional duties.

Representative Bill Chappell Jr. of Florida is the next senior Democrat on the
subcommittee and has served as acting chairman the past few months. But House
leaders have chosen, instead, the third most senior Democrat, Representative
John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania, who at 53 is 10 years younger than Mr. Chappell
and is regarded as considerably less conservative. Mr. Murtha, the first Vietnam
veteran elected to Congress, in 1974, has generally supported Pentagon policy,
occasionally backing the Reagan Administration on issues like the MX missile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW BATTLE FOR THESE VETERANS

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words


DURING their years in the service, some had not yet come to realize they were
homosexuals. Others were aware of it but kept the matter to themselves or
confided in the few others in the same situation. To acknowledge it, they knew,
could abruptly end their military careers.

Now 10, 20 or even 50 years after they were mustered out, much has changed for
many of America's homosexual veterans. They not only want to acknowledge their
sexual orientation publicly but to proclaim their patriotism at the same time
-by marching down Fifth Avenue, under the banner of the Gay Veterans
Association, in the annual Veterans Day parade.

''Nobody ever asked you when there was a firefight whether you were gay or
not,'' said Robert Walden, the secretary of the homosexual veterans organization
and a former Marine Corps sergeant. ''We fought alongside straight members of
the military service, and we want the right to march alongside them in
peacetime.''

Last year, officers of the 1,000-member group asked the American Legion, which
runs the parade, for permission to participate in it. Their requests were
ignored. Further inquiries this year, both to the legion and Mayor Koch, proved
unavailing. So, late last month, barely two weeks before the Nov. 11 parade, the
homosexual veterans took their case to Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Chief Judge Constance Baker Motley is expected to rule in the case today.

The lawsuit itself, however, has become a catalyst for many homosexual veterans,
prompting them to examine their experiences as soldiers and veterans and their
homosexuality and patriotism as well, the last two of which, they insist, can
co-exist peacefully.

Five members of the homosexual veterans organization - a New York schoolteacher,
a travel agent, a word processor, a police officer and a retired nuclear
researcher - gathered recently at the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund on
West 43d Street, the homosexual rights group representing them in the case, to
discuss these issues and their emotions. One had served in Vietnam, another in
Germany during World War II. A third had worked on nuclear weapons research in
the 1940's, and a fourth had been decorated for intelligence work by the Navy in
the 1970's. Their political views, by their own descriptions, range from leftist
Democrat to Reagan Republican.

''I don't think there could be anything more patriotic than wanting to see that
the American dream is a reality for all Americans,'' said the teacher, who asked
to be identified only by his first name, Fred. ''We're Americans like anybody
else. I resent thoroughly that the American Legion questions our patriotism when
we feel, probably more than they do, that America belongs to everyone, straight
and gay.''

Defense Department regulations state that homosexuality is ''incompatible'' with
military service and adversely affects the ability of the armed forces ''to
maintain discipline, good order and morale.'' For that reason, homosexuals who
enlisted, like Peter Guardino, a New York City police officer who served in
Vietnam, did not reveal their homosexuality.

Others found that homosexuality was acknowledged, even tolerated, by military
officials as long as one wasn't flagrant about it. ''The Army just doesn't want
to know about it,'' Fred explained. ''People don't mind thinking you're gay,
suspecting you're gay, but they can't deal with knowing that you're gay.''

The parade has brought the issue to the surface again. Named as defendants in
the suit are legion officials, Mayor Koch and Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward,
whose department issues all parade permits.

Legion officials say that homosexual veterans are free to march, but not under
their own banner, which the homosexual veterans insist upon doing. According to
John Paine, president of the Gay Veterans Association and a supporter of Mayor
Koch, they have rejected the Mayor's offer of a simultaneous, separate-but-equal
parade. ''We belong there with everyone else,'' said Mr. Paine, who served in
Germany and Belgium from 1975 to 1980.

The legion maintains that the group has no place in a Veterans Day parade, in
part because its agenda is more self-servingly sexual than patriotic. The Gay
Veterans Association, the legion's lawyers contend, is ''at best a social
club.''

''All they are looking for is recognition of their own sexual perversion,'' one
of the legion's lawyers, Casimir F. Sojka, said recently.

But Mr. Paine, now a travel agent in Manhattan, said that the group, which has
members in 31 states and chapters in Boston, Philadelphia, Washington, San Diego
and New Jersey, is also active in a number of other veterans concerns: pension
rights, medical care in Veterans Administration hospitals, drug and alcohol
abuse, unemployment. ''G.V.A. was not founded to be a total gay organization,''
he said.

Their presence in the parade, the veterans say in court papers, would remind the
public that ''some 23 million Americans are gay, and that countless thousands of
gay men and lesbians have served honorably in the armed forces of their country,
many of them paying with their lives for freedoms that they never were permitted
fully to enjoy.''

Up to now, the group represented only a small fraction of the nation's
homosexual veterans, with servicemen and women from World War II and Korea
dominating. Indeed, one purpose of wanting to join the Nov. 11 parade is to
enlist more Vietnam veterans, who have proved resistant to joining organizations
of any kind. Only when Mr. Walden, a word processor, marched in the Vietnam
veterans' parade in May did he learn that the group even existed.

The discovery, he said, changed his life profoundly. Mr. Walden, who described
himself as ''a radical libertarian,'' had never previously joined any homosexual
organization. What changed his mind about fighting for homosexual rights was
AIDS.

''Because of the people I've known who have died and my own concerns about
health, I've come to the conclusion that keeping my sexuality compartmentalized
in one little corner of my life does not work,'' he explained. ''A lot of us
believe that the rampant promiscuity which is largely responsible for the spread
of AIDS is due largely to repressed sexuality, and that we've got to find other
ways to express ourselves.''

One such way, he said, was provided by the Gay Veterans Association.

''I'm not a gay person over here and a veteran over here and a banker over
there,'' Mr. Walden continued. ''God made me one person, and I have a right to
bring that into my community life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE ROAD TO PEKING: WINSTON LORD'S 'DREAM'

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


Bette Bao Lord cannot look at the photograph without laughing. There, on a wall
of her Park Avenue duplex, her husband, Winston, is playing Ping-Pong with Henry
A. Kissinger, both of their faces grim with determination.

Mr. Lord may have won that game -his wife does not recall - but he lost the
next, a desperate mismatch arranged by Mr. Kissinger with a Chinese champion as
the opponent.

''Henry went around telling the Chinese that Winston was a good Ping-Pong
player,'' Mrs. Lord said, shaking her head at the temerity of such an assertion.
''That's like telling the Russians you're a good ballet dancer.''

The photograph of Mr. Lord is one of many in the couple's Manhattan apartment
that could serve as his resume for the position of Ambassador to China, a post
he is expected to take up soon.

Senate Approves Nomination

The Senate approved his nomination Tuesday night after President Reagan
intervened to break a five-week impasse caused by the opposition of Senator
Jesse Helms. The North Carolina Republican had blocked Mr. Lord's confirmation
in an attempt to win assurances from the Administration that it would provide no
aid to China's population control programs.

In a gallery off the ample foyer of the apartment, there is Mr. Lord greeting
Richard M. Nixon or Gerald R. Ford, shaking hands with Pope John Paul II,
smiling with Zhou Enlai or Mao Zedong, and leaving the house in Paris where the
Vietnam peace treaty was negotiated.

''I'm really a generalist,'' said Mr. Lord, who most recently was president of
the Council on Foreign Relations and was formerly one of Mr. Kissinger's top
advisers on the National Security Council and in the State Department in the
years when relations were reopened with China. ''I'm not a China expert in the
sense that's it's my sole preoccupation. But I was somebody with a world view of
how it all fit together.''

''He's not a China specialist in the sense of being a scholar,'' said Mrs. Lord,
a native of Shanghai and the best-selling author of several books, among them
''Spring Moon,'' a generational saga of her homeland. ''What he was able to do
was integrate China's opening into international policy.''

A Passion for China

Mr. Lord's passion for China, a matter of accident more than design, has
nonetheless been the centerpiece of his career. After graduating magna cum laude
from Yale and first in his class from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy,
Mr. Lord, now 48 years old, excelled at the State Department and the Defense
Department in matters unrelated to China, and at one point was warned that his
marriage would prohibit an assignment related to China.

By the time Mr. Lord joined Mr. Kissinger's staff in 1969, such prohibitions no
longer existed. He traveled with his mentor, and Mr. Nixon and Mr. Ford, on nine
diplomatic missions to Peking.

''Of all the things I did,'' Mr. Lord said in the interview earlier this year,
''that certainly was the most dramatic in all of its human and emotional
dimensions. You can argue that was one of the most important geopolitical events
in history - the world's most populous nation and the world's most powerful
nation, groping toward each other.''

Never, the Lords said, did they indulge in fantasies that they would someday be
posted to the country of her birth and his most dramatic diplomacy. ''It's not
even something we dared to think about,'' he said. ''We often feel we're living
a dream, against all odds, against all planning.''

The Language of Literature

Mrs. Lord, also a Fletcher graduate, casts the development in the language of
literature, which she turned to after jobs that included typing envelopes for an
insurance company, running programs for the East-West Cultural Center at the
University of Hawaii and dancing with a Washington repertory company.

''As a novelist, I could never plot a book the way this has turned out,'' Mrs.
Lord said. ''Some editor would say I'd loaded the dice. To come here as an
8-year-old, to happen to marry an American and, of all Americans, to have it be
this one.

''It's not a straight and narrow life. Winston and I don't sit around and say,
'Two years from now we want to do this.' Things happen to us and we react to the
opportunity. In a way, I guess, that's very fatalistic.''

It is a fatalism grounded in the culture of her country, which over the years
Mr. Lord, an heir to the Pillsbury fortune, has acquired by contagion. ''The ups
and downs, the yins and yangs, I'm learning that as I get older,'' he said.

'Would Have Been Unthinkable'

Mr. and Mrs. Lord say the assignment to China comes at an especially
invigorating time, when Mao's brand of Communism is being upended by Deng
Xiaoping. ''Fascinating,'' Mr. Lord said, declining to discuss matters of
substantive policy before taking up his new post. ''So much of what's happening
in China today would have been unthinkable a few years back.''

''In many ways,'' Mrs. Lord said, ''Deng Xiaoping's policies are more
earth-shaking than Mao's. I've asked many Chinese friends if they thought today
would ever arrive and they said they didn't.

''China is full of contradictions because of its age, its culture and the things
it's trying to do. I think the Chinese culture is so old that China will always
be China. It's so rooted in its past that it's not really comparable to anyplace
else.''

Mr. Lord also declined to discuss the potential difficulties of dealing with the
Taiwan lobby, but his views are suggested in an essay he wrote for the Op-Ed
page of The New York Times in April 1984, at the time of President Reagan's
visit to China.

'Ambiguity and Friction'

''The President, after early missteps, has resumed the course of his three
predecessors,'' Mr. Lord wrote. ''He can reaffirm our undertakings with China
without abandoning friends on Taiwan. He can state that we will accept any
peaceful solution that is mutually agreeable to the parties. Nevertheless,
Taiwan will inevitably remain a source of ambiguity and friction in our
dealings.''

Mr. Lord represents something of a hybrid between the career Foreign Service
officer - like Arthur W. Hummel Jr., his predecessor in Peking -and the
political appointees prevalent in Mr. Reagan's first Administration.

At the American Foreign Service Association, the union that represents State
Department employees, Mr. Lord is regarded as a political appointee of the
highest order, the equal in qualifications to Mike Mansfield or David Bruce.

''In my experience,'' Mr. Lord said, ''the most dedicated career officers
welcome a political appointee as long as he's qualified. You need new blood,
people with different perspectives and skill, or the service becomes ingrown.
But not so many that there's no opportunity to rise to the top.''

A Touch of Irony

There would be a touch of irony for Mr. Lord in serving under George P. Shultz,
a Secretary of State more inclined than Mr. Kissinger to manage diplomacy
through ambassadorial channels.

Mr. Lord disputed the widely held notion that Mr. Kissinger was almost
contemptuous of his ambassadors by citing his dependence on Ellsworth Bunker in
Saigon.

Still, Mr. Lord acknowledged, ''I'm not going to contend Henry used every
ambassador to the fullest. But if what you're saying is true, the moral of the
story is to be in the right place at the right time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Winston Lord and Bette Lord (NYT/Steve J. Sherman)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BAN ON HOMOSEXUAL GROUP IN VETERANS PARADE UPHELD

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


Homosexual veterans are not entitled to march under their own banner in the
Veterans Day parade next Monday, a Federal trial judge ruled yesterday.

In a 20-page decision, Chief Judge Constance Baker Motley of District Court in
Manhattan held that the parade, which is run by the American Legion, was a
private rather than a city-sponsored event.

Because there is no governmental involvement in it, she held, the legion may
properly permit other groups, such as the Catholic or Jewish War Veterans, to
march, but bar members of the Gay Veterans Association.

''The City of New York provides no funding to the American Legion or its
Veterans Day parade,'' Judge Motley wrote. ''The mere issuance of a permit does
not constitute state action.''

'One of Many Ceremonies'

Because there are two other observances at approximately the same time, she
continued, the march is in no sense New York's ''annual parade.'' She noted
separate observances by the Federation of World War Veterans of France and the
Vietnam Veterans of America.

''The parade is not the only event of the day or an official event,'' she wrote.
''It is just one of many ceremonies held throughout New York City to commemorate
Veterans Day.''

Legion officials had noted in court testimony that the organization received no
city funds for the parade and that it paid all costs for the event.

''I think she's correct in her decision, and I think she'll be upheld,'' said a
lawyer for the legion, Francis L. Giordano of Brooklyn.

Possibility of Appeal

He went on to say that the Gay Veterans was ''not a bona fide veterans
organization.''

''You can call yourself a veteran, but that doesn't mean you're a war veteran,''
Mr. Giordano added.

The president of the Gay Veterans, John Paine, said that he was ''very
disappointed'' with the ruling and that it would be appealed. With two court
days before the parade, it was unclear whether such a route would prove useful.

''It sends a clear mesage out that New York City is discriminatory against gay
people,'' he said. ''I am a patriotic veteran. I never realized America would
turn its back on me like this.''

''It is a clear expression of First Amendment rights being violated,'' said Abby
Rubenfeld of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a homosexual-rights
group that represented Mr. Paine and his colleagues.

Running Parade Since '23

The homosexual veterans group filed its suit last month, after the American
Legion had rejected its requests to participate in the march, and efforts by
Mayor Koch to insure their participation proved unavailing. The legion, under a
city permit, has been running the parade since 1923.

In its suit, the 1,000-member homosexual group asked Judge Motley to force the
legion to allow it to march, or to revoke the parade permit.

Defense Department regulations state that homosexuality is ''incompatible'' with
military service and adversely affects the ability of the armed forces ''to
maintain discipline, good order and morale.'' There are an unspecified number of
homosexuals in all branches of the military.

In her decision, Judge Motley disputed the legion's charge that the homosexual
organization was not a genuine veterans group, but ''at best a social club.''
All members, she noted, had to present evidence indicating a relationship to a
branch of the Armed Forces.

She denied that the city, had improperly discriminated against homosexuals by
granting to the legion exclusive use of Fifth Avenue on the morning of Veterans
Day, while rejecting a similar permit for the homosexual group.

For reasons of public order, she said, other groups holding annual events had
been given similar preferential treatment. Those groups, she noted, included the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. for parades on Labor Day; the Ancient Order of Hibernians for St.
Patrick's Day, and homosexuals for the Gay Pride Parade each June.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Showing the Way

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


In New Jersey, Gov. Thomas Kean, a Republican, was re-elected with a majority of
the black vote. In Virginia, Gerald Baliles, a Democrat, was elected Governor
with 50 percent of the white vote. His running mate for lieutenant governor,
Douglas Wilder, the first black since Reconstruction to win a statewide
election, took 46 percent of the white vote.

These remarkable returns from Tuesday's elections prove that Republicans can win
black support when they work for and deserve it. They show that the recent drift
of white voters away from the Democrats, especially in the South, is not
inevitable. And they suggest that as blacks become more politically active in
the Southern states, black-white polarization need not result.

The New Jersey and Virginia results also cast further doubt on the glib
proposition that ''the country has gone conservative.'' Mr. Kean's impressive
re-election owes little to the policies of the Reagan Administration or to
Ronald Reagan's tiny coattails; and the Democratic sweep in Virginia, a state
that Jimmy Carter lost twice, was achieved over a solidly conservative
Republican ticket.

It's not likely that Tom Kean's brand of leadership will drive the Reaganites
from the Republican temple any time soon. But Virginia Democrats showed their
party how to win in a region where it literally must regain support if Democrats
hope again to take national power; and how to break out of the pattern of
black-white polarization that has been depressingly prevalent in Southern
elections. Virginia also gave its outgoing Governor, Charles Robb, a strong
claim on national attention.

The Democratic sweep was led by Attorney General-elect Mary Sue Terry, the first
woman to win a statewide election in Virginia, who won 61 percent of the vote;
but the party triumph is universally attributed by Virginia political buffs to
Mr. Robb's leadership and to his four-year record - one of fiscal conservatism
and social progressivism, illuminated perhaps by a remark he made about a group
of national Democratic leaders who hope to tone down without abandoning their
party's liberal reputation: ''We're trying to be careful not to identify with
any specific ideology.''

When Mr. Robb - a Marine veteran of combat in Vietnam - ended 12 years of
Republican rule by narrowly winning election as Governor in 1981, a woman and a
black were among his first Cabinet appointees, but so were two holdovers from
the previous administration. He appointed record numbers of blacks to state
office, including the first to sit on the Virginia Supreme Court; he also
encouraged economic development, conducted himself as a friend of business, and
managed a prudent administration that conservatives found hard to criticize.

This middle-road record and Mr. Robb's moderate-young-executive public image
produced a popularity rating above even Ronald Reagan's. With it, he helped
shape a strong Democratic ticket that could run on his record in 1985. Mr.
Wilder, for example, was tailor-made to appeal across black-white lines. A
decorated veteran of the Korean War, in the State Senate since 1969, he is an
experienced legislator with a strong record on ''black issues'' who has
nevertheless refused, he told The Washington Post, to ''restrict my sphere of
influence to color.''

Similarly, Mr. Baliles was Attor-ney General and Miss Terry was an experienced
and respected legislator before this year's campaign. When Virginia Republicans
stuck to their outdated formula of appealing strictly to conservatives, they
abandoned the middle - which is to say the political future in a fast-growing
state like Virginia. The Democrats were ready to swarm all over it.

Strong candidates and policies of broad general appeal therefore cracked color,
sex and ideological barriers in a state where all three might once have seemed
impassable. That doesn't necessarily mean the Democrats can win the South in
1988, but it shows the way; and if it doesn't by itself make Chuck Robb a
national contender, it should at least earn him some solid respect. For in
Virginia, as one Democrat exulted, his party need no longer fear ''that label of
crazy, radical Democrats who tax, tax and spend, spend, spend . . . it just
won't wash anymore.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Lawrence J. O'Brien Jr., 38; Lobbyist for City in Mid-70's

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 168 words


Lawrence J. O'Brien Jr., New York City's chief legislative lobbyist in
Washington during the fiscal crisis in the mid-1970's, died of cancer Sunday at
his home in Washington. He was 38 years old.

Mr. O'Brien, a lawyer who specialized in government relations and maritime law,
was named by Mayor Abraham D. Beame to head New York's Washington office in
December 1976 and held the position for a year.

He was born in New York City, a grandson of John P. O'Brien, who was elected
Mayor of New York in 1933 to fill the remaining one-year term of James J.
Walker, who had resigned.

Mr. O'Brien received a B.A. degree from Georgetown University in 1968 and a law
degree from the school in 1975. He served as a combat infantry officer in
Vietnam.

Mr. O'Brien is survived by his wife, the former Melinda Dokken; a daughter,
Tara, of Washington; his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence O'Brien of Montclair,
N.J.; two brothers, John, of Montclair, and Kevin, of Washington, and a sister,
Irene Harlow of Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Americans to Excavate Crash Site in Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 175 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


The Pentagon announced today that American investigators would excavate a bomber
crash site near Hanoi later this month, the first time Vietnam has allowed
Americans to participate in the search for remains of missing servicemen since
the war ended in 1975.

Pentagon officials and representatives of families of the missing said the
agreement was a significant breakthrough in the effort to account for the 2,441
Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina, most of them in
Vietnam.

Assistant Defense Secretary Richard L. Armitage said a team including 11
Americans and 10 Vietnamese would participate in the examination of the site
where a B-52 with a crew of six went down in December 1972.

Mr. Armitage also disclosed today that American experts had identified 5 more of
26 sets of remains turned over the by Vietnamese in August. He said one of the
men, Lieut. Richard C. Sather of Pomona, Calif., was the first American shot
down over North Vietnam.Lieutenant Sather's plane was shot down Aug. 5, 1964,
the Pentagon said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

3 MONUMENTS VOTED IN HONOR OF VETERANS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 253 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


The House has voted to authorize three more monuments in Washington, which
already has 106 national monuments, statues and memorials. The new monuments
would honor Korean War veterans, women who served with the armed forces and
blacks who fought in the American Revolution.

The three memorials would be financed by private funds, built on Federal land in
the Washington area and maintained by the National Park Service. The bills, each
approved unanimously Tuesday, were sent to the Senate.

In floor debate Monday, Representative James J. Florio, Democrat of New Jersey,
said many of the 5.7 million Korean War veterans were ''concerned as to why it's
taken us so long'' to acknowledge their service. The three-year conflict, which
ended July 27, 1953, claimed the lives of 54,246 Americans, including 33,629
killed in combat. About 59,000 Americans were killed in the 10-year Vietnam War.

Urging approval of a monument to women who have served in the armed forces since
the Revolution, Representative Patricia Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat, said,
''There's a myth in America that all women sat out all wars on a pedestal
somewhere.'' The reality, she added, is that women ''have been walking alongside
men in every war.''

Representative Parren J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maryland, said the proposal for a
memorial to the 5,000 slaves and free blacks who fought in the Revolution would
provide ''encouragement and hope'' to today's blacks who believed the nation's
commitment to racial equality had diminished.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 9, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
JUDGE WITH ACERBIC PEN; HADDON LEE SAROKIN

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 973 words


The judges of the United States District Court in Newark are assigned their
cases randomly. But since President Carter named him to the bench in 1979, Judge
H. Lee Sarokin has come up with more than his share of big ones.

In 1982 he presided over the lengthy, highly publicized racketeering trial of
William V. Musto, the former Mayor of Union City. Last year, he was asked to
hear the case of Rose Cipollone, perhaps the most prominent of the dozens of
actions brought nationally by smokers and their survivors against cigarette
manufacturers.

And two years ago, in a case involving Kenneth N. MacDonald, the former New
Jersey Casino Control Commissioner and a target of the Federal Abscam
investigation, Judge Sarokin ruled that a libel action could proceed after the
death of the ostensibly injured party.

''Why should a claim for a damaged leg survive one's death where a claim for a
damaged name does not?'' he asked. ''After death, the leg cannot be healed, but
the reputation can.''

'The Luck of the Draw'

''I've been very lucky to get dynamite cases since the day I arrived,'' Judge
Sarokin said in a recent interview. ''It's just the luck of the draw, although
my clerks sometimes accuse me of making big cases out of small ones.''

None of the 56-year-old judge's rulings has been more closely scrutinized,
however, than this week's 70-page decision overturning the triple-murder
convictions of Rubin (Hurricane) Carter and John Artis.

The judge's ruling, followed by his decision yesterday to release Mr. Carter, a
one-time middleweight boxing contender, from prison, was the latest and perhaps
most sensational development in the 19-year-old murder case.

Judge Sarokin's decision was made more difficult, he acknowledged, because of
the conflicting rulings by several other tribunals, including a divided New
Jersey Supreme Court.

Resisting Temptation

''It's very tempting to assume that what a number of good, respected judges in
New Jersey did was correct,'' he said. ''You have to resist that temptation and
look at it anew.''

He issued his decision, moreover, well aware that in some quarters, defending
the rights of criminal defendants is decidedly unfashionable these days.

''There is a substantial danger that our society, concerned about the growth of
crime, will retreat from the safeguards and rights accorded to the accused by
the Constitution,'' he wrote in his decision this week.

''The need to combat crime should never be utilized to justify an erosion of our
fundamental guarantees. Indeed, the growing volume of criminal cases should make
us even more vigilant; the greater the quantity - the greater the risk to the
quality of justice.''

An Editor's Son

In the last six years, Judge Sarokin (pronounced SARE-o-kin) has won a
reputation for the length, thoroughness, elegance and, in particular, pungency
of his opinions, which belies his generally courteous courtroom demeanor.

His astringency in print, he said, is attributable to his father: Samuel
Sarokin, former editor and publisher of The Perth Amboy Record.

In one decision, for instance, Judge Sarokin chided three law firms seeking
$60,000 in legal fees for work in a $1,500 dispute, saying they were pursuing
''principal over principle.''

He once called an Internal Revenue Service effort to collect taxes from a
defunct charitable institution ''government at its heartless, rigid, and
Orwellian bureaucratic worst.''

Attacking Bureaucracy

In a 1984 case brought by a Vietnam veteran who had been denied disability
benefits, Judge Sarokin called the Federal Department of Health and Human
Services ''a heartless and indifferent bureaucratic monster destroying the lives
of disabled citizens.''

Shortly thereafter, when another individual had been denied benefits because of
a misunderstanding, Judge Sarokin went still further.

''This Court has already concluded that the Department of Health and Human
Services has no heart, but it appears now as if its brain is going as well,'' he
wrote.

His credo was perhaps summed up best in a 1983 case in which the Small Business
Administration sought to collect a $300,000 debt from a penniless widow. The
action, he wrote, had led him ''to wonder whether our governmental agencies are
being run by machines, rather than humans.''

''Better to have no government at all than a government devoid of compassion and
basic human decency,'' he concluded.

Student at Dartmouth

Haddon Lee Sarokin was born in Perth Amboy on Nov. 25, 1928, and named by his
newspaperman father after Haddon Ivins, the editor of The Hudson Dispatch.
''It's a dreadful name, which I dropped,'' the judge explained. He was raised in
Maplewood, N.J., and attended Dartmouth College and then Harvard Law School,
where he graduated in 1953.

He returned to Essex County in 1954, when he joined what was to become the law
firm of Lasser, Lasser, Sarokin & Hochman. He might have remained there had not
Larry Fleisher, a law school classmate and general counsel of the National
Basketball Players Association, asked him in the mid-1970's to do some legal
work for a friend who had just purchased a home in New Jersey. The friend was
Bill Bradley.

The two quickly became friends, and when Mr. Bradley ran for the United States
Senate in 1978, Mr. Sarokin was the financial chairman of his campaign. Mr.
Bradley won, and he later recommended Mr. Sarokin for a Federal judgeship.

Judge Sarokin and his wife, Marjorie, have five children and live in Essex
County.

Some of his opinions might earn Judge Sarokin the label of ''liberal'' in some
circles. It is a designation he dislikes, along with such other terms as
''activist'' or ''strict constructionist.''

''People call you an 'activist' if they don't agree with you and an 'upholder of
the Constitution' if they do,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Haddon Lee Sarokin (NYT)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FORMER OHIO GOVERNOR SEEKING FIFTH TERM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio, Nov. 9


Former Gov. James A. Rhodes, who has already served as the state's chief
executive longer than anyone else, said today that he would seek to oust the
incumbent and win a fifth term next year.

Mr. Rhodes, a 76-year-old Republican, said at a fund-raising rally here, ''This
will be a crusade to clean out the most corrupt, the most inept administration
in the history of Ohio, a crusade to revitalize Ohio's economy, and a crusade to
position Ohio for leadership in the 21st century.''

Mr. Rhodes, who served four terms as Governor, did not mention Gov. Richard F.
Celeste by name. But he accused the Democratic administration of what he
asserted were failures in economic development, of raising personal and business
taxes and of unethical conduct.

'A Stolen Credit Card'

''We cannot trust any administration that acts like they have a stolen credit
card,'' he asserted. ''If we as public officials and the press of the state of
Ohio would go to sleep, in six months eight acres of the finest parking lot
would exist because they would steal every stone out of the Statehouse.''

Mr. Celeste was out of the state today. His press secretary, Brian Usher,
dismissed Mr. Rhodes's assertions.

''I think it's safe to say that Jim Rhodes can run, but he can't hide,'' Mr.
Usher said. ''He can't hide from his record of double-digit unemployment, his
record budget deficit of $500 million when he left office, and his record of
school closings and school fund shortages.''

Mr. Rhodes alluded only once to his age, when he talked about the state's need
to protect children and the elderly, saying, ''We in the middle age of our life
can take care of ourselves.''

Mr. Rhodes is the second Republican to formally declare his candidacy for the
party's nomination. State Senator Paul Pfeifer announced last month that he
would seek the nomination. The State Senate's president, Paul Gillmor Clinton,
said he planned to declare his candidacy in January.

Mr. Rhodes served his first two terms as Governor from 1963 to 1971. He could
not immediately seek re-election because the Ohio Constitution prohibits a
Governor from serving more than two consecutive terms.

He Was Re-elected in 1974

In 1974, Mr. Rhodes ousted a first-term Democratic Governor, John J. Gilligan,
under whose administration a state personal income tax was enacted, and served
two more terms. Mr. Celeste took office in January 1983.

Mr. Rhodes has never fully escaped the shadow of May 4, 1970, the day National
Guard troops he ordered to the campus of Kent State University to quell
demonstrations against the war in Vietnam killed four students and wounded nine
others. Nevertheless, he survived the legal and political battles that followed.

Mr. Rhodes helped bring a Ford Motor Company and a Honda Motor Company plant to
Ohio but his efforts to spur economic development to avoid raising taxes failed
under the weight of the 1982 recession.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EFFORTS TO HONOR VIETNAM VETERANS SPREADING

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


The wall at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial here was washed this morning, in an
act of caring and a ritual performed by a dozen volunteers who rose at dawn.

The volunteers were here to wipe away any fingermarks clouding the memorial's
polished black granite slabs. Three million people visit the memorial each year
and many of them reach out to touch the names of lost loved ones. The names of
58,022 Americans, dead in Vietnam, are engraved on the memorial's walls.

Spokesmen for veterans' groups said the volunteers' work reflects rising
sympathy and understanding for Americans who fought in the nation's most
unpopular war. They say the belatedly popular idea of memorializing Vietnam
veterans is spreading across the land.

Monuments Around Nation

On Sunday, Nashville is to open a privately financed Vietnam Veterans' Park near
the state capitol with a wall on which the names of the 1,289 Tennesseans who
died in Vietnam will be engraved. In addition to this new monument and the
Vietnam memorial that opened in New York City last May, Vietnam memorials are
planned in Florida, South Carolina, Oregon and Texas, said Sam Bartholomew, a
combat veteran of Vietnam who headed the fund drive that raised $250,000 for the
Tennessee monument.

''We told people we had a monument on the War Memorial Plaza here to every war
we've ever fought except Vietnam, and that that was wrong,'' he said.

Mr. Bartholomew said he believed the country was seeing the beginning of a
trend. ''These Vietnam memorials are beginning to pop up all over the country,''
he said.

Attraction for Tourists

The memorial in Washington has become the third most visited tourist attraction,
after the Smithsonian Institution's Air and Space Museum and the Lincoln
Memorial. It draws more than 12,000 visitors a day on weekends and 7,000 on
weekdays.

This Veterans' Day, veterans' groups will continue their tradition of holding a
ceremony there that that remains somewhat aloof from the long-established
Veterans' Day ritual at the Tomb of the Unknown in Arlington National Cemetery.

At Arlington, across the Potomac River and in distant sight of the Vietnam
memorial, President Reagan is to mark Veterans' Day by laying a wreath at 11
A.M. Monday.

At the same time Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia, a Marine Corps officer in
Vietnam, is to deliver the main address in the ceremony at the Vietnam Memorial.
The volunteers were there to make sure the monument will be spic and span.

'There Was Sort of a Vacuum'

According to John L. Bender, the 65-year-old retired civil servant who organized
the memorial volunteers here a year ago, after President Reagan formally
accepted the privately financed Vietnam memorial for the Government on last
Veterans' Day ''there was sort of a vacuum here.''

The millions of visitors making finger contact with the names of sons and
fathers lost in combat left a residue that made it difficult to get clear
photographs of the glistening stone slabs, with their white-on-black lettering,
Mr. Bender said.

''In the summer time we get traces of suntan lotion, and it takes a tooth brush
and mineral oil to keep the names clear,'' he said. The Vietnam Memorial, sunk
into the ground near the Lincoln Memorial, is under the flight path of
Washington's National Airport ''and there is some fallout of oily jet fuel from
airplanes taking off and landing,'' he said.

Eight of the 34 active volunteers are combat veterans of Vietnam and several
others, men and women, are the relatives of men lost in combat. Their
sensitivity to the visitors who are overcome by emotion ''is sometimes a help,''
he said. ''We mainly listen and try to keep them talking, to work the grief out
as best we can.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN IN WAR SEEK STUDY ON AGENT ORANGE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


Women who served as civilians in the Vietnam War are pressing for Government
recognition that they may have developed health problems because of exposure to
Agent Orange.

A number of the women say they should be included in Government studies of the
effects of exposure to Agent Orange, a defoliant widely used by American forces
in Vietnam. They also believe they should be eligible, as are many veterans, for
financial compensation because of health problems they say could stem from their
exposure.

About 10,000 American women served as civilians in Vietnam, working primarily in
recreational programs with the United Service Organizations and the Red Cross.

Many of these women have found themselves suffering from health complications
that experts say are similar to ailments suffered by Vietnam veterans who were
exposed to Agent Orange, which contains dioxin.

Linked to Various Ailments

Dioxin, one of the most toxic man-made substances, has been linked in studies of
animals to ailments of the bladder, spleen and liver, and to spontaneous
abortions.

From 1965 to 1971 the United States sprayed more than 10 million gallons of
herbicides, including Agent Orange, to defoliate areas of Vietnam where enemy
troops were active.

A fund of $180 million was established last year by the manufacturers of Agent
Orange to settle a suit brought by Vietnam veterans who said they had been
harmed by exposure to the herbicide. The settlement, which also covered 7,000
women who served in the military in Vietnam, did not apply to the civilians.

''I would say the area we were in was saturated with defoliant,'' said Joan M.
Maiman, a Red Cross hospital worker in Vietnam in 1970 and 1971.

A Form of Virulent Acne

''We washed in local water,'' she said. ''Sometimes we drank local water. We
were brushing against plants that had been sprayed. We were sitting in the dirt.
And we know much of it was heavily defoliated.''

Since her return from Asia, Miss Maiman says, she has suffered from a form of
virulent acne that she did not have before going to Vietnam. She said she also
suffered from numerous allergies and problems with her immune system since her
return.

Many of the women who served as civilians have reported such other ailments as
irregular menstrual periods, miscarriages, cancer of the cervix and birth
defects in their children.

Since these women have not been studied in any systematic manner, no one knows
whether their illnesses were caused by exposure to Agent Orange.

'They Need to Be Checked'

''Many of the problems they complain about are quite similar to problems of the
Vietnam veterans,'' said Dr. Ronald A. Codario, a specialist in internal
medicine who was the chief medical witness for the veterans in the 1983
settlement. ''They need to be checked carefully.''

Dr. Vernon N. Houk, director of environmental health at the Centers for Disease
Control in Atlanta, said the civilians could not be studied. ''There is no
central listing anywhere of who was there as civilians,'' he said. ''We'd have
to ask for volunteers, and that would not be a valid study.''

Last year, State Assemblyman Tom Hayden of California sponsored the first
legislation directing a state to conduct a program to provide civilians who
worked in Vietnam with information regarding herbicide exosure.

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, introduced a bill in Congress to
conduct a study on the Federal Government's responsibility to the civilians; it
passed in the Senate but failed to pass in the House.

The Illinois General Assembly has also passed resolutions calling for medical
assistance for civilians exposed to Agent Orange.

''I just think it's unconscionable that it's taken all these years to determine
they just might do something,'' Miss Maiman said. ''We were volunteers, you
know. We didn't have to go.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE PARIS STAGE, TWO HITS WITH AMERICAN ACCENTS

BYLINE: By Rosette C. Lamont; Rosette C. Lamont is a visiting professor at the
Institute of Theater Studies of the Sorbonne Nouvelle.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1664 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The Paris season, which promises to be rich and varied, started out with a
marked American infiltration of the cultural scene. First came Christo's
irreverent and witty wrapping of the ancient Pont-Neuf. Then Parisians
celebrated the dedication of two public sculptures by Richard Serra, including
his 35-foot-tall, 100-ton assemblage, ''Slat,'' erected at the edge of the
high-rise business suburb of La Defense.

Now America is a presence on the Paris stage. The dialectic between strength and
precariousness which characterizes Mr. Serra's elegant steel cube can be
detected in the tilted urban landscape that provides the disquieting setting for
Woody Allen's ''Dieu, Shakespeare et Moi'' (''God, Shakespeare and Me''), the
reigning boulevard success of this early part of the season. Though these early
Allen sketches may not be the author-dramatist's best effort, he can do no wrong
in Paris. The French admire him as a fringe character, an anti-hero who has made
an establishment success out of resolutely going against the grain of his
society.

The other sold-out triumph in which America looms large is the avant-garde
production of Ariane Mnouchkine's Theatre du Soleil, lengthily titled
''L'Histoire terrible mais inachevee de Norodom Sihanouk, Roi du Cambodge''
(''The Terrible but Unended Story of Norodom Sihanouk, King of Cambodia'').
Helene Cixous's modern chronicle play, written in the tradition of Shakespearian
historical drama, has been accorded the bold Oriental treatment that
characterized Miss Mnouchkine's ''Twelfth Night,''''Richard II'' and ''Henry
IV.''

The eight-hour play, divided in two parts given over two evenings, is a highly
evocative, poetic caricature of a gentle yet wily ruler enmeshed in the power
games of the superpowers. Although Miss Cixous, one of the leaders of the
feminist movement in France, is well known for her radical politics, she proves
to be both moderate and wise in this complex, ambitious work of satire. Its
broad humor may not spare the American giant, but it is no less devastating in
its exposure of the schemes of the Russians and the Chinese. If there is any
message, it is, ''Leave this fragile, ancient culture alone.''

''Ariane and I wanted to create a modern history play, the story of a whole
people's misfortune, of a genocide,'' Miss Cixous explained after the play's
opening. ''Ariane traveled widely in the East some 10 years ago and she was
immensely impressed by the varied cultures she observed. When we finally decided
to create a spectacle about Sihanouk, a character who has entered history but
who's still alive, we realized that no one in France was interested in Cambodia.
Perhaps because of France's war in Indochina, followed by America's involvement
in Vietnam, young people here had become unquestioningly pro-Vietnam and
anti-Cambodia. In fact there was a good deal of hostility in regard to
Cambodians. It was our intention to alter this perception.''

As the play begins, four black-clad men and a woman stand on the edge of the
vast, square beechwood stage of Miss Mnouchkine's theater at the Cartoucherie de
Vincennes. They have reached the bank of the Mekong River. Phnom Penh, the
capital, lies on the other side, unprotected by the dispirited, corrupt forces
of Lon Nol's army. Led by Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge are close to final victory.
However, the victors now face the problem of administering ''a crocodile that
will tear them to pieces,'' a city peopled by an urban middle class and the
uprooted peasantry who fled their murderous advance through the countryside.

Pol Pot and his high command arrive at a ruthless solution: ''To empty out the
trash can, evacuate two and a half million inhabitants. Everybody out, into the
fields, the rice patches.'' When Hou Youn, a fellow revolutionary, raises his
voice in protest against this inhuman plan, he signs his death warrant. As he
strides off the stage, his associates suggest that he is an agent of the C.I.A.
The incontrovertible proof: ''In Peking he was seen reading The New York
Times.''

Despite a cool critical reception, every performance of ''Sihanouk'' is sold
out. The largely young audience squeezes tightly onto the upholstered benches
and even sits on the steps. Above the spectators' heads, propped up along a
gallery that runs all around the theater space, a crowd of dolls dressed in a
variety of Eastern and Western garb - the saffron robes of Buddhist monks,
cream-colored Hindu dhotis, ample djellabas, veils, turbans, fezzes, bowlers,
visored caps, berets, tweed jackets and blue jeans - conveys the sense that the
whole world is watching in awed silence and in judgment of the proceedings on
the stage. Toward the end of the play, at the climactic evocation of the fall of
Phnom Penh, the row of dolls, only dimly visible in the half light, suggests the
millions of passive victims driven out of their homes, out of the city,
uncounted numbers going to their doom.

Miss Cixous caricatures all parties involved in the death of a great culture:
the Cambodians themselves, their Vietnamese neighbors, the Americans, the
Chinese, the Russians and the lethal Khmer Rouge. Sihanouk himself, played by
the lead actor of the company, Georges Bigot, is depicted not only as a
sensitive artist but as a cunning diplomat caught in the web spun by the major
powers. Mr. Bigot shuffles, dances, leaps, as though nimble footwork could get
him off the tightrope.

The Americans in the play do not come off badly with the exception of a pale,
angry Henry Kissinger (played by Serge Poncelet, who is also cast as Pol Pot).
John Gunther Dean, the American ambassador to Cambodia, is shown to be a
compassionate, dignified diplomat. Addressing the weak, power-mad Lon Nol on the
eve of Cambodia's demise, the ambassador exclaims: ''Don't you see that you're
committing suicide? You must do something for your republic! I who love this
country and would like to avert the Communist menace, I've wept for this land
and my own!''

The other major success of the new season is the world premiere at the Theatre
de la Porte St.-Martin of two Woody Allen sketches written some 20 years ago.
''Death'' and ''God,'' combined into an awkward diptych under the grand title,
''Dieu, Shakespeare et Moi,'' are attracting a substantial middle-class,
middlebrow audience, quite different from the one that eagerly flocks to the
theater Miss Mnouchkine has created in an ancient munitions factory deep in the
woods of Vincennes.

The grand, four-tiered theater, the birthplace of 19th-century melodrama since
Pixericourt's first production there in 1802, is strictly establishment. It is
associated with the leading names of Romantic drama: Victor Hugo, Alexandre
Dumas, George Sand, Casimir Delavigne, Eugene Sue, Edmond Rostand. But its
crimson velvet interior still suggests some of the lurid glow emitted by the
melodramatic productions that once served to confer upon the Boulevard
St.-Martin the titillating name of ''Boulevard du Crime.'' The term proves
particularly apt in connection with Mr. Allen's first playlet, ''Death.''

''Death'' features the typically hangdog Woody Allen hero. As played by Pierre
Richard, a favorite with French movie buffs - in America he made a splash as the
sappy lead in ''The Tall Blond Man With One Black Shoe'' - the hero, named
Kleiman, is a lucid coward. Despite his sound survival instinct, he allows
himself to be inveigled into joining a group of scary and scared vigilantes who
are tracking down an elusive mad strangler. Alone in the empty canyons of a
deserted metropolis, this latter-day Candide wonders why he left his warm bed
only to face rival bands of vigilantes and other potential victims.

When Kleiman finally runs into a puny-looking killer, played by the actor Rufus,
he attempts to reason with him, even after the madman points out that this
approach is wasted on the insane. Kleiman's obsession has caught up with him. As
he falls bleeding, his throat slashed, a ripple runs through the well-dressed
audience. This familiar nightmare is of the type that has nourished for
generations the productions of ''Le Boulevard du Crime.''

In Mr. Allen's ''God,'' which makes up the second half of the evening, a limp
rag doll is lowered onto the stage by means of a red halter attached to a cable.
As the bearded, toga-clad puppet flops down, a familiar Nietzschean
pronouncement is delivered: ''God is dead!'' Then the play goes on to indulge in
the mock-Pirandellian device of questioning the relations between public and
performers. Members of the audience (actually plants) step into the action of
the play that is supposed to be in the process of being written.

''God,'' which concerns the difficulty of being a playwright, was described in
the Figaro Sunday supplement as an amalgam of Charlie Chaplin and Alfred Jarry's
''Ubu Roi.''

The plays' extraordinary success owes much to Woody Allen's talismanic
reputation in Europe, and especially in France. Together with Jerry Lewis, who
was knighted a couple of years ago by Jack Lang, the French Minister of Culture,
Mr. Allen has become a cult figure. He is viewed as a metaphysical comic, the
uncommonly common man who lets it all hang out. The French have always taken
pride in understanding certain aspects of America better than the Americans
themselves: Edgar Allan Poe made his mark in France thanks to the superb
translations of Baudelaire. William Faulkner's mythical South was explicated and
probed by the generation of Le Nouveau Roman. Ernest Hemingway is being
reverently analyzed this year on one of the prestigious early-morning radio
programs.

The myth of Hollywood is still powerful in France. Orson Welles's death made the
front pages of the major newspapers, knocking out the Greenpeace scandal, and
the hijacking of the Achille Lauro. ''Dieu, Shakespeare et Moi'' is another sign
of this fascination with America, and the disinterment of these buried early
sketches has proved to be a commercial bonanza.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pierre Richard and Rufus; Photo of scene from ''Sihanouk''
(Agence de Presse Bernand;Magnum/Martine Franck)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR FILMS DEPICT JAPAN AS A MISUNDERSTOOD VICTIM

BYLINE: By James Bailey; James Bailey is a freelance writer based in Tokyo.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1786 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


The enormous success of ''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' served to prove what
Japanese film makers have long known: there's money to be made from returning to
the scene of a military defeat.

The conflict of choice among local studios is not Vietnam, but World War II. As
American audiences this past summer cheered John Rambo's rescue of comrades from
a prison camp in Southeast Asia, Japanese audiences wept as a youthful soldier
in the director Kon Ichikawa's remake of his own ''Biruma No Tategoto'' (''The
Harp of Burma'') decided to remain in Southeast Asia and give decent burials to
all the fallen World War II comrades he could find.

It is highly doubtful that any renascent desire for martial glory is betokened
by the enthusiastic reception afforded this weepy melodrama, or, for that
matter, most of the well over a dozen other features with World War II themes
released here since 1981. There exists, after all, little public sentiment in
favor of changing the country's no-war constitution, or increasing defense
spending, or expanding the size of the all-volunteer armed forces. Rather,
Japanese audiences for these films - numbering in the millions and pouring the
equivalent of millions of dollars into the box offices - respond more to the
presentation of Japanese soldiers and civilians of this period as misunderstood
victims.

The Japanese, because of their lengthy history as inhabitants of resource-poor
islands buffeted by fires, typhoons and earthquakes, have developed what has
been dubbed higaisha ishiki, or, literally, victim's consciousness. Further, an
insular sense of cultural uniqueness, reinforced by centuries of isolation, has
contributed to a widespread feeling that they are easily misunderstood by the
outside world.

The film critic Kiyomi Furukawa finds it more than coincidental that production
of Japanese World War II films, rarely if ever seen in the United States, has
been stepped up concurrent with the ever-worsening trade imbalance between Japan
and the United States. After hearing what unfair aggressors they are in the
trade war, she says, Japanese can see ''proof'' in one of these films what
reluctant warriors they really are.

A compendium of the misunderstandings and victimizations to which a unique
nation can be subject is presented in Toei Studios' No. 2 money earner of 1982,
''Dai-Nippon Teikoku'' (''The Imperial Japanese Empire''). In the film, the
bombing of Pearl Harbor is shown to be an almost natural reaction by Japan to
President Roosevelt's desire - as he is made to say here - ''to get the Japanese
to attack us''; a Japanese soldier advancing into Singapore is taken aback by
the stiff resistance by Chinese civilians, who obviously don't know that, as he
puts it, ''We're trying to liberate them from British rule''; British defenders
of Singapore lure Japanese soldiers into an ambush by waving a white flag;
Japanese defendants at a war crimes trial in the Philippines are told by one of
their less-than-impartial judges, ''All Japanese deserve to die,'' and are then
taken back to their cells and made to eat their food like dogs; an American
soldier and his girlfriend take time out from the war to run up and down a
beach, playfully tossing the skull of a Japanese soldier back and forth like a
beach ball. Whoever said that history is written by the victors obviously never
read the screenplay for this film.

In ''Minami Jujisei'' (''Southern Cross''), released by Toho Studios in 1982 to
celebrate its 50th anniversary, what the historian John Toland characterizes as
the murder of 5,000 Singaporean Chinese by Japanese troops is excused as a
misunderstood act -to quote from a publicity release accompanying the film -
motivated by a sense of threat of the Chinese guerrillas who melted into the
crowds of Chinese citizens. Gen. Douglas MacArthur demonstrates his
misunderstanding of the Japanese when he observes in Toho's 1984 ''Zero-san
Moyu'' (''Zero Fighter'') that they ''can't build a good automobile, much less a
long-range fighter,'' just before a squadron of Japanese long-range fighters
destroys practically all American aircraft on the ground at Clark Field in the
Philippines.

In Shochiku Studios' 1984 ''Kono Ko Wo Nokoshite'' (''Children of Nagasaki''), a
survivor of the Nagasaki atom bombing who grows up to become a war correspondent
confirms the preeminent position of the Japanese as victims when he avers that
the absence of nuclear weapons from all the battlefields he has seen and written
about, including those in Vietnam and Biafra, causes him to breathe a sigh of
relief.

The all-too horrible consequences of the A-bombings firmly solidified the
Japanese perception of themselves as victims, rather than aggressors, and
studios here have done little to persuade the public otherwise. It would be
unthinkable for a local film maker to suggest, as the British military historian
John Keegan has, that the fate of Berlin can be equated with that of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. To do so would be to undercut the belief held by many Japanese
that they, being the only people to have survived an atomic attack, possess a
unique insight into human suffering.

Antiwar films which began appearing in 1950 criticized the military primarily
for causing so many young Japanese to be killed. Of the still-current tendency
to emphasize the deaths of Japanese soldiers to the virtual exclusion of those
of millions of Asian civilians, a Japanese film critic caustically remarks:
''People have forgotten that Japanese soldiers were not sent to Southeast Asia
to die; they were sent there to kill and conquer.'' But Americans who remember
the fanatical determination demonstrated by the enemy on late night telecasts of
''The Sands of Iwo Jima'' would probably be struck by the decided lack of killer
instincts on the part of fighting men in recent locally-made war films. Kamikaze
pilots, rather than using their penultimate breath to hail the emperor or curse
their intended targets, most frequently issue pitiful cries for their mothers.
Scenes showing the triumphant taking of the lives of American soldiers are
almost nonexistent; recreations of the attack on Pearl Harbor concentrate on the
sinking of ships, rather than on the deaths of the men inside them.

In their attempts to present Japanese as misunderstood victims, film makers in
the mid-50's began turning one of the most immediate results of Japan's defeat -
the Occupation -into a hell on earth. The films, featuring many an Occidental
counterpart of the fiendish Oriental with little regard for human life, include
''Ningen No Shomei'' (''Proof of the Man''), in which a Japanese man, attempting
to protect a Japanese woman from certain rape by Occupation soldiers, is stomped
to death and his lifeless body urinated upon in front of his horrified son. This
1977 feature, co-starring the Oscar winners George Kennedy and Broderick
Crawford, still ranks as one of the 10 most profitable domestic features ever
made.

Seldom have Japanese films taken up the question of responsibility for the war.
For most viewers, that subject was closed with the executions of those adjudged
by an Allied military tribunal to be the guilty parties - all seven of them. An
1983 documentary entitled ''Tokyo Saiban'' (''Tokyo Trial''), released this
autumn in New York, suggests that even these seven were perhaps themselves
victims -of victors' justice.

Among the handful of exceptions to the no-guilt rule are such films as Toho
Studios' 1982 ''Mikan No Taikyoku'' (''The Unfinished Game of Go'') and Shochiku
Studios' 1984 ''Shanhai Bansukingu'' (''Welcome to Shanghai''), both of which
roundly condemn Japanese actions during wartime on Chinese soil, though it's
problematic whether they do so out of conviction or necessity. The films were
shot on location in China, where scripts are perused by Chinese authorities to
determine if sensitive subjects -such as the death of 10 million Chinese at the
hands of Japanese soldiers - are acceptably treated. Though studios
unconvincingly deny tossing in antimilitarist scenes in order to get permission
from the Chinese Government for on-location shooting, the practice of tailoring
stories to curry official favor is hardly unknown.

Given the fickleness of the cinema-going public, the war film boom is all the
more remarkable for being so long-lived. In 1957, a financially hemorrhaging
Shintoho studio spent practically its last cent on ''Meiji Tenno to Nichi-Ro
Daisenso'' (''The Emperor Meiji and the Great Russo-Japanese War''). The film -
featuring copious battle scenes as well as a benevolent Emperor Meiji, who
insisted on eating the same food and wearing the same clothes as did his
soldiers - was seen by nearly eight million people, setting an attendance record
for a Japanese film. Nineteen years later, ''Hakkoda-san''(''Mt. Hakkoda''),
based on a true story of military preparations in 1902 for war with Czarist
Russia, became the first Japanese film to earn $12 million. And in 1980, Toei
Studios practically duplicated ''Meiji Tenno to Nichi-Ro Daisenso'' as ''Ni
Hyaku San Kochi'' (''Port Arthur''), earning $7.9 million, or nearly twice as
much as that studio's second biggest moneymaking release that year (also,
coincidentally, a war film).

While the Russo-Japanese War is currently out of favor, World War II films
continue to be cranked out and occasionally to horrify Japan's neighbors, who
protest what they see as distortions of fact.

The often self-serving picture that emerges from war films is a manifestation of
a national characteristic perhaps best described by the historian Barbara
Tuchman, writing nearly a half century ago in the magazine Foreign Affairs of
Japan's rationale for its behavior in Manchuria: ''Unlike an individual, a
nation cannot admit itself in error, so Japan's only answer has been to tell
herself that her judges are wrong and she is right. To strengthen this
contention she has built up the belief that she acts from the purest of motive
which her fellow nations wilfully misunderstand.'' The psychologist Hiroshi
Mikami finds these films pieces of nostalgia to the middle aged, while today's
youth, who haven't developed the habit of reading books, rely on them for their
history.

Whether studios here will be celebrating the 50th anniversary of Japan's
surrender with World War II films in 1995, or whether Sylvester Stallone will be
starring in ''Rambo X,'' is anyone's guess. Nonetheless, the position of
''Biruma No Tategoto'' as the latest and one of the most successful in a long,
long line of World War II films seems to indicate that obsession with national
defeat is an area in which Japan has several years' head start on the United
States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a scene from 1948 film ''Zero-san Moyu''

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM, TRYING TO BE NICER, STILL HAS A LONG WAY TO GO

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Do Hoang Hai says that when he was a South Vietnamese student activist in the
1960's he specialized in leading attacks against the United States Embassy in
Saigon. But today, Saigon has become Ho Chi Minh City, and Mr. Hai, the deputy
director of its Import-Export Corporation, works to bring American trade and
investment back to Vietnam.

A decade after North Vietnamese troops unified the country, and despite years of
Soviet assistance, Vietnam is a poor nation in need of hard-currency trade and
Western aid, diplomats in the region say. If Washington were to lead the way,
they add, other industrialized nations would follow. But how is Hanoi to deal
with Washington?

In the first place, the United States wants Vietnam out of Cambodia, which it
has occupied since December 1978. Though the United Nations General Assembly
approved again last week, by the largest margin in seven years, a call for the
withdrawal of Vietnamese forces, most diplomats doubt that Hanoi can be moved
from that strategic buffer nation. Diplomats and international agency officials
close to the Vietnamese believe, however, that Hanoi has decided to try to
remove some of the more negotiable obstacles to diplomatic ties and better
feelings. These include requests for a more credible accounting of missing
Americans, release of Amerasian children who want to leave and the reopening of
discussions on a Reagan Administration offer to resettle the inmates of
political prison camps.

However, things are not going well with Washington, and this seems to puzzle the
Vietnamese. Visitors sometimes come away with the sense that many Vietnamese,
living on the rhetoric of the 1960's, are unaware how much the world - and
America - have changed, how much sympathy for them has disappeared in the gap
between the Chicago Seven and Rambo. Or it may be a matter of a proud people
being unwilling to alter its tactics.

Mr. Hai, asks American reporters for ''the same understanding we got from the
media during the war.'' Young people, raised to believe that a peasant army
''defeated the greatest, most sophisticated military power,'' cannot understand
why Hanoi has become a pariah at the United Nations and lost old friends among
developing nations. They cannot fathom why American guilt has not been
translated into help with rebuilding.

The conflict between pressing economic realities and the suspicion directed at
Washington make this a critical time. Diplomats and aid officials are watching
the exploratory talks between Vietnamese and Americans, as well as concurrent
Vietnamese overtures to China, for signs of a new willingness to be
accomodating.

There has been progress, albeit slow, on the missing Americans. The first joint
excavation of a wartime plane crash site, tentatively promised for March, is now
to be held this month. Meetings get postponed without explanation; one is now
scheduled for Wednesday.

Hanoi continues to ask that thousands of Amerasian children now reaching
maturity be taken away.

But it seems cool to approaches by nongovernmental Americans. ''It's about time
the Vietnamese demonstrated some good will,'' said Charles Printz of Human
Rights Advocates International, after Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach offered
to deal with private American groups. Mr. Printz said that his organization of
300 lawyers had offered to help devise a legal way of moving the children but
that its letters to Hanoi had gone unanswered. Offers of assistance from
American religious groups are also declined. Asked why the Mennonite Central
Committee, which works in Cambodia, has been rebuffed, a Foreign Ministry
official said Vietnam did not need the programs.

Hopes are also dim for the resettlement of inmates from what Hanoi once called
''re-education'' camps.

Vietnam first offered to allow the estimated 8,000 to 10,000 prisoners to
emigrate, then backed off when Washington sought to negotiate procedures.
Recently in Geneva, the United States again asked Vietnam to allow the prisoners
to go.

Hanoi is widely believed to be holding out for diplomatic ties before freeing
the detainees. A delegation of Vietnam veterans from New York State, led by two
state assemblymen, recently asked if this were so. Mr. Thach, a master at
Delphic replies, denied that Vietnam was linking the issue to diplomatic
recognition.

''After recognition the question could be discussed,'' he said. ''But this is
not linkage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a military honor guard bearing the body of an American
serviceman recovered from Vietnam; Photo of Le Thi Lien with a photograph of her
father, who left Vietnam in 1970 (UPI; Magnum/Phillip Jones Griffiths)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW WE SEE EACH OTHER;
THE VIEW FROM AMERICA

BYLINE: By David K. Shipler; David K. Shipler, Moscow correspondent of The New
York Times from 1975 to 1979, is the author of ''Russia: Broken Idols, Solemn
Dreams.'' He is currently based in the Washington bureau of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6432 words


ONE DAY LAST SUMMER, my family and I were wandering through a small museum in
Concord, Mass., when we came to a diorama depicting the historic clash between
British redcoats and American colonists at North Bridge. There, on a miniature
landscape, toy soldiers faced each other across a tiny battlefield at the
opening of the American Revolution. My 8-year-old son, Michael, pointed to one
of the little redcoats that had been tipped over on its side. ''Look,'' he said,
''a dead Russian.'' Then he caught himself, laughed and shook his head at his
slip. ''I mean, British soldier.''

After 11 years of living overseas, our family had returned to the United States
only one year before, but Michael had quickly absorbed a view that has become as
American as the shot heard 'round the world: The Russians are the enemy.

The concept has worked its way into our culture. The Russians have taken their
place in film, advertising and popular literature beside the images of cruel
Nazis and the earlier, sinister stereotypes of Chinese and Japanese. They are
vilified by our Government leaders as militant aggressors devoted to conquering
the world. Their reciprocal fears of us are usually ignored in the textbooks
that introduce American teen-agers to world affairs.

And often, at a deeper level, we use the Russians to define ourselves. All
nations have a way of demonizing their adversaries. And so do we, picturing our
values as antitheses of the Russians' - our freedom, their slavery; our wealth,
their poverty; our honesty, their deceit; our righteousness, their subversion;
our peaceful intentions, their warlike militarism; our robust private
enterprise, their stifling state socialism.

The Soviet Union has given us plenty of reason to think the worst, of course -
as a brutal prosecutor of some of its own dissidents, a bully in Eastern Europe,
a trainer of terrorists, an arms merchant in tense regions of the world, a
nuclear power with a revolutionary ideology. Much Soviet behavior has been
inimical to American interests and offensive to American beliefs. But as I
return now to my own society after a long absence that included four years in
Moscow, I am struck by how incomplete our portrait of the Russians is, how much
of a caricature we have drawn, how thoroughly the shadings and nuances and rich
subtleties of Soviet society have escaped us.

The gaps in understanding were revealed in a telephone poll conducted by The New
York Times of 1,277 adults across the country between Sept. 15 and 19 (page 37).

FOR MANY AMERICANS, IMAGES OF RUSSIA ARE DOMINATED BY THE FAMIL-iar events of
political oppression and international tension. And because the Soviet system is
undemocratic, giving the Russian people no real voice in selecting leaders or
making policy, the people generally don't play a large role in our perceptions.
We tend to imagine Russians as hostile to the regime that governs them - while
overlooking the antidemocratic impulses that find deep roots among ordinary
Soviet citizens.

The terrible reign of Stalin is fixed in our imaginations: his forced
collectivization of Russian farmers, and particularly his madness in purging the
Communist Party and sending millions of innocent people to prison camps and
firing squads. Ultimately, this disillusioned even most of those Americans who
had initially seen hope for human justice in Soviet socialism.

Moscow's actions after World War II crystallized our sense of the Soviet Union
as an adversary. Communist parties were installed in Eastern Europe. West Berlin
was blockaded in 1948. Missiles were sent to Cuba in 1962, then withdrawn only
under an American ultimatum. Hungary was invaded in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968
and Afghanistan in 1979. The Helsinki accords of 1975 were violated as
dissidents were arrested and most emigration was barred. Poland was induced to
put down its free trade union, Solidarity, with martial law in 1981.

The record justifies our suspicion and outrage. But as a consequence, the
political conflicts have overwhelmed our perceptions, obscuring the character of
Soviet life. Most Americans rely on the news - and especially television news -
which is shaped by momentary political events, not the longer-range, subtler
elements of culture, tradition and attitude.

That kind of information is available in books, scholarly journals and the best
newspapers, but it takes second place in the popular imagination to the daily
drama of international politics. The easy news is all negative news, and for
that you don't have to get up from your television set.

Indeed, news coverage of the Soviet Union, especially on television, tends to be
dominated less by the knowledgeable correspondents in Moscow than by the
frequent, scary pronouncements of officials in Washington on the Soviet threat.
Important national perceptions can be shaped by a well-turned phrase or dramatic
image, even when the underlying facts are in doubt. Describing Soviet
intentions, for example, President Reagan recently used a quotation that he
ascribed to Lenin: ''We will take Eastern Europe. We will organize the hordes of
Asia. And then we will move into Latin America and we won't have to take the
United States; it will fall into our outstretched hands like overripe fruit.''
It turned out to be a phony, contained in a 1958 book by Robert Welch of the
John Birch Society.

There is a great paradox here. Although Soviet society is largely closed and
only partially visible to us, our freedom enables us to learn much more than the
Russians themselves know about Soviet history and current affairs. In an open
society, the facts are available to anyone who wants to dig through the serious
writing. But more immediate and ubiquitous sources of information are more
easily distorted by political fads and insidious stereotypes.

The resulting misperceptions seem less a function of politics than of emotion,
less rooted in the various positions Americans occupy along their political
spectrum than in their mythologies about the nature and intentions of the Soviet
Union. Indeed, as the recent Times poll showed, many misperceptions are held
across political lines - by Republicans and Democrats, conservatives and
liberals, voters for Ronald Reagan and for Walter Mondale. The profound
ideological conflict between the two countries transcends the divisions of
American politics.

It sometimes even affects personal behavior. Russians who visit the United
States are generally received with the same courtesy Americans are offered in
the Soviet Union. But some contacts have been laced with tension.

For the last two years, James E. Hill, who teaches high-school history in
Claremont, Calif., has been conducting an informal experiment, putting on a
Russian accent and giving the official Soviet viewpoint on a range of
international issues, including the Soviet argument on behalf of peaceful
coexistence with the United States. College audiences usually treat him well,
but high-school students and adults often erupt in rage. ''They say, 'We won't
have peace with you unless you change and live like us,' '' Hill reports. At
Edgewood High School in West Covina, a suburb of Los Angeles, teachers walked
out of his lectures. When he sat down in the faculty lunchroom, some teachers
got up from the table and walked away; others moved to the far end.

When a class of Soviet diplomats' children was scheduled to visit the Arlington
Middle School in the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., area, a few American youngsters on the
morning buses were overheard planning to harass ''the Commies,'' according to
Jane Barley, a former teacher of Russian who supervises some of the language
programs for the New York State Education Department. Perhaps their remarks were
a variation of the slogans now seen on T-shirts: ''Kill a Commie for Mommy.''
But the pupils involved were spoken to, and the visit occurred without incident.
At the Titusville Middle School in Poughkeepsie, Jane Barley said, a mother
refused to let her son sign up for Russian language, arguing, ''We would never
let him study Russian. We're Christians.''

THE BASIC OBSTA-cle to understanding is lack of knowledge. Polls show that
Americans are not very well-informed about other countries, and the Soviet Union
is no exception. Of those interviewed in The Times survey, 51 percent said that
they had no desire to visit the Soviet Union. Yet those of us who have returned
from Moscow find intense curiosity about life there -enough to put books on the
best-seller list and light up switchboards during talk shows on the subject.
Many Americans also seem ready to have their stereotypes revised.

Russian-language study has never been very popular in the United States, and
courses in Soviet studies have attracted relatively small enrollments. The
number of public secondary-school students taking Russian swelled to a high of
26,716 in 1965 -only two-tenths of 1 percent of the total student population
-and dropped steadily thereafter to 5,702, or four one-hundredths of 1 percent,
in 1982.

An opposite trend has been visible at the college level, with a rise from 1980
to 1983 of 26.7 percent in the number of students taking Russian. As
Soviet-American tensions have grown, so has the interest in graduate study of
Soviet affairs. The W. Averell Harriman Institute for Advanced Study of the
Soviet Union at Columbia University had 182 applicants for the current academic
year, up from 43 for 1980-81. The Russian Research Center at Harvard, which a
decade ago received 30 to 50 applications for its masters program, saw 100
students apply for 15 places last year and 90 this year. At Middlebury College
in Vermont, which has long enjoyed a fine reputation in Russian-language
instruction, a new Soviet studies program has begun to attract significant
numbers of undergraduates.

An average of more than 200 books and 2,500 articles a year are written by
Americans about the Soviet Union. Some 40 full-time American correspondents
reside in Moscow - one of the largest American press corps in the world. Legions
of American academic experts sift the Soviet press, monitor Moscow television,
talk with Soviet officials and publish learned analyses in scholarly journals.
And yet little of this information filters down to the general public.
Understanding is pockmarked with blank spots.

Of those polled in The Times survey, for example, 76 percent were unable to name
Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the top Soviet leader. Historical knowledge was weak,
especially in areas that weigh heavily on Russians' views of their relationship
with us. Forty-four percent of the Americans surveyed did not know that the
Soviet Union and the United States had fought on the same side in World War II;
a smaller number within that group - 28 percent of the whole sample - thought
that the two countries had actually fought against each other. Only 42 percent
knew that more Russians than Americans had died in the Second World War, and
just 14 percent were aware that in 1918, the United States landed troops in
northern and eastern Russia along with the British, French and Japanese to
bolster anti-Bolshevik forces in the civil war that followed the 1917
Revolution.

Part of the fault can be found in an assortment of history textbooks used in
junior and senior high schools. Some mention the American intervention in
passing, although many ignore it entirely. In their account of World War II,
many are almost mirror images of their Soviet counterparts, minimizing the
Soviet role in combating Hitler's Germany just as Soviet books reduce the
American role. (Box, page 56.) Soviet texts place the Soviet Union at the center
of the war, playing down the Pacific theater, portraying the battle of
Stalingrad as the turning point, and castigating the United States for delaying
its entry into the fighting, while the American books usually focus on the
United States' role as decisive and the Normandy landing as the critical moment
in the Allied effort.

''Freedom's Trail,'' an American history text published by Houghton Mifflin, for
example, passes quickly over the Soviet-German fighting: ''In June 1941, Hitler
attacked the Soviet Union. So the United States sent lend-lease supplies to help
the Soviet Union fight Germany.'' The book mentions neither the battle of
Stalingrad nor the extent of Soviet suffering. Only a note printed in the
teacher's edition recalls that an estimated 20 million Soviet citizens died.
''Exploring a Changing World,'' a junior-high-school text published by the Globe
Book Company, also gives America credit for much of the Soviet victory. ''The
Germans were very successful,'' it declares. ''But with the help of the United
States, the Soviets stopped the German armies.'' Stalingrad is recalled, but
without reference to the heavy Soviet losses.

This parochialism surprises Russians who come here. ''America is a rather
isolated country in a way,'' observed Vasily Aksyonov, a dissident Soviet writer
who immigrated to the United States five years ago. ''I have even had to tell
some people that Russia is located between China and Germany. They know that
this is some terrifying power, but they don't know where.''

Spy novels, films and advertisements reflect and reinforce stereotypes. Soviet
spies in some thrillers are sympathetic individuals caught in the wheels of
ruthless bureaucracy, and some films, such as ''The Russians Are Coming, The
Russians Are Coming'' of 1966 and the recent ''Moscow on the Hudson'' portray
individual Russians in warm tones. But vicious and absurd caricatures of
Russians have become standard fare in a current genre of commercials and films.
These have had a major impact on American teen-agers, as I discovered when I
went home to Chatham, N.J., the town where I grew up.

AT CHATHAM HIGH School, an upper-middle-class public school, I spoke with two
groups of about 40 students each, one drawn from honors 11th- and 12th-grade
history classes, the other consisting of sophomores and juniors at mixed levels.

I began by asking what words entered their minds when they thought of
''Russians.'' The images came in a flood: Flight 007, Reds, Communists, vodka,
not real, stubborn, nuclear war, cold, Siberia, gulag, trapped, nervous,
programmed, strict, Olympic boycott, Berlin, Iron Curtain, K.G.B., enemy,
Afghanistan, roulette, oppression, workers, regimented, hammer and sickle,
chess, sports, defectors, strong-willed, wheat, propaganda, Socialist, Kremlin,
long lines, absenteeism, Lenin, Cuba, Hitler, grain embargo, Marxism, Poland,
terrorism, cold war. When I asked for more about the Russian people, they added:
emotionless, ignorant, naive, afraid, sadness, paranoid, ugly (later retracted
by the boy who said it), alcoholics, gray, poor, strange, deprived, brainwashed,
old-fashioned, spies, bravery, survival.

Most American prejudices were contained in these words, and they pervaded both
the honors and non-honors classes. A similar harshness emerged from The Times
poll, whose respondents most often mentioned Communism, enemies, nuclear war,
aggression, invasion, world domination and other threatening terms. Only 6
percent of those polled had positive thoughts about the Russians, ranging from
''people like us'' to ''World War II allies'' to sable, caviar and the like.

Even admirable traits are stained by political hostility. In polls since 1942,
Americans have consistently labeled Russians ''hard-working,'' and 56 percent of
the Times survey's respondents thought Russians worked harder than Americans.
While some explained that they were really criticizing the ''lackadaisical''
American worker, others held an exaggerated picture of gloom and hardship in the
Soviet Union. Some thought, erroneously, that all Russians were assigned their
jobs and worked in near servitude.

''I believe they really don't have much choice in their jobs or career,'' said a
35-year-old dragline operator for a strip-mining company in Pennsylvania. ''I
don't believe there is a situation there for vacations, holidays and leisure
time,'' he added. ''The Russians, in order to eat, have to perform a certain
number of tasks for the Government. They are harder workers because they are
forced to be.''

A 34-year-old actress, college graduate and Reagan voter from St. Louis thought
the Russians put in ''way more hours'' than Americans and that ''they are
allowed only one pair of shoes a year. I would not be very happy working for
that one pair of shoes, knowing that's all I could have.''

This is a dramatic misimpression of the Russians, whose habits on the job -with
occasional exceptions -make the Soviet Union one of the world's greatest
goof-off societies. Workers are virtually immune from dismissal, no matter how
poorly they perform. The eight-hour day and the five-day week are normal
features of Soviet life, as are holidays and vacations, of course. Long
vacations and extra pay are offered as a way of attracting workers to the tough
climate of Siberia. Given the country's labor shortage, low-skilled Russians
have considerable latitude about the kind of job they take. Those with higher
education are on narrower tracks, but with some free choice; they are usually
able to select their areas of specialization before beginning their studies, and
upon graduating from college are assigned three-year positions in their fields.
When a 1981 Roper Poll presented Americans with a choice of terms to describe
Russians, practically every response was far off-target, in my experience. The
Russian people were seen as aggressive and competitive, disciplined, insensitive
and mean. Only 3 percent thought they were cheerful and fun-loving and had a
sense of humor. Anyone who has lived in the Soviet Union would find these
stereotypes utterly unrecognizable. To the extent that one can generalize about
a nation more diverse than we care to realize, Russians are warm and
compassionate, more complacent than competitive, more unruly in their souls than
disciplined.

What may be happening here is that Americans, encouraged by their own films and
advertising, are confusing politics with personality. You have to know Russians
personally, and preferably in the cloistered privacy of their own apartments, to
know the warmer side of them. A funny, nonsensical television commercial for
Miller Lite beer, for example, shows a Soviet emigre extolling the virtue of
America, which he says has parties everywhere. In the Soviet Union, he adds, you
don't find the parties, the Party finds you.

This disparity between the public and private Russian came to the surface in
Chatham High School, where one student called Russians ''emotionless.'' When I
asked him why, he gave an interesting answer. Watching Soviet athletes on
television, he never noticed any expressions on their faces. ''If they win, you
expect them to be happy,'' he said. ''Their athletes always look like they're
upset all the time.''

The comment drew objections from other students, especially a couple who had met
Soviet citizens personally. ''I find it hard to stereotype such a large country
as being emotionless,'' one boy declared. A girl in the class then spoke
movingly about a visit to the Soviet Union with her father, who sang in the Yale
Russian Chorus. She was only 10 at the time, but remembered visiting a Russian
family at home. The experience remained deeply engraved in her feelings. ''In
their homes they're very emotional people,'' she said. ''On the street they're
just being careful. This facade of being so cold and so hard is just a facade.''

That is precisely right, and it's a shame that Soviet authorities don't realize
how much good they could do for American perceptions by opening up a little.
Officialdom's suspicion of infectious foreign influence makes most Russians wary
of inviting Americans home, so even tourists who travel briefly to Moscow often
come away with an image of Russians in their public posture - cold, unfeeling
and rude.

Others go too far in the other direction, making the wondrous discovery that the
Soviet Union is a real country with real people who eat, sleep, brush their
teeth and love their children. This can produce gushing, naive declarations
about how we really don't have any conflicts at all.

One Harvard student, participating in a recent PBS television discussion,
delivered herself of a perfectly wide-eyed appreciation. ''When I got a chance
to go I was really excited by the fact that they are just people,'' she said,
''and they walk in the street and they talk and act just like people, like us.
There were times when you could have just limited contact with people, and you
could get an old woman on the street to smile at you if you did something that
she thought was good.'' Who can argue with her? The sun also rises over Moscow
from time to time.

O UR IMAGES OF THE RUS-sian people as individuals reflect and reinforce the
sense that Soviet society as a whole is bleak, regimented and wholly controlled
from above. A recent television commercial for Royal Crown Cola, for example,
begins with ranks of Soviet citizens in gray, Stalinesque tunics, their faces
impassive as they stand in Red Square facing a stern leader who admonishes them
to drink Coke and Pepsi. The scene then shifts to a cabin in the wintry
countryside, where jovial Russians in old-fashioned Cossack costumes dance, sing
and make merry with RC - until the door bursts open, two black-hatted secret
policemen appear and the main reveler hides his RC Cola inside his coat. The
caricature of Soviet society as the ultimate in totalitarianism is widespread in
American advertising, films and political cartoons. Even the film ''Moscow on
the Hudson,'' which compassionately portrays individual Russians, contains an
absurd scene in which a Russian family sitting at home grows alarmed when the
hero starts talking about American jazz and singing some tunes. ''I know we'll
get arrested for sure,'' one man says.

Similarly, an ad mailed out this autumn by Time-Life Books for a volume on the
Soviet Union shows a full color picture of a uniformed Soviet schoolgirl holding
an AK-47 assault rifle. The bold print declares: ''Powerful. Defiant. Alert to
every threat . . . .'' Only in fine print is the girl identified as an honor
guard at a war memorial. Inside, the blurb asks the reader to imagine himself as
a Russian in Moscow, standing at a street corner and checking his impulse to
curse at a speeding limousine as he notices a possible informer nearby. ''No
Party bigshot is worth a trip to Siberia.'' The ad invites the reader to
discover ''what life is really like inside a country where nothing -absolutely
nothing - goes unnoticed under the unblinking gaze of the omnipotent state.''

But life in the Soviet Union is not that way. Nor is it portrayed that way by
the book itself, which is an excellent, fair-minded examination. The
advertisement, in reinforcing the Stalinist image, ignores the extensive changes
since Stalin's death in 1953. Although the structure of oppression remains
intact, people do not disappear into Siberia for the relatively minor offenses
of grumbling or telling political jokes; usually it takes an overt and
deliberate act of dissent to provoke a political arrest, and lesser deviations
mean lesser punishments, including the forfeit of material privileges, travel to
the West and the like.

''It is not a totalitarian state,'' said Vasily Aksyonov, the dissident writer
now living in Washington. ''There is a second level full of confusion, full of
idiocy, full of black markets, full of debauchery.''

Soviet authorities reinforce the totalitarian image by persecuting highly
visible, respected human-rights activists such as Andrei D. Sakharov and Anatoly
B. Shcharansky, and by harassing and sometimes arresting Soviet Jews who want to
study Hebrew, practice their Judaism or immigrate to Israel. The anti-Jewish
oppression touches a powerful nerve in the United States, particularly for many
American Jews whose parents or grandparents were born in Russia, came to this
country and left their children and grandchildren with a legacy of gratitude and
a sense of obligation. Rallies, newsletters and lobbying efforts on behalf of
Soviet Jewry convey a justified sense of passion and outrage to large numbers of
influential Americans.

For the most part, descriptions of Soviet life in American textbooks are frozen
in the Stalinist era, when masses of Communist Party officials and others were
arrested and shot ca-priciously. Few books update the picture, and when they do
they are sometimes attacked by conservative groups who want them banned from
schools for being too gentle with the Russians. One such text, used in Chatham,
N.J.; Montgomery County, Md., and elsewhere, is ''Unfinished Journey: A World
History'' by Marvin Perry. In 1981 it was dropped from the Alabama State Board
of Education's approved list mainly for its passages on evolution and organized
religion, but also because it noted that ''under Communist leadership the Soviet
Union had been transformed into a modern nation in record time.''

''Both sides have inundated their populations with malicious propaganda for a
long time,'' said Stephen F. Cohen, a professor of Soviet politics and history
at Princeton University. Among the resulting misperceptions he lists the notions
that ''the Soviet elite is utterly monolithic because all Communists think
alike,'' that ''every Soviet leader is strong,'' that ''there is no real
politics in the system - it is a kind of an administrative despotism.'' This
last perceptual problem stems partly from the public struggle between dissidents
and the state, which creates an appearance of politics while the real politics,
the jockeying among constituencies for resources and priorities, takes place
behind the closed doors of Soviet officialdom.

A final misperception holds that the regime has no legitimacy in the eyes of
Soviet citizens. ''Most Americans don't think of the Soviet system as having a
social contract with its people,'' Cohen observed, citing the mistaken notion
that a vast population of Russians detests its system and Government.
Fifty-eight percent of those questioned in The Times survey thought Americans
were more patriotic than Russians because, as one explained, ''I don't think
they are too proud of what they stand for, and their economy and life style is
more of a grind.''

In fact, as Americans who have lived in the Soviet Union have usually come to
realize, a broad consensus seems to exist between the rulers and the ruled, one
that transcends the widespread grumbling about shortages of goods and services,
the acerbic political jokes, the yearning for material artifacts from the West.
Despite their mediocre living standards, Russians have a feeling of economic
security, an appreciation for the cradle-to-grave welfare that distinguishes
their system from what they are told is the chaotic uncertainty of life in the
United States. The importance of this in Russian minds rarely seems to leave its
mark on American perceptions. The characteristic is far from comforting, and may
lead us to miscalculation if we assume that Russians form a captive nation
yearning to be free.

In The Times poll, 49 percent of those surveyed thought the Communist Party
would lose a free election in the Soviet Union while 40 percent thought it would
win; 51 percent thought that most Russians disliked their system and would
prefer a democracy, while 35 percent believed that most preferred strong
leadership and would not be attracted to democracy. Asked which they imagined
the average Russian would choose, more consumer goods or more political freedom,
62 percent guessed more freedom and only 29 percent said more goods. After four
years in the Soviet Union, my hunch is the opposite on each question; I came
away convinced of the Russians' discomfort with weak leadership and of their
aversion to the West's pluralistic array of political ideas.

That realization comes hard. It is a view of Russian political impulses that has
only gradually and recently begun to gain acceptance among American academics,
as Robert Kelley, a professor of history at the University of California at
Santa Barbara, discovered upon his return from a semester of teaching at Moscow
State University in 1979. When he described Russians' affinity for order and
unanimity and their desire for a strong hand at the top, his colleagues ''simply
recoiled in disbelief,'' he recalled. ''I remember being accused of being
brainwashed when I said this at a faculty seminar. It seems to me that if I were
coming back from Moscow now I wouldn't have the problem. People now are ready to
accept this idea.''

The academic world is as susceptible to fads as the population at large. It
swings from one popular concept to the next. For many years following the launch
of Sputnik in 1957, the Soviet Union seemed to have won the scientific and
technological race with the United States. Soviet education seemed invincible,
American schooling inferior. Now the coin has been flipped, and Soviet society
is more widely seen as economically incompetent, technologically hopeless,
gripped by imminent crisis and possible collapse. ''Why?'' asks Stephen Cohen,
who has become a gadfly within his profession of Sovietology. ''We hate the
system and we want it to go away, and we know we can't make a war against it. So
we want it to commit an act of self-abolition. It would solve our problems.''

AT A CERTAIN level, American antipathy toward the Soviet system satisfies our
own need for a villain. And the villain is an abstraction, an all-purpose enemy
that often has little to do with the Russians themselves. Thus it is in ''Red
Dawn,'' John Milius's World War III film that was popular briefly in the summer
of 1984. The scenario plays to the wildest fears and fantasies in American
society: An invasion force of Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan troops takes over the
western part of the United States, shoots up a school, murders townspeople and
herds men into a concentration camp. A few high-school students escape with guns
into the mountains, where they organize themselves into a band of guerrillas
called the Wolverines, attacking Soviet soldiers, convoys and bases in a
satisfying orgy of violence that ultimately helps overcome the sinister
occupiers.

Virtually all the Chatham students who had seen the film liked it, identified
with the Wolverines and enjoyed the idea that a bunch of kids like them could
kill a lot of Communists.

''It kind of made you feel good,'' one boy remarked. ''You came out hating the
Russians.'' Another boy added: ''Americans went through Vietnam and suffered
terrorist attacks. People are sick of America always being wrong. Americans are
sick of that. They want the movies to kick their butts around.'' Only a few in
the honors class criticized the film as absurd, scary and bloodthirsty.

The specter of a Soviet takeover will also be exploited by ABC television in a
16-hour miniseries called ''Amerika'' scheduled for broadcast during the 1986-87
season. Set a decade after the United States has fallen to the Russians without
a fight, the program portrays a materially deprived and politically fearful
America run by vil-lainous Soviet agents. A K.G.B. colonel will be drawn as a
sympathetic character saddened by America's departure from its own values.

But the damaging potential rests in the film's reliance on the debatable
assumption that the Soviet Union is out to conquer us. Donald Wrye, the
program's writer, producer and director, conceded that most experts his staff
consulted ''held the opinion that this could not happen.'' But his plan to
sketch a United States as something akin to Vichy France under the Nazi
occupation seems likely to encourage those Americans who like to see Soviet
Communists behind every unwelcome opinion and development.

If the Russians began producing films and television shows about a conquest of
the Soviet Union by the United States, we might rightly accuse them of whipping
up hysteria, anti-American hatred and international tension. And we would have
some reason to fear the effects on their population, as we ourselves might now
worry about the influence of this genre of entertainment on young Americans.

The Chatham High School girl who thought of Hitler when the word Russians was
mentioned explained that both regimes treated their people similarly - an idea
formed from the images of Nazi-like Russians that appear increasingly in
American films.

''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' in which an American superfighter goes into
Vietnam in search of American POW's, announces the arrival of Soviet officers
with a closeup of their black jackboots. The Soviet interrogator, a Lieut. Col.
Podovsky, speaks English with a German accent; his precise manner, erect posture
and cool sadism make him a carbon copy of Hollywood's typical Nazi S.S. officer.
The ruthless Russians torture Rambo with electric shocks, threaten to burn out
an American prisoner's eye with a red-hot knife blade, shoot an escaping POW in
the back. As Rambo's helicopter seems to spin out of control, there is a searing
shot of the satisfied face of a Soviet pilot, set in a cold, malicious grin.

All this could be dismissed more easily if it did not have such an impact. When
I asked one group of Chatham students who their heroes were, they listed Rambo
and the Wolverines along with President Reagan, General Patton and the United
States Marines.

OUR CONFRONTA-tion with Soviet society is something of a confrontation with
ourselves. Any thoughtful American who lives for a time in Moscow comes away
with insights into his own fears about the darker sides of his political
personality, questions about integrity, courage, principles, values. Some
Americans who have read the chapters of my book on Soviet children learning
hypocrisy and Soviet adults practicing political charades see aspects of
American society there. At a seminar for Middlebury alumni last summer, several
retired corporation executives said that they recognized the American business
world in my descriptions of the Soviet drive for conformity.

We need an external villain to attack, an image, perhaps, of that villain we
suspect lurks inside ourselves. The Russians fill the role conveniently, partly
because they are in a real ideological conflict with us. At their cores, our two
countries are both evangelical; each is possessed by what it conceives as the
most righteous political and economic system in human history, and each is
convinced that spreading its system would benefit all mankind. Each proselytizes
out of its national interest, creating a mixture of ideological vision and
military power that makes a potent chemistry.

Our images of Russia tend to define a certain intellectual orthodoxy in American
Sovietology. Some on the political right, such as Polish-born Richard E. Pipes,
a professor of history at Harvard, see the consensus as ''slightly left of
center,'' as he put it. Others believe that academic debate about the Soviet
Union is focused by the political climate of the moment, that as American
attitudes have moved to the right, ''the aperture of permissible discussion''
has moved right as well, in the phrase of Michael MccGwire, formerly a British
naval attache in Moscow and now a specialist in Soviet military affairs at the
Brookings Institution in Washington. ''It's like a spotlight,'' he said. ''In
Russia, you have a spotlight of permissible discussion, but it's fixed. In
America, it swings.''

Nevertheless, knowledge about the Soviet Union breeds neither affection nor
unanimity among the American experts. They are fascinated by the Soviet system
but rarely attracted to it. They argue among themselves about Soviet intentions
and military capabilities, disagreeing on the most basic questions of whether
Moscow is inherently aggressive or defensive in its motivations.

Many students and experts dislike the Soviet system. ''That isn't necessarily
bad,'' said Marshall D. Shulman, director of the Harriman Institute at Columbia.
''If you train somebody who knows all the negative sides of it, he may be a
better reporter, he may be a better negotiator than somebody who is pro-Soviet.
The objective shouldn't be to make everybody pro-Soviet.''

The penalty for straying beyond the beam in the United States is to be ignored,
according to John Steinbruner, head of foreign policy studies at Brookings. ''It
is exceedingly difficult to get people to hear what you're saying if you're
outside of that,'' he said. Being outside these days means arguing that the
Soviet Government is complicated, makes decisions the way most organizations do
-in a chaotic and disorganized way - and operates mostly defensively to hold
onto what it has. The contrary assumption - that, despite its economic
weaknesses, the Soviet Union is a logical, dedicated, expansionist enemy - ''is
the governing theology of the age, like the tenets of faith of the 14th
century,'' Steinbruner declared. ''It's easy to be an apostate.''

There is a danger that if we accept our amalgam of images as the entire reality,
we cannot deal with the real Russians; we can deal only with our own fears.
Still, as I stood in my old high school, I saw a scattering of students in the
honors classes whose questioning skepticism set them apart from the crowd. I had
come back to my cloistered, homogeneous town wondering whether I would find the
mirror image of a group of Moscow teen-agers I once met. They were youngsters of
the elite - well-scrubbed, patriotic leaders of Komsomol, the Communist Youth
League - who thought their country was the font of all virtue and the United
States the focus of evil. They were comforted by the certainty of simplicity,
and they reminded me of my hometown, in which the world had seemed neatly
divided into good guys and bad guys.

The only heroes the Soviet students could think of were Lenin and Che Guevara,
and some of the Chatham youngsters were equally conformist. But the few
questioning Chatham kids were quite different from those Komsomol kids in Moscow
- and from most of their peers in Chatham - for their heroes included more than
models of toughness. They mentioned Martin Luther King, John F. Kennedy, Bishop
Desmond Tutu, Gandhi. They had a long list of wrongs to set right in the world,
a more searching and self-critical list -poverty, crime, racism, hunger, the
nuclear threat, and so on - than the Soviet students had given me. They were
ready to learn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Soviet boxer on Atlantic City Boardwalk (Adam J.
Stoltman/Duomo); Still from 1984 movie ''Red Dawn'' (Phototeque) (Page 34);
Photo of Soviet tanks on parade (Jasmin/Gamma-Liaison) (Page 35); Photo of
Soviet dissident Anatoly Shcharansky's wife at U.N. vigil (Ricki
Rosen/Sipa-Special Feature) (Page 36); Photo of anti-Soviet video-game screen
(Peter Silva/Picture Group) (Page 40); Phot

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


Here are two first novels, and let's start with THE COYOTE CRIED TWICE by Austin
Bay (Arbor House, $14.95). It is the story of a drifter, a young man who was a
helicopter pilot in Vietnam. Thumbing his way through Texas, he takes a ranch
job to tide him over. Strange things happen in the desert at night - auto
headlights where there should be none, low-flying planes on mysterious missions.
Then murder. The man who gave him the job and now is his best friend is
bushwhacked and killed. The drifter is promptly fired. But he has to find out
what happened and is almost murdered doing so.

There may be nothing unusual about the ingredients of ''The Coyote Cried
Twice,'' but there can be no denying the deftness with which the story is told.
Mr. Bay displays unusual competence. His writing moves alertly along, with a
minimum of padding. His characters are mostly men in a man's world, though a
tough woman - his boss, who owns the ranch - is portrayed as having as much
personality as the men. The drifter is no angel, but he is basically honest
(even considering what he does in the last five pages) and is the kind of man
you would want next to you in a dirty fight. There is no moral to the book, no
ethics or weighty issues. It is a story meant to entertain, and entertain it
does.

Jeremy Pikser's JUNK ON THE HILL (Carroll & Graf, $13.95) introduces a private
eye named Joe Posner. He lives in New Jersey and concentrates on divorce work. A
spoiled teen-age girl with rich parents hires him to recover a stolen necklace.
He has a strong internal debate about the propriety of taking the case, but
before he makes up his mind, the girl is murdered. The police say she has died
of an overdose of drugs. Posner knows better. He returns his advance to the
girl's parents and then, Don Quixote that he is, sets out to discover what
happened.

Basically, the book is about alienated youth and the high-school drug scene.
There also is a not very admiring look at progressive schools and corrupt
teachers. Everything in the book is competent, and no new ground is broken.
Posner is in the great line of private eyes in his pure ethics and his
determination to uncover the truth, even though he is next to broke and working
for nothing but his curiosity. All very standard. One thing, though - Posner is
not in the tough-guy tradition. Very careful, he is not a man with ready fists,
and when trouble is coming, he is even apt to run the other way.

The next two are additions to series. In MURDER SEES THE LIGHT by Howard Engel
(St. Martin's, $13.95), the adventures of Benny Cooperman continue. He is a
Canadian private eye, low-key but efficient and, when necessary, tough. He can
be surprisingly learned at times. He is also a nice Jewish boy with a nice
Jewish mother.

The locale is a fishing lodge in northern Ontario, where a Canadian-born
American evangelist is hiding out. He is the head of a prosperous church
awaiting a United States Supreme Court decision on tax evasion charges.
Cooperman is hired by a detective agency to keep an eye on him in case he jumps
the country. Then several people - not the evangelist - are killed, and there is
a nearly successful attempt on Cooperman's life.

As always, Mr. Engel writes well. The characters are real, and there is a
well-constructed plot. But the author indulges in a solecism that becomes a
mannerism. It appears on every second page or so - the misuse of ''like'' for
''as though.'' ''Valentine watched us from the high ground like we were the last
human beings he was likely to see for some time.'' An educated man like Benny
Cooperman (whose chess playing would appear to be on a master level) should not
speak as though he were talking to illiterates.

Ruth Rendell's Detective Chief Inspector Reginald Wexford is back in AN
UNKINDNESS OF RAVENS (Pantheon, $15.95). This prolific and critically acclaimed
British author writes in an understated style that almost always has an
undercurrent of menace. The book concerns a missing husband who months later is
found murdered. Investigation reveals some unpleasant things about his marital
arrangements and sexual preferences. Wexford also has to deal with a society of
young women who draw ravens with a woman's face on their arms. At the end there
is a good deal of psychiatric jargon. Mrs. Rendell has written better books.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Miss Piggy (NYT/Dith Pran)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOCTORING THE DEMOCRATS

BYLINE: By Michael Kramer; Michael Kramer is the political editor of New York
magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words


THE REAGAN DETOUR By Richard Reeves. 141 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $14.95.
CUTTING EDGES Making Sense of the Eighties. By Charles Krauthammer. 221 pp. New
York: Random House. $17.95.

ALMOST immediately after the 1968 election, politicians, journalists and
academics, all conditioned by eight years of Democratic control of the White
House, began asking if Richard Nixon's victory had been a fluke. Richard Reeves
asks the same question about our current President and answers with the title of
his book, ''The Reagan Detour.'' To Mr. Reeves, among the most perceptive and
accessible of political analysts, the liberal consensus that guided the
development of America's welfare state continues intact. President Reagan has
been unable ''to change very much about America,'' the author says. Mr. Reeves's
argument is supported by polls showing that Mr. Reagan was re-elected because
people voted their pocketbooks rather than their ideology.

Mr. Reeves is a pendulum theorist. He sees America forever swinging between the
often contradictory values of freedom and equality. Inevitably, and soon in his
view, the country will turn again to equality as it becomes shocked by the sight
of too many conspicuous poor after years of energetic free enterprise. ''Today's
consensus,'' says Mr. Reeves, will become ''tomorrow's contention.'' But this
doesn't mean that the Democrats can wait complacently and simply offer the old
prescriptions of the New Deal. Instead, he argues, the Democrats must ''create a
new context of ideas and issues.'' In foreign policy, which he rightly labels
the ''glamour zone'' of national politics, Mr. Reeves urges retreat - ''a
Democratic alternative to a foreign policy that begins with the assumption that
every sparrow that falls from every tree is America's business.''

Like Mr. Reeves, Charles Krauthammer - an elegant stylist whose clear thinking
shines in ''Cutting Edges: Making Sense of the Eighties'' - pines for a
Democratic renaissance, and largely for the same reason; he too would like a
more humane national Government. Unlike Mr. Reeves, however, when it comes to
foreign policy Mr. Krauthammer believes the proper road back would have the
Democrats at least as assertive as Ronald Reagan, and perhaps more so. Which
makes for an interesting contrast with Mr. Reeves, and helps explain why the
Democrats have found it difficult to capture the Presidency since the
mid-1960's. Mr. Krauthammer's ''liberal internationalism'' would put America
under almost every tree. It is not enough, in his mind, to be an interventionist
in the West and an isolationist in the third world.

As a true interventionist, Mr. Krauthammer believes America must stand for
something greater than the nation's physical security. Our nationalism is
different, he says, because we stand for the idea of freedom, a concept
transcending national interest. America, therefore, should commit itself to the
pursuit of freedom wherever it is threatened and wherever it seeks expression.
For conservatives, or in this case for neoliberals - as Mr. Krauthammer, who
writes for The New Republic, may be fairly labeled - to favor anything less is
to betray liberty, the value conservatives have traditionally cherished above
all others.

But it's the cases that matter, according to an article by Robert W. Tucker,
co-editor of The National Interest, a new conservative quarterly de-voted to
foreign policy. ''The issue is not the value of freedom,'' Mr. Tucker writes.
''Instead it is what power can accomplish in spreading freedom. It is also
whether universalizing freedom is a proper interest of foreign policy.'' To Mr.
Krauthammer, the answer is yes - and the battle, of course, is at the periphery,
in places like Central America. Ever consistent, he believes that if untended
the periphery soon becomes the center, and so when America does intervene the
price paid is greater.

Leaving aside the irony of role reversal - it was, after all, the traditional
Democrats who championed an interventionist policy until after the Vietnam War -
the central question remains: Was America merely voting its pocketbook when it
chose Mr. Reagan, as Mr. Reeves contends, or was it ratifying the end of one
political era and the beginning of another? Put another way, even if a Democrat
should recapture the Presidency, wouldn't he be constrained by a right-tilting
consensus?

What has really happened, it seems to me, is that while Democrats have fretted
over the evident limitations of late 20th-century America, the Republicans, and
Mr. Reagan in particular, have appropriated the rhetorical symbols and tenets
that characterized liberalism from roughly the middle 1930's to the early
1970's. The two faces of the conservative mood are the legacy of liberalism -
confidence to the verge of complacency about the perfectibility of American
society, and anxiety to the point of paranoia about the threat of Communism.

Mr. Reagan is quite happy to choose freedom over equality, and even happier that
he can invoke the memory of his Democratic predecessors while doing so. The
President, and the majority that supports him, know all about ''limits,'' but
they don't want to hear about them. So they traffic in the ancient verities,
although ''me first'' - and often last - is the calculation that controls
action. In practice, as Mr. Reeves points out, this hasn't meant an actual
rollback of the ''safety net'' for the very poor, merely a slowing in its rate
of growth, and a preference for a philosophy (deficit spending) and programs
(like Social Security and Medicare) that not only were the hallmarks of
Democratic politics but that serve primarily the middle class. S INCE Mr. Reagan
has assiduously protected this group, which usually provides the voters who
decide elections, the shock of recognition Mr. Reeves foresees seems a long way
off. It is not that the polls are invalid. They simply ignore the context. It is
not that the majority defends war or racism or even the status quo. It is that
it doesn't disapprove of them strongly enough to believe that ultimate remedies,
like the scaling down of America's foreign commitments or redistributive
taxation, are demanded by the state of events.

These voters, whom Kevin Phillips has labeled ''temporary conservatives,'' are
the people for whom, in Mr. Reeves's phrase, ''America works.'' Once these
people were the heart of the Democratic party. Now they have been abandoned, or
feel abandoned, because their traditional political home has been taken over by
the groups and interests that used to be at the periphery, the poor and the
minorities for whom Democratic principles have worked. Last year the Democrats
tried appealing to ''fairness'' as a winning issue. But the public read
Democratic fairness as meaning more for the periphery - for the poor and
minorities. The Republicans, meanwhile, had their own version of fairness - that
the poor and minorities were already receiving more than their fair share.

The Democrats are in a bind. If they forget their commitment to programs like
affirmative action, they risk losing their new center, with no guarantee that
their old one will return. But, as both Mr. Reeves and Mr. Krauthammer agree,
the day of reckoning cannot be postponed indefinitely. Sooner or later the
Democrats must choose. And if they hope to regain the Presidency, they had best
lean to the old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWEST RESEARCH IDEAS COMING FROM CENTERS

BYLINE: By Steven Muller; Steven Muller is president of the Johns Hopkins
University.

SECTION: Section 12; Page 73, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 1317 words


AT Johns Hopkins today, and presumably at the nation's other major research
universities as well, every interesting idea being advanced cuts across existing
disciplines and draws on scholarship from several departments -sometimes,
indeed, from several colleges.

Lawyers, mathematicians and economics now work together to contain hospital
costs. Astrophysicists are working with chemists to study the earth's
atmosphere. Philosophers may soon be collaborating with linguists,
psychologists, neurologists and engineers to probe the secrets of the brain.
Such ventures represent the cutting edge of research in higher education today.
They also represent a fundamental challenge to the internal structure of the
contemporary research university.

That structure is relatively new. For many centuries, universities functioned
mainly to transmit - but not expand -knowledge and old truths. The old
university had faculties in philosophy, law, and medicine, with specialization
centered on a few senior professorial chairs. Only after the Enlightement was
the university set free from the bonds of religious orthodoxy and transformed
into an institution of unfettered inquiry. As late as 1877, a professor at
Amherst College was removed for teaching biology as a science and not ''as an
absolutely dependent product of an absolutely independent and spiritual
creator.''

In 1876, Johns Hopkins University became the first American university dedicated
to graduate research and advanced study. It was built around the fundamental
concepts of the modern university: that knowledge is not static and already
known, but is instead a process of inquiry and discovery, that learning and
teaching are a joint search and that freedom is essential because the results of
the search for truth and knowledge can never be known in advance.

With the redefinition of scholarship as inquiry, specializations flourished, and
scientists frequently found themselves crossing academic boundaries when they
needed the fresh perspective of a colleague. New sciences like biochemistry and
astrophyics were created, a process that was hastened by the introduction of new
instruments. Full exploitation of the spectroscope, for example, required
chemists, physicists and astronomers.

New Disciplines Flourish

The fragmentation of knowledge has continued, resulting in new disciplines such
as sociobiology and psycholinguistics. Sometimes such new specialties are
accommodated within existing departments; but while departments can and do
change direction, changes in the nature and content of knowledge are
increasingly challenging the traditional departmental structure. The quest for
new knowledge demands new combinations of academic expertise. As enhanced
knowledge strives for intellectual coherence, fault lines between
departmentalized disciplines shift and groan with portents of an organizational
earthquake.

Universities have thus increasingly begun to create multidisciplinary academic
centers, programs and institutes. These are not small sub-efforts within
departments, but larger superstructures that pool the talent of many
departments. For example, Johns Hopkins recently created a Center for
Astrophysical Sciences, which brings together faculty and researchers from the
departments of chemistry, earth and planetary sciences, physics and astronomy
and from the Space Telescope Science Institute on the Hopkins campus. In one
joint venture, chemists and physicists are studying energetic particles in the
earth's upper atmosphere. In another, scientists from two departments are
studying the atmospheres of other planets.

At our Center for the Nondestructive Evaluation of Materials, engineers and
scientists from several departments are devising techniques to study the
condition of materials, from surgical implants to nylon rope, without destroying
them. And in the Pediatric Brain Tumor Group, social workers, psychologists,
physicians, technicians and others work in teams to treat sick children.

Research Individualized

A related trend is the individualization of research that has became a hallmark
of Federal research sponsorship. The explosion of scientific and technical
knowledge during and following the second World War was driven by
national-security needs and fueled by billions of Federal dollars, and the
Federal agencies that sponsor research, such as the National Institutes of
Health and the National Science Foundation, have adopted a system of individual
competition for support, awarded by a process of peer review. The agencies did
this on the advice of the scientific community, and the system is splendidly
open to all and based on merit.

Once the researcher has a grant, the university saves whatever part of the
researcher's salary that can be charged to the grant. Both the university and
the researcher become dependent on the grant and successor grants for salary
support. And in return for some departmental support engendered by the grant,
the department helps the researcher administer the grant. As a result, in plain
truth, universities do not conduct research; rather they harbor it. And the
''it'' they harbor is a multiplicity of individual investigators, often paddling
their own canoes or loosely moored in their departments, but more or less
compelled to be on their own.

The problem is that this virtuous and largely manageable system nevertheless
discourages interdisciplinary cooperation. Two or more researchers, each with a
separate grant, may find it complex to collaborate, especially if their grants
are anchored in different departments. The system also tends to reward
individual rather than cooperative achievement. And at the same time, the system
reinforces the department, if only for administrative rather than academic
reasons.

Today, research support from the Federal Government is shrinking, having run
into two major problems: unaffordable costs, and the gradual end of the nation's
mobilization of universities for national defense, a trend that began in the
second World War, lasted through the cold war and waned after Vietnam.

According to a current study by the American Association of Universities, the
typical university investigator in 1970 needed $8,000 of equipment and access to
departmental equipment costing $116,500. By 1979, these figures had climbed to
$43,850 for the investigator and $741,000 for the department.

Industry Steps In

Federal funding of university research has not kept pace. American industry,
however, confronted with worldwide competition, now has greater need than ever
for trained graduates from major research universities. And although American
industry has not stepped in completely to fill the gap left by the Federal
Government, key companies in certain fields -notably pharmaceuticals,
electronics and biotechnology -have recently begun a selective process of large
new investments in university research and training.

Federal sponsors - to their credit - have frequently been persuaded to support
research for its own sake. For-profit corporate sponsors are usually more
task-oriented. Moreover, industrial corporations may prefer to deal with the
university as a whole rather than with a multitude of individual researchers.

At this point, then, the American major research university confronts, ever more
sharply, a structural crisis. The progress of knowledge and the urgent need for
support demand multidisciplinary reintegration and collaboration, while the
existing structure is departmentalized and excessively individualized.

An enormous, and still undigested, expansion has largely committed the
university to one response pattern oriented to the Federal Government as the
predominant sponsor. Now, diversity of sponsorship and the integrity of research
itself demand a reorientation. The process will be onerous and controversial. It
cannot, however, be avoided.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: SPECIAL SECTION

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 18, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words


TWO years ago, H. Bruce Franklin of Montclair, a professor of English at
Rutgers-Newark, found himself, he recalled in a recent interview, ''making my
usual complaint about a course on Vietnam that I teach here: that no adequate
documentary history of the war that tore this nation apart for over 10 years was
readily available in one volume.''

This was not the first time that Dr. Franklin had objected to what he calls
''the Americanization of the Vietnam War.'' His name should ring familiar, he
went on, to those who might remember how his appointment to Rutgers in 1975
caused a flurry of excitement.

''Previous to arriving here, I had been dismissed by Stanford [University] for
giving speeches protesting its direct involvement in the war,'' Dr. Franklin
said. ''Looking back now, I realize how much the American people had learned
during the war and how drastically these lessons are now being expunged.''

''Vietnam and America: A Documented History,'' co-edited by Dr. Franklin and his
wife, Jane; Marvin E. Gettleman and Marilyn Young (Grove Press, New York,
$22.50; paper, $11.95), a valuable anthology of crucial texts and records,
tersely replays the bitter conflict that cost more than 58,000 American lives.
(Mrs. Franklin is also the author of ''Cuban Foreign Relations, A Chronology:
1959-1982'' (Center for Cuban Studies, 124 West 23d Street, New York 10011, $7.)
The once-so-familiar words abounding in ''Vietnam and America'' -
''self-determination,'' ''Ngo Dinh Diem regime,'' ''Tet offensive,'' ''agrarian
reform,'' ''peace initiative'' and ''escalation'' - call up brutal memories.

''We end the book with the Vietnamese victory of 1975,'' Dr. Franklin said,
''but the war is still with us and, in some senses, still goes on.''

''Gems of New Jersey,'' by Gordon Bishop (New Jersey Business & Industry
Association, P.O. Box 230, 102 West State Street, Trenton, N.J. 08602, $19.95),
extolls almost every facet of the good life in New Jersey, from adult
communities, animals, architecture, arts and aviation to trails, utilities,
wildlife, wineries and zoos.

Mr. Bishop, who lives in Eatontown, originally wrote the illustrated 372-page
book as a series for The Newark Star-Ledger, for which he has been a reporter
since 1969.

Among other plaudits, Mr. Bishop hails Atlantic City as ''America's top tourist
attraction,'' adding that ''the world's longest and original Boardwalk . . . has
become a gleaming gold coast of modern and historic casino-hotels and convention
centers overlooking smooth, sandy beaches and rhythmic whitecaps breaking in a
visually endless ocean.''

A counterpoint to the Bishop book is ''The New Jersey Shore: A Vanishing
Splendor,'' a photographic text by Tova Navarra of Howell Township (Art Alliance
Press, 440 Forsgate Drive, Cranbury, N.J. 08512, $20), which deplores the
demolition of landmarks in Atlantic City and its environs.

''Though visitors still come, the shore's elegant life style has crumbled into
history,'' writes Mrs. Navarra in recounting the demise of palatial hotels like
the Traymore in 1972 and the Marlborough-Blenheim in 1979.

In the foreword, Frank J. Esposito of Ocean, vice president of academic affairs
at Kean College in Union, calls the book ''a part of the Jersey shore which has
not been detailed before in any book . . . a story worth telling.''

It is hoped, he writes, that it will ''spur New Jerseyans to preserve the many
historical and architectural gems which remain.''

Mrs. Navarra's book does preserve the right of personal expression and, although
one might not be exhilarated by a photograph of sewer pipes waiting to be
installed in Barnegat, her more than 80 pictures of seashore natives, tourists,
architecture and amusements fully indulge what she calls her ''objective,''
namely:

''To show slices of shore-community life at best and at worst because life is a
series of those slices in something of a manic sense.''

The New Jersey Romance Writers will hold their second annual ''Fall in Love''
workshop for both experienced and aspiring writers Saturday at the Coach and
Four Restaurant in the Town House Motel, Hightstown (Exit 8 of the New Jersey
Turnpike).

The seven-hour session gets under way at 9:15 A.M.

The featured speakers include well-known editors, agents and authors, who will
discuss topics such as ''What Publishers Are Looking For'' and will be available
throughout the day for interviews.

Susan Elizabeth Phillips, nominated by Romantic Times magazine as ''the best new
historical author,'' is the keynote speaker.

Reservations are required. The $45 fee includes lunch.

Information: Bernice Picard at (609) 429-3685 days or Rainy Anderson at (609)
267-103 evenings.

For a variety of reasons, not necessarily culinary, ''The Day Before Payday
Cookbook,'' by William J. Hincher (Pex Publishing, 117 Kingsley Way, Freehold
N.J. 07728, $10.99 postpaid), is an attractive collection of recipes coming
''primarily from wives of military men in the service of the U.S.A.''

Mr. Hincher, who lives in Freehold, spent 20 years in the Air Force in countries
around the world. Since 1959, he has been the owner of Pex Publishing, which
specializes in highly technical dictionaries.

In the interest of preparing ''delicious foods with an eye toward the economies
of the budget,'' Mr. Hincher includes in his book old-time favorites like
''Creamed Beef on Toast'' (G.I.'s had another name for it) and ''The Eisenhower
Chocolate Cake,'' as well as ''The Day Before Payday Meal,'' which he figures
currently costs about $1.20 a serving.

It's not too early, at least not for publishers, to think of offering new
calendars. None is likely to be more indigenous than the ''NJ & You 1986
Calendar'' (Newark Museum Publications Department, P.O. Box 540, Newark, N.J
07101, $8.95 postpaid).

Chosen from 1,000 entries, its 13 color photographs prove that, as the new year
approaches, the state has never looked more beautiful. The cover picture, ''An
Autumn Stroll in Verona Park,'' a glimpse of an enchanted forest, was taken by
Dr. Bernard Huang, a North Caldwell dentist.

It should be a great year for the calendar collector who receives any of the
following from Main Street Press, William Case House, Pittsdown, N.J. 08867:

''American Victorian 1986,'' by Lawrence Grow and Dina von Zweck, a re-creation
of the Gilded Age, $6.95; ''Dolls 1986,'' by Jean Bach, also $6.95;
''Quilts/86,'' an oversize work (16 by 32 inches when open), by Phyllis Haders,
$9.95, and ''The Mystery and Suspense Engagement Calendar 1986,'' by Basil
Santoine, for the ''whodunit addict,'' $7.95.

Impressive within and without, ''The American Heritage Century Desk Calendar
1986'' (Houghton Mifflin, New York, $14.95), excites and enriches our historic
awareness by pointing with pictures to what was going on exactly a century ago.
Thus, in January 1886:

''Following the biting of four Newark children,'' later ''rushed to Paris and
successfully treated by Louis Pasteur, . , . Newark police were given orders to
shoot on sight all unmuzzled animals found running at large.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KIND WORDS FROM THE PRINCE ON MUCH-ALIGNED ANCESTOR

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


The Prince of Wales held a rare news conference today, decreeing that his wife
finds John Travolta to be a good dancer and that he finds George III to be a
better King than Americans might admit.

''King George III had a bit of a raw deal in history,'' Prince Charles said in
politely contradicting what he called ''propaganda'' about his forebear, who was
denounced as a tyrant by the American revolutionaries. ''I think slowly but
surely people are realizing he wasn't such an ogre as they made out.''

Facing questioners with a gentle precision, the heir apparent to the British
throne deftly handled the one nonhistorical question on everyone's mind: how did
his wife enjoy dancing with Mr. Travolta, who starred in ''Saturday Night
Fever,'' on Saturday night in the White House state dining room?

As the band played the theme from the movie, other dancers on the floor stopped
to watch the blonde Princess and dark-haired actor offer a whirling, syncopated
display of charming touch-dancing described as flawless by witnesses.

Attempting an answer today at the National Gallery of Art, the Prince smiled and
glanced back at the Princess. She remained silent, eyes down, fighting a smile
that blossomed on her lips.

''She would be an idiot if she didn't enjoy dancing with John Travolta, wouldn't
she?'' he said, after first disavowing any intent of speaking for her. He looked
back at her again, inquiring whether the answer was correct, and received
another shy smile of very clear assent. After the dance, Mr. Travolta had
praised his royal partner. ''I found her refreshing and down to earth,'' he
said. ''She has style and rhythm.'' The Prince, describing the dinner as ''the
greatest possible fun,'' seemed pleased to have navigated past a matter
threatening to take on global importance as the press corps scrambled through
the day for details.

''How many of you manage to reply in behalf of your wife like this on these
occasions and then get beaten up afterwards for getting it wrong?'' Prince
Charles asked, drawing laughter.

The Prince and Princess had just spent 90 minutes touring ''Treasure Houses of
Britain,'' an exhibition of more than 700 works of art and furnishings from 200
country estate houses in Britain.

The show, packed with silver furniture, a fortune in assorted heirlooms of
books, drawings, tapestry, jewelry and china, and works by Holbein, Titian, El
Greco, Rembrandt, Rubens and dozens of others, was described the Prince as
''quite dramatic.''

Charles, a patron of the show, invited Americans to visit it before it is
disbanded in March. ''I only hope they manage to get all the pieces back in the
right places,'' he said Saturday night at the White House dinner.

Services at Cathedral

Before the museum tour, the royal couple attended morning services at Washington
Cathedral as crowds watched outside. The Episcopal Bishop of Washington, John
Walker, surveying the friendly interest in the visitors, at one point speculated
whether the American Revolution might come unraveled ''if the Prince said, 'All
is forgiven, come home.' ''

In the service, Charles read from Isaiah 35:10 on the coming of God: ''They
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.''

The Prince and Princess then set off for the next event on their schedule, an
afternoon journey into the hill country of Virginia for a private luncheon at
Oak Spring, the Uppervale estate of Paul Mellon, the millionaire Anglophile.
This evening they attended a dinner with Vice President Bush and his wife,
Barbara, among others, at the British Embassy residence.

The capital was at its autumnal best for the royal tourists. It was quiet, with
strollers watching the leaves fall to earth through warm sunshine. The city was
resting before another week of work at the endless agenda of postcolonial
government: nuclear weapons talks, the approaching summit meeting, the
mushrooming deficit, defecting spies.

Fighting the Wind

Nearby, the Prince toured the old British treasures. As he paced and studied
what amounted to five centuries of his family history, crowds of Americans
waited outside to cheer the sight of him, and they pointed when the Princess'
big, saucer-shaped hat threatened to take off into the wind.

Virtually unnoticed was the nightlong approach of the thousands of people here
to commemorate Veterans Day on Monday. As is now habit, hundreds of them
congregated at the Vietnam War Memorial, many in old battle fatigues, and they
touched the black marble wall at the etched names of the beloved dead. Rock
music of the 1960's twanged from a loudspeaker.

The Prince seemed fairly at ease at his news conference. He took care with his
reply as he denied playing a hard ''salesman's'' role in promoting the British
art show today and journeying to a J. C. Penney department store Monday to
celebrate a nationwide sales campaign for imports from Britain. ''I think it
might be a bit embarrassing for people to know whether I was a salesman or
whatever,'' he said, a faint sigh audible in his baritone. ''It's a bit
difficult, really.''

Near the end of what British reporters said was the Prince's first free-form
news conference in several years, he admitted he was still suffering jet lag.
''We'll survive,'' he said, smiling and toying with a small bandage on his right
pinkie, an aftereffect of a recent polo match. ''It's all in the breeding, you
know.''

In Regard to the Dance

In discussing his campaign to refurbish George III's reputation, the Prince
noted that similar efforts by modern historians here and in Britain ''haven't
managed to succeed so far.'' This revisionist view of history holds that George
was personally popular but got caught in the pressures created by Parliament's
demands on the colonies and so became an easy target of denunciation in the
Declaration of Independence.

But the Prince was quick to put aside any centuries-old differences. ''All I can
say is we're both enormously touched by such a display of friendliness,'' he
said of his welcoming, as Michael Cole, the BBC's Court correspondent, prepared
to arise and face his Prince with the question carefully crafted in concert with
other British correspondents, the question of the dance.

''Well done,'' Mr. Cole was told by his peers in the news pack after the
conference as they hurried off to write more of the Princess' stepping with the
actor.

A few hours later Michael Shea, the royal spokesman, was asked whether there
would also be dancing at the British Embassy this evening.

''No dancing, and Mr. Travolta has not been invited, and this is not intended as
a snub,'' he replied. It will be a grand hour for American polo tomorrow when
the Prince visits Florida for a match. Page C8.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A TOWN HAILS ITS VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: WALLINGFORD, Conn., Nov. 10


A decade after the end of the Vietnam War, this town welcomed home its Vietnam
veterans with a parade down Center Street today.

Drum majorettes tossed batons, a high-school band played ''America the
Beautiful'' and small boys climbed trees to watch. The veterans who marched,
many with their eyes glistening from emotion, grinned and waved to acknowledge
the applause.

For many of the veterans, the parade marked a reconciliation with a town - as
well as a society at large -that they said had not given them recognition.

''It feels good - it's the first time a lot of these guys have ever come out,''
said John Henninger. In 1966, Mr. Henninger left his job at a local steel mill
to serve with the Air Force. He was wounded at Pleiku during the Tet offensive.

Ignored and Scorned

Wallingford, a town of 37,000 with a large blue-collar population about 15 miles
north of New Haven, sent 676 men and women to Vietnam. Twelve of the men died
there.

From 1961 to 1975, the veterans returned to Wallingford, many said today, only
to be ignored at best and scorned at worst.

''I felt like an oddity,'' said Kenneth Polanski, who served two tours with the
Army. ''It was hard to get a date because I was a Vietnam vet. People thought
that funny and strange.''

''There were no bands playing, no nothing - it was like you had been working
somewhere else and had come back,'' said David P. Ciosek, who flew attack
helicopters for the Army in Vietnam.

Last year, some of the veterans banded together to build a Vietnam memorial on
Main Street. The memorial is to be dedicated Monday.

Initial Opposition

At first, the veterans ran into opposition from the older generation of
veterans, men who had served in the Korean War and World War II.

''I was told that losers don't get anything,'' said Mr. Polanski, recalling a
conversation at a veterans club in town.

But soon, they also discovered a growing sentiment of good feelings toward the
Vietnam veteran.

Determined to build a monument of their own design, the veterans refused to take
any government money. And, after 10 months of dances, suppers, tag sales, car
washes, ham raffles and sales of T-shirts, they raised the $80,000 needed for
the monument. Local artisans donated $20,000 more of in-kind services.

A Symbolic Tilt

''An estimated 20,000 people donated money,'' said Charles Park, a former medic
in Vietnam, and now the director of the Wallingford Vietnam Memorial Committee.

Engraved with the names of all the townspeople who served in the war, the
V-shaped monument of black Pennsylvania granite stands 11 feet high and tilts at
a 30-degree angle. Mr. Polanski, who designed the memorial, said that the two,
seven-ton slabs were set in the ground at an angle to symbolize an inconclusive
end to an undeclared war.

The veterans' names are listed in the order of their return. The names of the
dead are highlighted in gold leaf and are interspersed with those of the living.

''They are amongst us as if we were in a firefight and they are lying there
dead,'' said Mr. Polanski.

Hundreds have already visited the memorial, set at the end of a park that has a
Civil War statue.

Tears Before the Parade

''I go there almost every morning - to me it means everything,'' said Mrs. Miris
Miglierina, whose son Robert was killed in Vietnam in October 1968.

''They were just thrown out there in the wilderness and forgotten,'' Mrs.
Miglierina said of the soldiers. ''Then, they came back one by one, a few at a
time, as if they were nobody.''

This morning, before the parade, grown men stood by the finished monument,
brushing aside tears.

''I just found my name - it's very moving,'' Paul M. Donahue, a certified public
accountant, said. ''Time heals a lot of things. Now, people want to understand
the people, not the issues.''

Marching in Fatigues

''This parade was long overdue,'' said Quentin Goodrich, commander of the local
Veterans of Foreign War post. Mr. Goodrich, who helped organize the parade, said
the post had contributed about $5,000 to the memorial.

''I feel very warm in my heart about this,'' said Deborah Garlick, whose
husband, Edward, marched today. She said that, when she married, she did not
know Mr. Garlick had been in Vietnam.

''When he came back, he was called a lot of names - he didn't want to talk about
it,'' she said.

About 50 veterans marched in remants of combat fatigues - old field jackets,
rain hats and combat boots. Behind them came a flatbed trailer carrying their
children.

As the veterans neared the end of their two-and-a-half-mile march, an older man
stood up and waved a sign reading ''Welcome Home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of marchers in parade (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ROUTE OF JET IN CRASH OVER JERSEY THAT KILLED 6 IS CALLED 'UNUSUAL'

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1964 words


The corporate jet that collided with a small plane over New Jersey Sunday was on
an ''unusual, nonstandard'' course for its intended landing at Teterboro
Airport, an official close to an investigation of the crash said yesterday.

A more usual course for a landing approach, the official said, would have put
the plane, a Falcon 50 Executive Jet, two miles west of the spot where it and a
single-engine Piper Cherokee collided and plunged in flames into Fairview and
Cliffside Park, small communities across the Hudson River from the Upper West
Side of Manhattan. The crash killed six people, one of them on the ground. It
was unclear whether the jet's unusual route was taken at the direction of the
Teterboro control tower. Asked at a news conference last night if the jet was
''too far east,'' James E. Burnett Jr., the chairman of the National
Transportation Safety Board, said he did not know because he had not studied the
plane's radar track.

A Visual Sighting

The official who told of the unusual course, speaking on the condition that he
not be named, also suggested that the jet's pilot, in reporting a visual
sighting of the Cherokee to the Teterboro tower just before the crash, might
have seen a third aircraft that he mistook for the small plane, or else may have
lost sight of the plane.

It was after sunset, with the light fading, and the area was busy with air
traffic at the time, the official said. And he noted that, from an aviation
standpoint, it was difficult to understand how a pilot could collide with
another aircraft that he had in sight.

Six people - two pilots aboard the jet, a pilot and two passengers aboard the
Cherokee, and a person on the ground - were killed when the planes collided,
then broke apart and plunged into densely populated neighborhoods, touching off
fires and panic, at about 5:20 P.M., about a half-hour after the sun went down.

Three bodies were recovered from the wreckage of the Cherokee in Fairview Sunday
night. Three more bodies were found yesterday in the rubble of six buildings in
Cliffside Park. Two of the buildings were leveled by the impact of the jet and
four were destroyed in the fires that followed the crash.

The bodies found in the Cherokee -those of Henry Nocha Sr., whose age was not
available, and his wife, Lucia, 51 years old, of Brooklyn, and a pilot whose
name was not immediately released - were taken to the Bergen County Morgue.

Two other bodies - believed to be those of Gregory L. Miller, 36, of Danbury,
Conn., the pilot of the jet, and Alan K. Stitt, 31, of Highlands, N.J., his
co-pilot - were recovered yesterday during the day.

At about 6:30 P.M. a third body was pulled from the rubble, according to Lieut.
Bruce Ardolino of the Cliffside Park police. The lieutenant said no
identification would be made until an autopsy was performed today.

Rescue teams had been searching with a crane and bulldozers for the body of
Abdul Taha, 34, a machine operator in a plastics factory, who was believed to
have been sleeping inside the building at 228 Cliff Street, one of those that
was leveled.

Others Injured

Mr. Taha, who was married and had four children, had passed up a family outing,
relatives told the police. Eight other people were injured, two seriously, as
they fled from the fire and debris that hurtled down on a half-dozen locations
in the two communities.

State police officials said it was miraculous that more people on the ground had
not been killed. They said that 20 of the 34 residents of the six destroyed
buildings were not home at the time of the crash; of the 14 others, 13 -all but
Mr. Taha - were known to have fled to safety.

Many questions about the movements of the planes and the causes of the collision
remained unanswered yesterday as investigators for the National Transportation
Safety Board impounded the pilots' taped conversations with the tower, searched
for clues in wreckage that had been strewn over a 20-block area and interviewed
six people who witnessed the accident from the ground.

Board officials refused to discuss the accounts of the witnesses or to give any
information about the planes' speeds, direction of travel at the time of the
collision and other aspects of their ongoing inquiry. ''We know the two aircraft
came together, and that's it,'' Ira J. Furman, a spokesman for the seven-member
Federal investigating team, said during the afternoon. He said it might take
weeks to determine the cause of the crash.

But Mr. Burnett, in a briefing last night, gave a few details. He said the crash
occurred at an altitude of about 1,500 feet as the Cherokee flew a level course
and the corporate jet, owned by Nabsico Brands Inc., made a descending left turn
in the shape of a loop in preparation for a landing at Teterboro.

''It was during that turn that the collision occurred,'' Mr. Burnett said. He
said the last radar blips had shown the Falcon at 1,600 feet and descending, and
the Cherokee level at 1,500 feet.

He said investigators were searching for a cockpit voice-recorder from the jet,
which may have recorded conversations between the pilot and the co-pilot.
Control tower recordings, he said, showed that the Cherokee pilot had said he
was ''transiting'' the area and gave his destination ambiguously as ''Hudson.''
It was unclear whether this meant the Hudson River or some other location.

The officials said, however, that there was no immediate evidence that either
pilot had violated navigation procedures in the crowded airspace around
Teterboro Airport.

In Contact With Tower

Officials of the Federal Aviation Administration said that both pilots had been
in radio contact with the tower at Teterboro, four miles west of the crash site,
and that each had been told to watch out for the other.

''The Falcon acknowledged seeing the Cherokee,'' said Mira Rosen, a spokesman
for the F.A.A. ''The Cherokee did not acknowledge seeing the Falcon, but did
acknowledge receiving the transmission.''

Reconstructing the planes' movements, Federal officials and executives of
Nabisco Brands, based in East Hanover, N.J., said that the Falcon - which was
made in France by Dassault-Breguet, can seat 12 and has three turbo-fan jets in
the tail - had left Morristown Airport and was bound for Teterboro. The jet was
to pick up five Nabisco executives for a flight to Toronto, where a subsidiary,
Nabisco Brands Ltd., has offices.

At the controls was Mr. Miller, Nabisco's chief pilot, who had been employed by
the company since August 1980. Mr. Miller, who, with his wife, Eileen, had two
children, Kim, 15, and Stephen, 14, had served as a Navy pilot in Vietnam and
had a total of 9,000 hours of flying time.

Mr. Miller's co-pilot, Mr. Stitt, who was married but had no children, had been
employed by Nabisco only since last May. Before that, a Nabisco spokesman said,
he had been employed as a Lear Jet captain with Midatlantic Airways. He had a
total of 4,350 hours of flying time.

A Short Trip

The trip to Teterboro, which was only 18 miles to the east, took only a few
minutes, officials said. While the airport was slightly north of due east, the
jet would have taken a slightly more northerly route to intercept a traffic
beacon.

The Cherokee left the Essex County Airport at Fairfield at about 5 P.M. Owned by
Air Pegasus, a 70-member private flying club, the single-engine, four-seat
propeller-driven plane was restricted to use by club members. Its destination
was uncertain because it had not filed a flight plan, as the jet's pilot had.

The Cherokee's course, like that of the jet, took it eastward, toward Teterboro,
and its pilot checked in with the control tower as the plane neared the airport.
The pilot, officials said, told the tower he planned to fly across the airport's
airspace at an altitude of about 1,500 feet.

A Five-Mile Radius

The pilot later reported having passed to the east of the airport's control
space, defined as a circle of about a five-mile radius from the center of the
field.

While the Falcon jet had made its trip under instrument flight rules, its pilot
and the pilot of the Cherokee were flying on visual flight rules, requiring them
to look out for other aircraft, as they drew near to Teterboro Airport.

Although investigators declined to comment officially on the final movements of
the planes, one official said the Falcon jet had taken an ''unusual,
nonstandard'' course in making his approach for a landing.

After flying over the airport in a southeasterly direction, he said, a standard
approach would have been to turn left quite near the airport - perhaps only a
mile or two to the east -and swing around to approach a north-south runway from
the north.

Wider Than Ordinary

The plane evidently made the left turn, the official said, but did so in a wider
than ordinary swing toward the north. That wider swing brought the Falcon jet
two to three miles farther east - over the Fairview-Cliffside Park area where
the collision occurred.

The Falcon's altitude, between 1,600 and 1,500 feet, was appropriate for traffic
approaching a landing at Teterboro, the official said. But it also happened to
be the approximate altitude of the Cherokee passing through the traffic pattern.
The official said the tower informed both planes of the other's presence in the
area.

It did so by telling the jet's pilot that there was traffic at ''11 to 12
o'clock'' -a position relative to the jet's nose, or just to the left of it.
Similarly, the tower informed the pilot of the Cherokee that he had traffic at
''6 o'clock'' - or directly behind it.

Visual Separation

The jet's pilot replied that he had the traffic in sight, the official said, but
there was no similar response from the Cherokee. The tower then instructed the
Cherokee to maintain visual separation with the jet.

Communications with the two planes was interrupted at 5:22 P.M., presumably the
time of the collision.

It was not clear which plane hit the other, or whether both came together on
converging paths. Witnesses Sunday gave conflicting accounts, some saying the
planes were flying alongside one another and others saying the larger jet seemed
to overtake and hit the smaller plane from above and behind.

Besides these uncertainties, the speeds of the planes were not known. Since the
collision occurred as the sky was darkening, other key questions included
whether the lights of both planes were working and switched on. There was also a
question whether the Falcon's pilot had actually seen the Cherokee, or had
glimpsed another plane in the busy air-traffic area.

There were no indications that the controller at Teterboro Airport did anything
wrong, officials said. The controller was not identified publicly. The field, an
825-acre facility used since 1914, is a base for 450 noncommercial aircraft
ranging from two-seaters to corporate jets seating up to 30 passengers.

Travel by corporate jet has been increasing rapidly and has been considered less
safe in the last two years than travel by commercial airlines, according to the
National Business Aircraft Association, a Washington-based organization that
represents 3,000 companies and individuals that own corporate jets.

The association said that in 1984, corporate aircraft had an accident record of
0.248 per 100,000 hours of air travel, or about one in 400,000 hours. In
contrast, commercial airliners had an accident rate of 0.164 per 100,000 hours,
or less than one in more than 600,000 hours. Both are about half the accident
rates for 1983.

On the edge of three big commercial airports - Kennedy International and La
Guardia in New York and Newark International - Teterboro is New Jersey's second
largest airport and is heavily used by executives going to and from New York
City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of wing of plane that fell on Anderson Ave. in Fairview, N.J.
(NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT STRESSES STRENGTH IN RITES FOR VETERANS

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


President Reagan marked Veterans Day today by paying emotional homage to the
nation's war dead and declaring that the ''surest way to keep a peace going is
to stay strong.''

In a hushed Arlington National Cemetery where soldiers and veterans were
gathered, Mr. Reagan said, ''Perhaps we can start by remembering this:

''That all of those who died for us and our country were, in one way or another,
victims of a peace process that failed; victims of a decision to forget certain
things; to forget, for instance, that the surest way to keep a peace going is to
stay strong.

'Weakness, after all, is a temptation - it tempts the pugnacious to assert
themselves. But strength is a declaration that cannot be misunderstood.''

Ceremonies at Arlington

His remarks were delivered to about 6,000 people attending brief ceremonies
marking Veterans Day at the vast cemetery across the Potomac from Washington.
Later, the Prince and Princess of Wales also laid a wreath at the Tomb of the
Unknown Soldier.

Meanwhile, others marked Veterans Day throughout the area in ways that ranged
from enjoying a Federal holiday to visiting the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

In a separate ceremony before a crowd of about 2,500 at the Vietnam Memorial on
the Mall, speakers asserted that the national turmoil over that war has made all
Americans who came of age in the decade that ended in 1975 ''veterans of
Vietnam,'' whether they were military or civilian.

Mr. Reagan began by laying a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier before
delivering the address in the marbled amphitheater overloooking row upon row of
graves of United States serviceman. At one point, he said of the scene:

''We're surrounded today by the dead of our wars. We owe them a debt we can
never repay. All we can do is remember them, and what they did, and why they had
to be brave for us. All we can do is try to see that other young men never have
to join them.''

Reagan Stresses Strength

Mr. Reagan has favored steep increases in military spending to upgrade the
nation's defenses and, in effect, he used today's ceremony to argue the merits
of that policy.

''Strength is a condition that declares actions have consequences,'' he said.
''Strength is a prudent warning to the belligerent that aggression need not go
unanswered.''

At the same time, he said that peace fails ''when we forget what we stand for''
and it is imperiled ''when we forget to try for agreements.'' It also fails
''when we forget that agreements, once made, cannot be broken without a price,''
he said.

Mr. Reagan, who is to meet next Tuesday in Geneva with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the
Soviet leader, made a veiled reference to the coming summit meeting when he
said, ''Peace also fails when we forget to bring to the bargaining table God's
first intellectual gift to man - common sense.''

Summit Attitude Hinted

''Common sense gives us a realistic knowledge of human beings and how they
think, how they live in the world, what motivates him,'' he said. ''Common sense
tells us that man has magic in him, but also clay.''

Referring to the meeting more directly, Mr. Reagan said that the importance of
Veterans Day would be ''in the forefront of my mind and my heart'' when he saw
Mr. Gorbachev.

At times, Mr. Reagan's voice choked with emotion as he recalled how Gen. Matthew
Ridgway lay awake and listened for encouraging words from God the night before
the D-Day invasion. The general wanted to hear the promise that God had made to
Joshua about supporting him, Mr. Reagan said.

''And let us make a compact today with the dead, a promise in the words for
which General Ridgway listened -'' 'I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.' ''

The theme of reconciliation and ''healing'' between the nearly three million
combat veterans of the Vietnam War and those at home who despised the war, has
been a recurring one at the monument here in the three years of its existence.

Easing Pain of Vietnam Era

In remarks today, the veterans who helped create the memorial and Gov. Charles
S. Robb, Democrat of Virginia, who was a Marine Corps officer in Vietnam,
carried the idea of ''healing'' a step further before a throng of several
thousand, many of them tearful comrades and relatives of the 58,022 dead whose
names are etched in the granite slabs of the monument.

Discarding his prepared remarks, Governor Robb said ''the mind floods with a
remembrance of the weapons'' of ''this least-understood war.'' But he said
''healing and caring is the message we want to leave with our brothers and
sisters'' who did not fight.

One of the speakers today, John P. Wheeler 3d, chairman of the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial Fund, said the monument here, and others like it that are springing up
across the county, are becoming a ''national touchstone'' for all sectors of a
troubled ''Vietnam generation, veterans and nonveterans.'' He said that
''because of the turmoil and trauma of the Vietnam era, there is a sense in
which all of us are veterans'' of that time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gov. Charles Robb and John Wheeler 3d (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

96 More Names to Go On Vietnam Memorial

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 279 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


The Pentagon will add 96 names to the 58,022 on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
here after deciding to engrave combat-related deaths on the black stone.

The memorial currently lists only those who died in combat in the official war
zone of Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and adjacent waterways.

Friends of Capt. Larry Broadhead were surprised to find his name left off when
they visited the memorial last year. Captain Broadhead died when his B-52
crashed on takeoff from Guam on what would have been his 88th bombing mission.

His parents enlisted the help of Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma,
and others to persuade the Pentagon to broaden the list. It now includes ''any
deaths which occurred as a result of aircraft accidents en route to or returning
from a direct combat mission to bomb, strafe or perform surveillance of targets
within the defined combat area.''

The Pentagon reviewed 330 cases, finding some who were already on the memorial
and others who did not fit the new category. But 96, including Captain
Broadhead, did qualify, and officials hope that by Memorial Day their names will
be on the wall.

Jan Scruggs, president of the memorial fund, said most of the 96 were flight
personnel killed in crash landings or takeoffs or when bombs accidentally
exploded. Mr. Scruggs said that he regretted the belated recognition but that he
and Pentagon officials had been forced to draw a line somewhere.

''There's a finite amount of space on the memorial and we still have guys dying
of wounds,'' he said. ''There are limits to how many names you can put on the
wall.'' After the 96 names are added, there will be space on the memorial for
just 444 more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


International

Soviet negotiators continue to insist on a ban on scientific research into
space-based defense weapons, even though Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet
leader, seemed to hint publicly two months ago that such research might be
allowed, according to a senior Reagan Administration official. [Page A1, Column
6.]

Moscow's press nearly ignored the war in Afghanistan in its first years, but
Soviet newspapers now regularly carry reports about young Soviet heroes killed
in battle, and Soviet television is now showing combat scenes. After almost six
years of combat involving hundreds of thousands of Soviet soldiers and thousands
of Soviet casualties, the Kremlin cannot pretend that only a few Russian
soldiers are in Afghanistan temporarily to help out. [A1:5-6.]

It will take Manila at least a decade to contain the anti-Government insurgency,
according to the Philippines' Defense Minister, Juan Ponce Enrile. President
Ferdinand E. Marcos has predicted the insurgency will be defeated in one year.
[A14:1-2.]

National

Two agents who forcibly returned a Soviet sailor to his ship last month are
expected to face disciplinary action, according to the commissioner of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, Alan C. Nelson. He said the two Border
Agents had clearly made mistakes after the sailor, Miroslav Medved, jumped from
his ship into the Mississippi. [A1:4.]

President Reagan paid homage to the nation's war dead at Arlington National
Cemetery and declared that the ''surest way to keep a peace going is to stay
strong.'' Others celebrated Veterans Day in ways that ranged from savoring a
Federal holiday to visiting the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. [A25:1-4.]

The Great Red Spot of Jupiter is a gigantic eddy of swirling gas, driven by the
planet's turbulent winds and apparently capable of keeping its shape as long as
Jupiter keeps spinning, according to the latest findings by physicists and
meteorologists. The Red Spot has baffled scientists for generations. [C1:3-4.]

A person who drinks 5 or more cups of coffee a day is almost three times as
likely to develop heart problems as a person who drinks no coffee at all,
according to scientists at the John Hopkins Medical School. They said the
finding was based on a study of more than 1,000 medical school graduates for up
to 38 years. [C1:1.]

Melvin Belli, citing addiction by cigarette smokers, is pressing one of 35
liability suits pending around the country against the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company. Mr. Belli, who has brought dozens of such suits to trial without
winning any of them, contends the issues are now different and the scientific
data on the hazards of smoking have increased. [A19:1-3.]

Vermont ski areas' growth is stifled and the expansion sought by developers is
virtually halted by a ruling of the State Water Resources Board. The decision
revived a long dispute over whether the resorts' rapid growth benefits Vermont's
economy or threatens its main attraction, the Green Mountains. [A1:1-2.]

Black voters in Miami are expected to hold the balance today in the city's first
mayoral runoff election between two Cuban-Americans, Raul Masvidal and Xavier
Suarez. [A29:1-4.]

Washington remained obsessed with the visiting Prince and Princess of Wales.
Observers concluded that Prince Charles is happy to stay in the background at
public events but is the dynamic member of the team when speaking with
strangers, more adept and more interested in the art of small talk. [A1:3-4.]

Metropolitan

The corporate jet that collided with a small plane over North Jersey Sunday was
on an ''unusual, nonstandard'' course for its intended landing at Teterboro
Airport, according to an official close to the investigation of the crash, which
took at least five lives. The official also suggested that the pilot of the jet,
in reporting a visual sighting of a single-engine Piper Cherokee to the
Teterboro control tower just before the crash, might have seen a third aircraft
that he mistook for the small plane or, alternatively, might have lost sight of
the plane. [A1:1.]

Residents of Fairview and Cliffside Park, N.J., gave thanks they had been spared
in the fiery crash of two private planes. The shocked residents shared a sense
of relief that the loss of life was not greater. [A1:2.]

Blue-chip issues had the best gains in 10 months and some Wall Street indexes
moved to record levels. The Dow Jones industrial average soared 27.52 points and
closed at a record 1,431.88. [A1:5.]

Jewish merchants were questioning the motives of vandals who broke the display
windows of 13 shops in a mainly Hasidic section of Brooklyn over the weekend.
The police said they still had no clues to the identities or motives of the
vandals. [B1:5-6.]

Lewis E. Lehrman will not seek the Republican nomination for governor next year,
he said. Mr. Lehrman ran an unexpectedly close race against Mario M. Cuomo in
1982, spending at least $11 million, most of it his own money. Mr. Lehrman said
he wanted to spend his time aggressively leading a national conservative group,
Citizens for America. [B2:5-6.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

New York Veterans Mark Day With a Fifth Avenue Parade

As some of the 1,500 marchers passed by, they were saluted by Albert Lewis,
left, and Louis Hermans, veterans of World War I. Observances around nation
marking the Federal holiday included a speech by President Reagan at Arlington
National Cemetery. Page A25. (NYT/Neal Boenzi)

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Veterans of the Vietnam War marching in the American Legion's Veterans
Day Parade yesterday along Fifth Avenue to the Eternal Light Memorial at Madison
Square Park.

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FALWELL, ON VISIT, ACCLAIMS MARCOS

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Nov. 12


The Rev. Jerry Falwell chided American policy makers today for ''bellyaching''
about the Philippines and said Filipinos enjoy freedom thanks to the family of
President Ferdinand E. Marcos.

He urged the United States to do ''whatever is necessary'' to stop the spread of
Communism here.

''I don't think any fair person can deny the fact that had it not been for the
Marcos family, the chances are that the freedoms you enjoy now would not be
here,'' Mr. Falwell said at a dinner at Malacanang Palace.

His statement, made Monday night, was broadcast today on the Government
television station.

Philippines 'a Paradise'

Ending a two-day visit, most of which he spent in the company of Mr. Marcos and
his wife, Imelda, Mr. Falwell called the Philippines ''a paradise'' and ''one of
the best friends the United States has in the world.''

''This is a great land and a free country and we need the Republic of the
Philippines as our friend,'' he said.

Mr. Falwell, the leader of the Christian evangelical group known as the Moral
Majority, said that he had come here ''as a friend'' and that he hoped to
heighten American support for the Philippines as he had tried to do for South
Africa after a visit there last August.

At that time, he urged support for the white Government of P. W. Botha and
called the Anglican Bishop, Desmond M. Tutu, the nation's most prominent
clergyman, a phony.

''I hope that we can do here what we have tried to do in Central America and
South Africa,'' he said at a news conference before his departure. ''That is
awaken the American people and particularly conservative Christians in America
to the serious threat of Communist expansion in the free world.''

He said that here as in South Africa he would call for increased American
investment because ''if there's any place on earth that deserves the financial
support of the United States, it is the Republic of the Philippines.''

''I have a great disagreement going on with a State Department that pumps
millions of dollars into Mozambique and Zimbabwe and those kinds of countries
with Marxist governments who use the money as they please to hurt, shed blood,
whatever,'' he said, ''and then we play the hypocrite here and tell the
Philippines Government that you've got to use this money a certain way.''

He praised Mr. Marcos for calling for elections early next year and said that
once they were over, ''the United States has an obligation to stop bellyaching
and get in behind the Republic of the Philippines with unswerving support.''

Mr. Falwell said that he believed the Marcos Government was not receiving fair
treatment in the American press and that ''the impression left in the United
States is that Manila is a war zone.'' But he said, ''I felt a lot safer in
Manila than I do in New York or Washington.''

'Unreal' Effect on Touristm

''Sure, there are troublemakers here,'' he said. ''We have them in the United
States too.''

He added, ''It's unreal that tourism has almost dried up here because of that
kind of fear when in fact this is a paradise.''

Mr. Falwell said that if the Philippines fell to the Communists, ''forget it -
there will never be another election, and neither the United States nor anybody
else will ever, ever liberate the country.''

While denying that he would advocate sending American soldiers, he said, ''I
would support anything the United States could do and would do to prevent the
Republic of the Philippines from becoming another Vietnam.''

During his visit here, Mr. Falwell breakfasted and dined with Mr. Marcos and his
wife at Malacanang Palace, flew by helicopter with Mrs. Marcos to an Indochinese
refugee camp in Bataan, lunched with a group of Baptist missionaries and toured
the slum area of Tondo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 13, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

What We Need Is a Hostage Protection Act

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


To the Editor:

In recent history, few struggles involving such a small number of people have
had such a profound effect on the American public (and on international events)
as the hostage episode aboard the liner Achille Lauro. Such acts are designed to
provoke social psychological reactions in viewing audiences, and they inevitably
do. Judging from the depth of feeling portrayed in and by the media, the Achille
Lauro episode especially provoked United States audiences to feelings of anger,
frustration and eventually pride. It is the aim of terrorist doctrine to use
anger and frustration to fuel conflict between citizens and their governments,
and between governments.

For these reasons I suggest the enactment of a hostage-protection bill. The aim
of such a measure would be to provide a type of medical, psychological and
financial insurance package for United States citizens victimized by terrorist
acts directed at the U.S. Government or its allies. Such assistance would be
applied for by the victims or their families to supplement standard insurance
coverage as necessary. The measure would accomplish important instrumental and
symbolic goals.

It would make it more likely that these victims would seek and receive the help
they require. It would also probably reduce lawsuits directed at the U.S.
Government, transportation companies and other groups deemed negligent in these
cases for lack of security against such attacks. It would give the Government a
medium for a more supportive, friendlier relationship with the often vocal,
critical families of victims, and it might reduce the emotional pressure the
families apply on the Government's ability to react to these crises. As in the
Achille Lauro episode, a few hours of withstanding pressure to act can make a
difference between a negotiated or violent resolution.

Hostages and future potential hostages (which is all of us) will know they have
the attention, support and care of their government. Such a sanction can have
extremely positive effects on hostage adaptation to the stresses of captivity
and release. It can also provide critical support to the morale and political
identity of hostages, making them less manipulable for propaganda purposes. As
in the case of Vietnam veterans who suffered from a lack of such recognition and
sanction, the absence of such a perception can have devastating psychological,
propaganda and medical implications.

Criticism of this idea may include its potential expense, bureaucratic
requirements and potential intrusiveness into the private lives of victims. But
if one considers the small number of persons who are terrorist victims each
year, who further require assistance in addition to their private insurance
coverage, and who in turn will request such assistance, the symbolic nature of
the act becomes clearer.

A number of agencies are assigned responsibility for terrorist victims and their
families, notably the State Department's cabinet committee and working groups.
Such a bill would give them something real and substantive to offer in addition
to news briefings. ERIC D. SHAW New York, Nov. 1, 1985 The writer, who is on the
faculty of the Payne Whitney Clinic's department of psychiatry, was a staff
member of the State Department's cabinet committee to combat terrorism working
group and a U.S. consultant on terrorism crisis management.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Officials in Hanoi Seeking Missing Soldiers

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 13


American military officials arrived in Hanoi today to discuss the fate of
American servicemen listed as missing in action in Vietnam and to excavate the
crash site of a B-52 bomber in the first such joint effort of the United States
and Vietnam.

The excavation at the site of the crash in 1972 will begin Monday, but will be
preceded by talks aimed at locating other areas where remains of Americans may
be found.

A total of 2,441 Americans are listed as misssing in action in Indochina, 1,797
of them in Vietnam and surrounding waters. Vietnam has turned over the remains
of only 123 American servicemen since 1974, drawing strong criticism from United
States officials.

The American delegation in Hanoi for three days of technical talks is expected
to seek the quick return of the remains of seven people, believed to be
Americans, which were recovered earlier by Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N., 122-19, ASKS TROOP PULLOUT IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 13


The General Assembly overwhelmingly approved a resolution today calling for the
immediate withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. The Soviet Union was
not mentioned by name.

The resolution, which is similar to ones that have been adopted each year since
Moscow sent troops over the border in December 1979, was approved with 122 votes
in favor, 19 opposed and 12 abstentions.

The vote today was the widest margin in favor of such a resolution since the
first vote in 1980. Support for the resolutions has gone up gradually since
then. The vote last year was 120 in favor, 20 opposed and 14 abstentions.

Mozambique, which voted against the resolution last year, did not take part in
the vote this year, a sign of that nation's increasing interest in strengthening
political and economic contacts with the West, according to Western diplomats.

Burkina Faso and Uganda, which abstained last year, voted in favor of the
resolution. Uganda's vote in part reflected the new Government's interest in
Western aid, but the vote by Burkina Faso, a Marxist country that consistently
votes with the Soviet Union, surprised many people here. St. Christopher and
Nevis, which did not take part last year, also voted in favor.

The annual condemnation of the Soviet role in Afghanistan is probably the most
dramatic example in the Assembly of steadfast opposition to a Soviet position by
the countries espousing nonalignment. It also reflects the degree to which most
of the movement's members feel threatened by Moscow's drive into a fellow
country proclaiming nonalignment.

As in previous years, the Western nations and most of the nonaligned members
supported the call for an immediate troop withdrawal, while the Soviet bloc and
some of its allies opposed it.

The vote also illustrated the conviction among a few members of the Nonaligned
Movement that Moscow must be supported at all costs, as Angola, Cuba and
Ethiopia continued to vote with the Soviet Union this year. The other countries
that voted against the resolution were Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Byelorussia,
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Laos, Libya, Madagascar, Mongolia,
Poland, Southern Yemen, Syria, the Ukraine and Vietnam.

India, which is to head the group of countries espousing nonalignment until next
year, abstained, as it has in the past. This position continues to be a source
of friction among Western nations and many members of the 101-nation Nonaligned
Movement.

In her speech to the Assembly on Monday, Arajit Kaur, a member of the Indian
delegation, said, ''We will achieve nothing by engaging in polemics or by
sitting in judgment.'' She called the resolution ''a biased and selective
approach by the General Assembly.''

Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India was careful not to criticize Soviet
involvement in Afghanistan during his visit to the United Nations last month.

The other countries abstaining were Algeria, Benin, Cape Verde, Congo, Cyprus,
Finland, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Mali, Nicaragua, Sao Tome and Principe. Bhutan,
Mozambique, Rumania, the Seychelles and Yemen did not vote.

In addition to a troop withdrawal, the resolution also called for ''preservation
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned
character of Afghanistan;'' the right of the Afghan people to determine their
own form of government and to choose their economic, political and social
system, and the creation of the necessary conditions to allow Afghan refugees to
return voluntarily to their homes.

Moscow is thought to have about 115,000 troops in Afghanistan, according to
Western estimates. Foreign Minister Sahabzada Yaqub Khan of Pakistan told the
Assembly on Monday that according to some estimates, nearly one million Afghans
had died and close to three million had been forced to flee to Pakistan and Iran
since the Soviet move into Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RECENT SETBACKS ASIDE, C.I.A. STILL WANTS MORE 'HUMAN' SPIES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


The following dispatch is based on reporting by Joel Brinkley and Stephen
Engelberg and was written by Mr. Engelberg.

Despite recent problems with defectors and its own employees, the Central
Intelligence Agency remains committed to rebuilding this country's network of
covert intelligence operatives, reversing a trend of extensive reliance on
technological intelligence gathering.

The Reagan Administration, with the support of Congress, has concluded that its
predecessors placed too much emphasis on the gathering of intelligence by
sophisticated satellites, communications listening posts and high-flying
airplanes.

Under William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, the Reagan
Administration has embarked on a major effort to expand and re-emphasize
traditional espionage, called ''human intelligence'' in the jargon of the
intelligence field.

Many Agents Rehired

Officials said Mr. Casey had rehired many of the veteran intelligence officers
dismissed by Adm. Stansfield Turner, the Carter Administration's Director of
Central Intelligence, in his move to trim the size of the agency's clandestine
services.

Administration officials say the espionage branch has benefited from significant
increases in resources. They say morale has improved from the low point of the
mid-1970's, when it was the focal point of several highly critical Congressional
investigations.

The events of the last few weeks have demonstrated the potential for dramatic
reverses, which, officials say, prompted the Carter Administration to prefer
technical methods to traditional espionage. In a recent interview, a senior
Carter Administration intelligence official said the Government then believed
human spies were ''messy'' and prone to cause embarrassment.

The Yurchenko Affair

Days later, there was evidence supporting such doubts. Vitaly S. Yurchenko, a
K.G.B. officer whose defection was hailed as a major intelligence coup, appeared
at a news conference to denounce the C.I.A. and say he was returning to the
Soviet Union.

Just a few weeks before, Edward Lee Howard, a former C.I.A. officer who had been
forced to resign by the agency, fled the country after officials determined that
he had helped Soviet intelligence identify a valued American agent in Moscow.

Despite these cases, Administration officials say their faith in the potential
of ''human intelligence'' is unshaken. ''This will just be a mini-blip on a
large radar screen,'' a senior intelligence official said. ''I don't think this
will influence the rebuilding program.''

Officials say that by far the greatest bulk of intelligence is gathered through
technical methods. That balance is unlikely to change, but the Administration's
is trying to recruit significant numbers of agents and defectors in third-world
countries as well as in the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc.

Virtually every President in recent years has complained about so-called
intelligence failures, in Iran, South Africa, Lebanon and Grenada, among other
places. Most of those failures have been blamed on a lack of reliable eyewitness
reports.

This fall, Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser,
told a group of business leaders that he believed some American servicemen might
still be held captive in Vietnam and said the United States needed ''better
human intelligence in Vietnam to find them.'' ''Now we don't have it,'' he said.
'So Much More Insight'

Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, the chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said: ''A human source can give you so much more
insight. We can listen all we want to the Nicaraguan traffic, but we don't know
what's going on in the heads of the Sandinistas because we don't have anyone in
the Government'' relaying intelligence to United States agencies.

Reagan Administration officials say they recognized that American ''human
intelligence'' was inadequate when they took office five years ago. ''We were
very concerned when we came in that human intelligence had to be
reinvigorated,'' a senior White House official said.

Administration officials also note that many of the C.I.A.'s new objectives,
such as stopping terrorists by penetrating their organizations and fighting drug
trafficking, can usually be accomplished only by human agents.

Government Wants to Know More

Richard Helms, a former Director of Central Intelligence, said, ''You're always
going to have to have human beings because there are a lot of things you just
can't do'' by technical means.

But even with the hiring and training of hundreds of additional intelligence
officers in the last few years, a senior intelligence official said, it will
take a long time to rebuild the nation's ''human intelligence'' because
acquiring sources - foreign agents willing to work secretly for the United
States -takes years of nurturing.

Part of the problem, officials said, is that for a long time the United States
did not try to recruit Soviet agents.

A principal mission of most intelligence officers stationed abroad is to recruit
local officials or others as spies. But it was not until the late 1970's that
the C.I.A. ''got into the business of trying to recruit Soviets,'' because the
agency was convinced that it was impossible, a senior intelligence officer said
in an interview.

Until then, he added, ''most of the Soviet sources were walk-ins,'' meaning
people who came forward on their own, volunteering to spy.

Other officials said the United States reliance on unmanned microphones and
cameras in the last years helped insure the need for more human agents. Knowing
that the United States was listening and photographing, the Soviet Union has
stopped doing certain things in open view, over unsecure telephones or in open
publications.

Data 'Harder to Get'

In a recent speech, Robert Gates, the C.I.A's Deputy Director for Intelligence,
said that ''the data we need is harder and harder to get,'' and added that ''in
the Soviet case, economic information which has been available for years is no
longer released.''

In addition, according to Senator Malcolm Wallop, Republican of Wyoming, who was
a senior member of the intelligence committee until this year, the Soviet Union
can exploit the United States' dependence on electronic intelligence gathering.

As an example, a few years ago an American photo-reconnaissance satellite
passing over the Soviet Union photographed an unusually large submarine at
berth. On a subsequent pass, after a storm, the satellite image showed that the
submarine had been folded in half.

It was determined that the vessel was a fake, made of rubber, designed to
deceive Americans watching by satellite, intelligence officials said.

Many present and former intelligence officials say the deception problem is
overstated. ''It's a bunch of hogwash,'' said Adm. Daniel J. Murphy, who was a
senior C.I.A. official in the mid-1970's and recently resigned as chief of staff
for Vice President Bush.

But Mr. Gates said that ''we are seeing other countries engaged in camouflage
and deceptive activities'' intended to thwart technical espionage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TOWARD THE SUMMIT: GAUGING THE OUTCOME;
PAST SUMMIT MEETINGS, UNLIKE REAGAN'S, WERE FOR SIGNING OF KEY ACCORDS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 14


By and large, most of the past summit meetings involving the Soviet Union and
the United States stand in a different category from the one between President
Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev in Geneva next week.

Some of the past meetings occurred against the backdrop of long preparations and
represented the final high-level push toward arms control understandings or
formal agreements.

This time the two sides are far apart on fundamental issues, such as the extent
to which the research and development of space-based missile defense systems
should be limited.

Participants in past summit meetings offer two possible lessons: First, such
meetings can be used to break negotiating deadlocks; second, Soviet officials
are sometimes prepared to react quickly to American proposals.

Jan M. Lodal, a National Security Council staff member during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations who attended past summit meetings, said: ''If you are prepared
to be flexible, you can accomplish things at a summit.''

Threshold Treaty Case Cited

He cited the case of a treaty that established a limit of 150 kilotons, the
equivalent of 150,000 tons of TNT, on underground nuclear tests. The treaty was
concluded in 1974 by President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev with ''no prior
negotiation before the summit,'' Mr. Lodal said. He added that this example
''supports the thesis that if you put leaders together, you can do an whole lot
of stuff that would take years for the bureaucrats involved.''

But summit meetings have also have had drawbacks. Some experts say that in the
rush to get agreement, some technical issues have been brushed aside and the
public has been led to believe that more was accomplished than was the case.

In the push to conclude the first strategic arms limitation treaty in 1972
during the first meeting between Mr. Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev, Henry A. Kissinger,
then the national security adviser, worked out an understanding that he later
told Congress would prevent the Soviet Union from deploying any land-based
missile that was larger than its SS-11.

The Soviet Union later deployed a larger missile, the SS-19, and was accused by
some conservatives of having violated the treaty.

Kissinger Is Criticized

Raymond L. Garthoff of the Brookings Institution said in a recent book on
East-West relations that Mr. Kissinger had failed to negotiate a tight
understanding and that the Soviet Union had made clear that it intended to
deploy the SS-19, according to intercepted radio-telephone conversations from
Mr. Brezhnev's limousine.

''By sweeping under the rug the fact that the Soviets were going to be able to
produce a larger missile than the SS-11,'' Mr. Garthoff said in an interview,
''Kissinger was creating the basis for later lack of confidence in Soviet
compliance and in SALT itself.''

Kenneth L. Adelman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,
alluding to other disputed arms limits agreed to in 1972 on the number of
submarines, said, ''The impulse to get something signed sometimes works against
our interest.''

The term ''summit diplomacy'' was coined by Winston Churchill in 1950, when he
spoke of the need for leaders to ''parley at the summit'' to reduce cold war
tensions.

Big Four Met in 1955 in Geneva

The first summit meetings dealt the division of territory and the then pressing
issue of German reunification, but nuclear arms control has been a growing
concern.

In July 1955, President Eisenhower and three Prime Ministers - Nikolai A.
Bulganin of the Soviet Union, Anthony Eden of Britain and Edgar Faure of France
- met in Geneva to consider the reunification of Germany, disarmament and the
improvement of East-West relations.

President Eisenhower advanced his ''open skies'' proposal, which would have
allowed the United States and the Soviet Union to carry out aerial surveillance
of each other's military installations. The Soviet Union called the proposal a
cover for espionage.

In September 1959, President Eisenhower met with Nikita S. Khrushchev, and they
agreed to broaden exchanges and possibly meet again.

One Summit Meeting Collapsed

A follow-up meeting collapsed in May 1960 in Paris after the Soviet Union had
downed a U-2 spy plane. Mr. Khrushchev demanded an American apology, and the
United States refused.

President Kennedy's June 1961 meeting with Mr. Khrushchev in Vienna dealt with
the war in Laos, a nuclear test ban treaty and the Berlin problem. Some experts
cite that meeting as an example of how a session can become disputatious if
there is a lack of prior agreement and preparation.

President Johnson's June 1967 meeting with Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin in
Glassboro, N.J., focused on the Middle East and Vietnam.

It was also at that meting that President Johnson and Defense Secretary Robert
S. McNamara tried to convince Mr. Kosygin that the development and widespread
deployment of antiballistic missile systems would stand in the way of limits on
offensive forces. Now, the position of the two sides on that issue has been
reversed.

One Meeting Canceled in 1968

Also noteworthy is the meeting that was not held during the Johnson
Administration. On Aug. 16, 1968, the United States tested a new
multiple-warhead technology, just a few days before a Leningrad summit meeting
was to be announced.

According to former Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Walter W. Rostow, former
national security adviser, President Johnson planned to seek a ban on missiles
with multiple warheads at that meeting. Some former officials question whether
President Johnson would have been able to win the approval of the military and
the Congress for such a ban.

As it turned out, the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia the day before the
meeting was to be announced and the talks were put off.

President Nixon held three summit meetings with Mr. Brezhnev. The first, in May
1972, resulted in the first strategic arms agreement limiting offensive arms and
in the ABM treaty. Most of the work on those agreements had already been
accomplished.

Nixon Burdened by Watergate

The subsequent meeting were held in a different political atmosphere. President
Nixon was burdened by the Watergate affair and was under pressure to restore his
standing at home by demonstrating an improvement in East-West relations.

At the June 1973 meeting in Washington, agreements were signed on a pledge to
avert a military confrontion and other issues, such as trade, oceanography,
transportation, agricultural research, cultural exchanges and nuclear energy
research. A declaration of principles was signed calling for the completion of a
second treaty on offensive arms by 1974.

In June 1974, President Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev concluded the threshold test ban
treaty and a 10-year economic agreement in Moscow.

President Ford met with Mr. Brezhnev in November 1974 in Vladivostok to outline
a new strategic arms treaty.

The United States approached the meeting with the view that the Soviet Union
should accept a lower limit than the United States on the new multiple warhead
missiles, while the United States would accept a lower limit than the Soviet
Union on deployed missiles. This approach was abandoned in favor of equal
limits.

Five Years to Complete Treaty

President Ford recorded in his memoirs that he expected that a second strategic
arms treaty would be concluded the following spring after the ''technicians had
ironed out the few remaining problems.'' As it turned out, it took more than
five years. The treaty was signed by President Carter and Mr. Brezhnev in June
1979 in Vienna. An American participant recalls that Mr. Brezhnev's health was
so poor at the time that he signed some of the 12 copies of the accord before
the formal ceremony.

A last-minute side agreement limited the production rate of the Soviet Union's
Backfire bomber. Defense Secretary Harold Brown and David Jones, the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, met their Soviet counterparts. Some Pentagon
officials have cited this as a precedent and have complained about the exclusion
of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger from the meeting in Geneva next week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Champions of a Cause: Containment

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 14


It was a gathering of cold warriors, assembled to reminisce about the origins of
containment, the post-World War II policy of building political and military
bulwarks to hold back Soviet power.

They came to hear and to honor George F. Kennan, the diplomat and student of the
Russians who gave initial expression to containment 40 years ago in that first
winter of disillusion after the war, and to recall their own roles in shaping
that policy, which resulted in, among other things, such organizations as NATO.

But it was not all nostalgia when this old guard came together again the other
day at the National Defense University here in the capital. Containment is part
of the historical baggage that President Reagan will carry to Geneva next week
for his meeting with the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and the old guard
had some advice. To wit: Containment is still a valid policy because the Soviet
Union is still a threat.

Containment became the foundation of American foreign policy under President
Truman and was expanded under Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson. In the
1970's, it was allowed to lapse a bit by President Nixon, who emphasized
detente, an easing of tensions. Presidents Ford and Carter continued detente,
but President Reagan revived containment, under the rubric of deterrence.

To add their footnotes to the history, Mr. Kennan and others of the old guard
were invited by the National Defense University to talk before 300 military
officers, civilian officials, scholars, industrialists and foreign dignitaries.

There were Clark Clifford, who had been a personal aide to Truman, and Dean
Rusk, a Army colonel in Washington at the end of World War II. There were the
Rostow brothers, Walt, who was then an economist in the State Department, and
Eugene, who represented Paul Nitze, an author of a National Security Council
document that crystallized containment into policy in 1950. There was U. Alexis
Johnson, a diplomat who described himself as an ''operator'' in the realm of
containment.

In their reminiscing, they recalled the ''long telegram'' that Mr. Kennan
dispatched from Moscow in the winter of 1946, a closely reasoned analysis of
Soviet behavior that became the intellectual catalyst for containment.

Shortly after, Mr. Kennan became the senior diplomat at the National War
College, now part of the National Defense University, and there wrote an article
for Foreign Affairs magazine signed with an ''X'' because it had been cast as a
Government memorandum. Even so, the ''X'' article was soon recognized as Mr.
Kennan's and galvanized public support for containment.

Mr. Kennan, erect and vigorous in speech at the age of 81, said the threat in
1947 was political, mainly the possibility of the spread of Soviet Communism to
Western Europe and Japan devastated by World War II. Today, he said, Communism
has been so discredited as an ideology that it is no longer a political threat.
Instead, there is the threat of Soviet military might, he said, warning, ''That
aspect is of prime importance.''

As a practitioner of containment, Mr. Rusk gained a reputation as a hardline
prosecutor of the war in Vietnam when he was Secretary of State under Presidents
Kennedy and Johnson. At the National Defense University, he was tough as ever,
asserting that he didn't ''wear a hair shirt'' for his role in containment.

Even so, Mr. Rusk cautioned that today ''we ought to watch the level of rhetoric
between the two capitals'' because one side might ''begin to believe its own
rhetoric.'' He urged Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev to eschew ideology at the
summit.

Mr. Clifford, Secretary of Defense under Johnson, recalled that Truman had
returned from meeting with Churchill and Stalin at Potsdam in the summer of 1945
in a state of ''temporary euphoria'' over the possibility that the Soviet Union
would cooperate with the West.

But, Mr. Clifford said, that optimism deteriorated and in the spring of 1946
Truman asked him to prepare a report on how to deal with Moscow.

Mr. Clifford said he delivered the report, which recommended containment, at 5
o'clock one afternoon and got a telephone call before 7 o'clock the next morning
telling him to come immediately and gather up all 12 copies of the report.
Truman, who evidently believed the nation was not yet ready for containment,
said that any disclosure of the report would ''blow the roof off the White
House,'' so he locked every copy in his safe and, even after containment became
policy, they remained out of the public eye for 25 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George F. Kennan

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words


LAST spring it was one of those hoped-for things - now it's definite, or as
definite as something can be before the actual opening, which is scheduled for
Jan. 5. What opening? ''Corpse,'' of course, Gerald Moon's comedy-thriller in
which the star plays twins, one of whom hires a killer to rub out the other.
Keith Baxter played the role in London and will do so here, and Milo O'Shea is
again slated to play the killer. Performances at the Helen Hayes Theater begin
Dec. 12 with John Tillinger directing and Martin Markinson, Gary Leaverton and
Robert Fox producing.

Japan seems to be the newest destination for American musicals. Michael
Bennett's ''Chorus Line'' is due in the 2,200-seat Koma Theater in Tokyo next
May, starring none other than Donna McKechnie, who won a Tony Award in 1976 for
her portrayal of Cassie. The deal, said to involve some $2 million, was
engineered by James Kabler and Masaka Shibaoka of Ampac Enterprises and Masafumi
Watanabe, who produces the Tokyo International Music Festival. Mr. Watanabe will
present the musical, which will feature a national touring company.

Part of the charm of ''The Mystery of Edwin Drood,'' which began performances
this week, is that the audience gets to vote on whodunit. Part of the enjoyment
is that it all takes place at the Imperial Theater, which has just had a $1.5
million facelift. Probabilities for other Shubert musical theaters in the next
year are Bob Fosse's ''Big Deal,'' Peter Shaffer's ''Yonadab'' and Tim Rice's
''Chess.'' Bernard Jacobs, the organization's president, says he doesn't know
yet what's going where.

Monica Tesler was a big star in Rumania before she became a big star in Israel,
but in this country, she's still a little twinkle. She's just made her Broadway
debut as Natasha in ''A Match Made in Heaven,'' the Yiddish Musical Theater
comedy at Town Hall, and she finds her audiences as enchanting as they
apparently find her.

''Here they are more emotional,'' she said. ''At the finish, they stand up, they
cry out, they make more applause, it makes me feel good. In Israel, they have
big applause too, but another style, not so explosive. In Rumania, it is more
like Israel.''

Miss Tesler, who says she's 30, left Rumania in 1976 because although she made a
lot of money, she wanted, she said, to be free.

''In a Socialist land, art is very strong,'' she said. ''But to play on Broadway
is the top in the world.'' It's been one of those now-it's-on, now-it's-off
productions, but thank goodness, the yo-yo seems to have stopped. Nancy
Donohue's ''Beach House'' will begin previews Dec. 13 and Circle Repertory has
lined up Swoosie Kurtz to play an ardent law student (equally ardent about other
things, one gathers) and George Grizzard to take the role of a divorced doctor,
who does what any divorced doctor would do in a romantic comedy.

David Rabe, between working on two novels and a couple of plays, is busy cutting
''In the Boom Boom Room'' and, he said, ''trying to get it back into what was
its organic structure.'' Simply put, that means condensing three acts into the
two he had visualized in the first place.

The play, originally produced by Joseph Papp at the Vivian Beaumont and the
Public Theaters, is being mounted this time around by the Orange Theater
Company. It begins previews Nov. 27 at the South Street Theater, at 424 West 42d
Street (telephone: 279-4200).

The moon, the sun and the sky may belong to everyone, but the best things in
life aren't usually free. Still, some pretty good ones occasionally are.

The Quaigh Theater, for instance, is presenting James DeMarse's ''Easy Street,''
a one-act play with three characters, as a free lunch-time diversion (12:15
P.M.) until Nov. 22. The theater is at 110 West 43d Street (831-7285).

At the Actors Studio, there's a work-in-progress called ''Shout and Twist'' free
to the public until Nov. 24. Michael Butler, Johann Carlo and Henry Stram
collaborated on this play with music, which has Hamlet, Lady Macbeth and Candide
returning as rock stars. The Actors Studio is at 432 West 44th Street; show time
is 8 P.M. Reservations are required (757-0870).

When the New Year rolls in, Jane S. Moss will be rolling out as executive
director of the Alliance of Resident Theaters-New York. She's leaving to produce
an international theater festival in the city.

A play called ''My Four Mothers,'' about the relationship of a young man to his
father's four wives, may sound a little far out. Which just goes to prove that
fact is often stranger than imagination, because this particular play parallels,
in part, the history of a Broadway baby. Ward Morehouse 3d, the author, is the
son of the late Ward Morehouse, who was a critic, a columnist and a man who did
have four wives.

Mr. Morehouse's mother, Joan Marlowe, is a former actress, and his stepmothers
include Jean Dalrymple and Rebecca Morehouse, who writes for Playbill. The
not-quite-facsimiles will be on stage Dec. 5 for the world premiere at the Off
Center Theater, 436 West 18th Street (929-8299).

The opening of John Pielmeier's ''Boys of Winter'' has been pushed back to Dec.
1 to allow two more weeks for rewriting. The delay means that Herbert Ross, who
was directing the drama about Vietnam, is bowing out to fulfill a previous
commitment on the West Coast. Bowing in is Michael Lindsay-Hogg, whose directing
credits include ''The Normal Heart'' and ''Agnes Of God.''

Mr. Lindsay-Hogg's mother is also keeping busy. She's directing an Off Broadway
musical called ''To Whom It May Concern,'' which opens Dec. 16 at St. Stephen's
Church, 122 West 69th Street. The play, about the thoughts of members of a
congregation during a church service, is by Carol Hall, who wrote the music and
lyrics for ''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas.'' Oh yes - the name of Mr.
Lindsay-Hogg's mother? Geraldine Fitzgerald.

One of the nice things about the acting profession is sleeping late, but it
doesn't always work out. Take Dina Merrill, who is in ''The Importance of Being
Earnest,'' now at the Samuel Beckett Theater. Miss Merrill is up at the crack of
dawn because she's been called for jury duty. But she's been given a special
dispensation for Wednesdays - she can leave at 12:30 P.M. to make the matinee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Aljean Harmetz

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Nov. 14


Do things go better with Coke?

Not according to most of the people involved in ''Where Are the Children?''

A $4 million production based on a best-selling suspense novel by Mary Higgins
Clark, ''Where Are the Children?'' has been languishing at Columbia since last
spring. Columbia is owned by Coca-Cola. From the movie's star, Jill Clayburgh,
to its director, Bruce Malmuth, to its screenwriter, Jack Sholder, to its
producer, Zev Braun, people connected with ''Where Are the Children?'' wonder
aloud whether Coca-Cola got frightened by the movie's story of children in
jeopardy and its subtext of child abuse.

John Fiedler, Columbia's president of production, said of the charge: ''That's a
fantasy. I've never had the pleasure of screening a movie for Coca-Cola.''

For whatever reason, the movie has been revised to take out not only the
explanatory plot reference to child abuse but also many of the scenes of the
children in jeopardy. Mr. Fiedler said that all the editing of ''Where Are the
Children?'' was done by Rastar, the company from whom Columbia acquired the
movie. In one of those convoluted deals that are typical of the movie industry
today, ''Where Are the Children?'' was financed by the producer Ray Stark,
produced by independents and sold to Columbia.

Mr. Stark, however, said in an interview a month ago that Columbia had ''made
the suggestions and requests'' for editing, and Gerald Lipsky, Mr. Stark's
lawyer, said flatly, ''Columbia has the movie, and they've edited it.''

Last week, Columbia was all set to open the revised version of the film in
Fresno, Calif., this weekend as a test. ''We're supporting it with normal
advertising, including local television,'' said Bob Dingilian, Columbia's vice
president of marketing. But, according to Mr. Fiedler, the release of the movie
this weekend may be canceled.

''Where Are the Children?'' deals with a mother who was convicted of murdering
the two children of her first marriage. Now the two children of her second
marriage have been kidnapped.

''The emotional fiber of the film is missing,'' says the director, Mr. Malmuth,
of Columbia's version. ''I'm speaking with regret, not with anger. It's
two-dimensional. It has much less impact. They've systematically removed any
kind of difficulties experienced by the kids, all shots of them being handled,
picked up or carried. And 100 percent of the powerful stuff is gone - when the
kids are in the closet with bandages over their faces, when the kidnapper drags
the little girl into the bathroom to give her a bath. The sensitive nature of
the material may be in conflict with the corporate image of Coke.''

Movies are often changed against the wishes of the director, mostly because they
seem uncommercial. However, at two previews last June, a majority of the
audience turned in preview cards marked ''good'' or ''extremely good.''

In the audience at one of the June screenings was Robert Rehme, the president of
New World Pictures. ''It was a scary, tough picture because of the sensitive
material,'' Mr. Rehme said a few weeks ago, ''but I thought it was quite good,
very well done, and Jill Clayburgh was terrific. The recruited audience screamed
at the appropriate spots. I wanted to distribute the movie but wasn't able to
make a deal. I'd still like to distribute it.''

''There was great response,'' says the screenwriter, Mr. Sholder, who has just
had a soothing success as the director of ''Nightmare on Elm Street Part 2:
Freddy's Revenge.'' ''I don't know what their motives in recutting the movie
are. I certainly wouldn't tamper with the formula for Coke.'' A Comedy of
Manners, Literally, From Paramount Paramount is making ''Whoopee.'' From the
creators of ''Revenge of the Nerds,'' ''Whoopee'' is an $8 million comedy of
manners to star Michael O'Keefe, who won an Academy Award nomination as Robert
Duvall's son in ''The Great Santini,'' and the stand-up comic Paul Rodriguez,
who was the star of Norman Lear's failed television comeback series ''a.k.a.
Pablo'' last year.

''We mean manners as in 'Miss Manners,' '' says the movie's producer, David
Obst. ''Judith Martin, Miss Manners, gave us great tips, like, 'Never spit quail
onto your plate.' 'Whoopee' will answer the question: What would happen if the
two wildest people you know have to go to charm school?''

Mr. Obst, a former editor of Ramparts magazine and an activist against the
Vietnam War, said that the four and a half years he has spent in Hollywood
acting as a midwife to such projects as ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High'' and
''Revenge of the Nerds'' are not slumming.

''I think that humor is a step up,'' he said. ''Anyone can bring down the
Government. It's more difficult to make the country laugh.''

''Whoopee,'' which begins production in Miami on Dec. 2, was written by Jeff
Buhai and Steve Zacharias and will be directed by John Byrum, who is known for
such dour projects as ''The Razor's Edge'' and ''Heart Beat.'' ''Why not?'' asks
Mr. Obst. ''We gave 'Revenge of the Nerds' to Jeff Kanew, a director who had
never done anything but the most serious of films.''

''Revenge of the Nerds'' was the first screen credit for Mr. Buhai and Mr.
Zacharias, who wrote the story to fit a title owned by 20th Century-Fox. At a
cost of $6 million, ''Revenge of the Nerds'' brought Fox nearly $20 million in
film rentals last year, much to the studio's surprise.

''Fox executives had reservations about heroes who weren't good-looking,'' said
Mr. Zacharias. 'Commando' Garb Proves Popular ''Commando,'' the latest
successful action-adventure-revenge movie, has been doing well in the department
stores too. At $6 to $20, olive drab and camouflage-colored ''Commando''
T-shirts, sweat shirts, shorts, pants and jackets are selling extremely well for
an R-rated movie.

''Because licensed articles appeal to the youth market, retailers have always
shied away from R-rated movies,'' said Larry Blum, president of Sales
Corporation of America, which holds the licenses on 20th Century-Fox's
''Commando.'' ''But with 'Rambo,' we noticed that kids were going despite the R
rating. No one had any major expectations for 'Rambo' items, so the licensing
came late, after the movie was released.''

But ''Rambo's'' success led to ''Commando'' clothes arriving at stores at the
same time the Arnold Schwarzenegger movie hit theaters. Mr. Blum, who had the
lucrative pleasure of licensing ''Return of the Jedi'' and ''Indiana Jones,''
said he expected wholesale sales of $4 million to $5 million ''at best'' on
''Commando.''

But he doesn't win them all. ''We pre-booked a quarter of a million dollars of
'Dune' merchandise,'' he said, referring to one of last Christmas's box-office
failures. ''After that, zero. And we had the poster rights on 'The Godfather,' a
very successful movie that didn't appeal to kids. I couldn't give the posters
away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOW CAN REAGAN FACE THE INDOCHINA P.O.W.'S

BYLINE: By John LeBoutillier; John LeBoutillier, a Republican, while
representing a New York district from 1981 to 1983 served on the House Foreign
Affairs Committee and the House Task Force on Prisoners of War in Southeast
Asia.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: WESTBURY, N.Y.


Ten years ago, Representative G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery headed a Congressional
commission charged with determining whether American prisoners of war were being
held captive in Indochina. The verdict: No P.O.W.'s were alive there. The other
day, Mr. Montgomery admitted that, amid new reports of sightings of Americans
imprisoned in Vietnam and Laos, doubt has crept into his mind. ''This is the
issue that won't go away,'' he said.

One reason for the increase in news about servicemen being held against their
will in Laos and Vietnam is a series of comments by Robert C. MacFarlane,
President Reagan's national security adviser. In response to a question about
his views on whether there are P.O.W.'s alive in Indochina, he said, ''There
have to be live Americans there.''Asked what the Administration was doing, he
replied: ''I wouldn't pretend to you that we've done enough to even start. And
that's bad and that's a failure.''

Needless to say, Mr. MacFarlane's revelations shocked families of the missing
men because they directly contradicted statements by the President. On Jan. 29,
1983, President Reagan, addressing the National League of Families of Prisoners
of War and Missing in Action in Southeast Asia, said: ''Your long vigil is over.
The intelligence assets of the United States are fully focused on this issue.''
Later that year, he said, ''The P.O.W. issue is the highest national priority of
this Administration.''

Not only do Mr. MacFarlane's comments contradict those statements, they again
point out what many P.O.W. families and others, myself included, have long
suspected: P.O.W.'s are alive in Laos and Vietnam. Our Government knows this.
And it isn't doing everything possible to recover them.

There is other evidence of neglect. For example, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick who, for
four years as chief delegate to the United Nations also served as a member of
the Cabinet and National Security Council, said the P.O.W. issue was never once
raised in any White House meeting she attended. Does this sound like ''the
highest national priority''?

If the Administration is doing everything possible, why isn't a Cabinet
secretary instead of an Army lieutenant colonel running day-to-day supervision
of all P.O.W.-related activities?

Many reports at both the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency that I have
read describe similar scenes: P.O.W.'s, mostly pilots who are also officers, are
being held in small groups. They are chained together at night while they sleep
in bamboo cages and are forced by the Vietnamese to do slave labor.

The Vietnamese are holding these men because of an unfulfilled pledge made in
1973 by President Richard M. Nixon and his national security adviser, Henry A.
Kissinger, to pay Hanoi $3.25 billion in reparations. (Mr. MacFarlane was a
member of Mr. Kissinger's staff during the negotiations.) Ever since then, Hanoi
has made it clear the prisoners of war will be ''found'' only after the United
States compensates Vietnam for war damages.

Twice this year, Americans have been held hostage. Both the Achille Lauro and
Trans World Airlines hijackings showed our Government ''fully focused'' on
recovering the captives alive as soon as possible. Both incidents demonstrated
our national belief that every human is special. Why should it be different for
servicemen? We are all familiar with President Reagan's intimate involvement in
the planning and capture of the Achille Lauro hijackers. Can't we expect the
same personal involvement in bringing the P.O.W.'s home?

Mr. Reagan has difficult questions to answer: Do you really care about the
P.O.W's? If so, why are so many wives, mothers, sons and daughters of these
prisoners convinced that you are not in charge? Most of all, what will you tell
these men when they come home? Will you be able to look them in the eye, after
five years as President, and say you did everything possible to bring them home
- especially after your chief foreign policy adviser says you're not?

I hope that President Reagan understands that ''the issue that won't go away''
won't go away until all the P.O.W.'s come home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NO EASY ANSWERS TO AFGHANISTAN QUESTIONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 365 words


To the Editor:

Louis Dupree (''How to Get the Russians Out of Afghanistan,'' letter, Oct. 25)
points out some of the growing complications in the search for a solution of the
Afghan problem. It is true that Zbigniew Brzezinski's formula suggesting a
''linkage'' or rather a trade-off between the United States and the Soviet Union
over Nicaragua and Afghanistan, besides being speculative, puts small nations in
the category of meek pawns in the big game of the superpowers.

However, some of the ideas Mr. Dupree has offered seem equally impractical. A
rapprochement between India and Pakistan on the ''defense'' of South Asia does
not appear possible in the foreseeable future. While Pakistan might be unwilling
to liquidate the Kashmir question, India, with its history of close
understanding and relations with the Soviet Union, is hardly likely to assume a
role in any form of defense that jeopardizes their mutual ties.

Involvement by Pakistan in overtly supplying heavy American or Westen arms to
the Afghan rebels will undoubtedly expose the country to perils it may not be
able to face, unless the United States becomes openly ready to defend Pakistan
against the Soviet Union in the event of a crisis that Islamabad cannot manage.

A geographically unalterable fact is that the Soviet Union has a contiguous
border with Afghanistan while the United States, in the event of wider conflict,
may have to recall some of the lessons learned from the war in Vietnam
concerning the logistical problems entailed.

Some thoughtful Pakistanis are already wondering whether most of the three
million refugees will ever leave their country regardless of the outcome of the
current struggle in Afghanistan. They are aware of the new demographic and
political problems that they may have to face if most of the refugees do not go
back to Afghanistan. The route lies through detente between superpowers,
recognition of the dignity of smaller nations and the strengthening of
international institutions for reconciliation. It also applies to some other
regional conflicts.M. SHAFQAT Rye Brook, N.Y., Oct. 25, 1985 The writer is a
former career diplomat in the Pakistani foreign service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 16, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NORTH KOREA SUPPORTED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 49, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 15


Sports ministers from 13 Soviet-bloc countries, including the Soviet Union,
issued a communique in Hanoi today supporting North Korea's demand to be co-host
of the 1988 Seoul Olympics and establish a joint North-South team for that
event, the Kyodo News Service of Japan reported. It was the first time the
Soviet-bloc countries issued a unified statement on the Seoul Olympics.

In a report from the Vietnamese capital, Kyodo said the communique, issued after
the conclusion of the 34th Socialist Countries Sports Ministers' Conference,
asked the International Olympic Committee and the various sports federations to
''seriously consider'' North Korea's demand. The communique did not say whether
the countries were contemplating a boycott. The I.O.C. has rejected North
Korea's stance, saying a divided Olympics would violate the Olympic charter.

The Soviet Union, Cuba and other socialist countries have criticized the
selection of Seoul, saying that the Olympics should not be staged in one state
of a divided nation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN SPARKMAN, 85, EX-SENATOR, DIES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 44, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words


Former Senator John J. Sparkman, the Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee in
1952, died of a heart attack early yesterday at Big Springs Manor Nursing Home
in Huntsville, Ala. He was 85 years old.

The Alabama Democrat had served 42 years in Congress before retiring in January
1979. He suffered a heart attack shortly after his retirement, and had been
undergoing therapy at the nursing home for a broken hip he suffered about two
years ago.

Mr. Sparkman was first elected to the Senate in 1946 after serving for 10 years
in the House of Representatives.

He was one of the early populist liberals to come out of the South and made his
greatest legislative mark as an advocate of public housing while serving as
chairman of the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs from 1967
to 1974.

Stevenson's Running Mate

The high point of Mr. Sparkman's political life came in 1952, when he was chosen
as Adlai E. Stevenson's running mate. In the general election the Democratic
ticket was defeated by Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Republican Presidential
nominee, who received nearly 34 million votes out of the 61.5 million cast and
won the electoral votes of all but nine states.

For a number of years Mr. Sparkman was chairman of the Senate Select Committee
on Small Business, where he worked on bills to help the survival of small,
family-owned farms.

He also served for many years on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee under
Senator J. W. Fulbright, Democrat of Arkansas, and succeeded Mr. Fulbright as
chairman in 1975 after the Arkansan failed to win renomination in a primary
contest.

While Senator Sparkman was highly regarded by his colleagues for his geniality
and intelligence, some maintained that the Senator, then 75, was too old and
lacking in energy to give the Foreign Relations Committee firm leadership.
Indeed, some members of the committee and others familiar with its workings
contended that under Mr. Sparkman's chairmanship the committee lost much of its
influence.

Power to the President

Shortly after becoming chairman of the committee, however, he expressed in an
interview his belief that the President, not Congress, shaped foreign policy,
and that was how it should be.

''The Constitution places in the hands of the President the right to originate
and execute foreign policy, and he does that through the agency of the Secretary
of State,'' Mr. Sparkman said. While acknowledging that the committee ''does
have an impact on foreign policy,'' he asserted, ''It doesn't make foreign
policy, except insofar as the executive will take our advice and consent.''

Mr. Sparkman was especially displeased with efforts by the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee to set itself ''in public opposition'' to Presidential
policy on the Vietnam War.

He frequently praised John Foster Dulles, who was Eisenhower's Secretary of
State, for his consultations with the Foreign Relations Committee. He also
admired Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, the Michigan Republican, for his
bipartisan approach to foreign policy in World War II and the immediate postwar
years.

John Jackson Sparkman was born on Dec. 20, 1899, the seventh of 11 children of
Whitten Joseph Sparkman and the former Julia Mitchell Kent. His father was a
tenant farmer, and Mr. Sparkman spent his early childhood in a four-room log
house near the Tennessee Valley town of Hartselle in northern Alabama.

He studied by kerosene light, walked four miles each way to high school and
worked his way through the University of Alabama, where he earned a Bachelor of
Arts degree, a master's degree and a law degree.

To enroll in the university, Mr. Sparkman received a $75 bank loan on a cotton
crop, then got a job tending furnaces that paid $4.20 a week. In his junior year
he obtained a teaching fellowship in history and political science. He served as
student president, edited the college newspaper and was selected by Phi Beta
Kappa.

He joined the Army in October 1918; three years later, after receiving his
bachelor's degree, he was given a reserve commission in the Coast Artillery.

Civic Leader in Huntsville

After graduating from law school in 1923, he married Ivo Hall of Albertville,
Ala., who had been a fellow student at the university. A daughter was born in
1924.

Mr. Sparkman was admitted to the Alabama bar in 1923 and started practice in
Huntsville, where he soon became a civic leader, serving as president of the
Huntsville Chamber of Commerce and district governor of the Kiwanis Clubs of
America.

He started his political career in 1936, when he was elected to the House from
Alabama's Eighth Congressional District.

He was re-elected to the House five times. In 1946, in an unusual set of
circumstances, he was elected to the Senate at the same time he was re-elected
to the House. He won the Senate race to fill the unexpired term of Senator John
H. Bankhead, who had died earlier that year, and resigned from the House.

Mr. Sparkman was elected to a full term in the Senate in 1948, and was
re-elected in 1954, 1960, 1966 and 1972.

In January 1978, at the age of 78, he announced that he would not seek
re-election to the Senate. He gave no reason for his decision to retire but
noted that he had served in the Senate longer than any other person from
Alabama.

'Only Cherub in the Senate'

Mr. Sparkman, a burly, 6-foot, ruddy-faced man with white hair and a jolly
disposition, was once called ''the only cherub in the United States Senate.'' He
summed up his political philosphy by saying, ''You have to sit down with one
another, talk things over, reason together.''

Although he rarely took a stand against Presidential policies, Senator Sparkman
opposed President Truman's civil rights programs, saying he feared the President
had committed a ''colossal blunder'' in proposing legislation to curb racial
discrimination.

In 1948, Mr. Sparkman joined with Senator Richard B. Russell of Georgia in
proposing that Truman drop his bid for the Democratic Presidential nomination,
but opposed the Dixiecrats who tried to take over the Alabama party machinery.

At the 1952 Democratic National Convention, Mr. Sparkman initially supported
Senator Russell for the Presidential nomination. He played a leading role in
persuading Northern delegates to tone down their civil rights proposals and in
persuading Southerners to accept planks they had opposed.

After Stevenson, who was then Governor of Illinois, was nominated for the
Presidency on the third ballot, Senator Sparkman was nominated for the Vice
Presidency by acclamation.

Besides his wife, Ivo, and daughter, Julia Ann Shepard of Washington, Mr.
Sparkman is survived by a grandson, Tazewell T. Shepard 3d of Huntsville.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary Photo of John J. Sparkman (NYT, 1975)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


The Reagan Administration has decided to propose to the Soviet Union at the
summit meeting next week that the two nations use their influence to try to
bring an end to the Iran-Iraq war, Administration officials said today.

As President Reagan flew to Geneva in advance of his meetings next Tuesday and
Wednesday with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the officials said they thought the Persian
Gulf war was one regional issue in which Moscow and Washington had a common
interest in seeing the fighting stopped.

But there was a recognition, a senior official said, that any Soviet-American
cooperation on this issue would probably have to be in parallel and not in
concert, given the sharp differences between the two sides on almost all
regional world issues. They said they were hoping for some statement at the end
of the summit meeting by the two leaders calling for a negotiated end to the
conflict.

Pressure From Arab Nations

One official said there had been pressure from Arab nations on both the United
States and the Soviet Union to join forces to seek an end to the war, which has
been going on for more than five years.

Some Arab countries urged that Washington and Moscow join as co-sponsors in a
United Nations Security Council resolution to end the fighting. But the United
States rejected the idea, officials said, because it felt this would have no
impact on Iran, which regards the United Nations as dominated by those hostile
to it.

Foreign Capitals to Be Briefed

Richard W. Murphy, the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs, will be in Geneva during the summit meeting, in case his
expertise is needed in the negotiations. He will then go to the region to brief
key capitals on the talks.

Other regional assistant secretaries have also been asked by Mr. Shultz to go to
Geneva and be briefed on the meetings before fanning out to world capitals,
State Department officials said.

Regional issues are due to be discussed on Wednesday morning by Mr. Reagan and
Mr. Gorbachev, although they could come up earlier during the two men's private
meeting on Tuesday morning, and in ''side talks'' by other members of the
delegations.

Given the refusal to date of Iran to consider any negotiated accord that does
not include the resignation of the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein, there was no
optimism that any Soviet-American approach might work.

But one official said those in Iran who want an end to the war might seize upon
the fact that Moscow and Washington were in agreement on the need for a
cessation of fighting, to argue their point of view.

The United States has recently improved its relations with Iraq by establishing
formal diplomatic ties, but it has had no relations with Iran since the hostage
crisis of 1979-81. The Soviet Union, which has been a major arms supplier to
Iraq in the past, has recently improved ties with Baghdad after several years of
chill. Its relations with Iran are also chilly, because of the Soviet military
involvement in Afghanistan, which is strongly opposed by the Iranians, and
because of the anti-Communist views of the Khomeini Government.

Iranian Arms Supplies

But Iran relies heavily on arms being supplied by Syria, Libya and North Korea,
all nations with good ties to Moscow. Washington says it believes the Russians
have more leverage on the Iranians than might otherwise appear to be the case.

Secretary of State Shultz, who has not held out the hope of any other regional
issues being resolved during the summit, did note the American interest in
discussing the Iran-Iraq war with the Soviet side at the summit meeting.

'Deserves Attention'

''This is a war that deserves attention,'' Mr. Shultz said at a news conference
on Thursday, ''and that's a war that's been very deadly, where chemical weapons
have been used, where there doesn't seem to be any outcome in prospect and which
is not in any inherent way a product of conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet
Union.

''And I would hope that we might be able to talk about it constructively,'' he
said, ''but that again remains to be seen.''

Mr. Reagan, in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly last month, drew
attention to the regional issues between the two countries and said they were
often major causes of friction between the two nations.

He cited five areas where Soviet or Soviet-backed troops were involved -
Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, Ethiopia and Nicaragua. But there are other
issues to be discussed as well, officials said.

Arab-Israeli Conflict

Chief among these is the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the possibility of bringing
about peace in the Middle East.

The Soviet Union has favored an international conference to which all parties
would attend, as well as the United States and the Soviet Union. Recently, Prime
Minister Shimon Peres said Israel would be interested in such a conference if it
led promptly to direct talks between Israel and Jordan, and if the Soviet Union
restored diplomatic relations with Israel.

Mr. Shultz said, ''I would be very surprised if there were any breakthrough on
an international conference in the Middle East.''

''However,'' he said, ''we will talk about regional issues and certainly the
Middle East is one of them that both countries have a major interest in.''

After the 1973 war between Israel and Egypt and Syria, the United States and the
Soviet Union served as co-chairmen of a Geneva conference for peace in the
Middle East. But Washington increasingly served as mediator between Israel and
the Arabs without Soviet participation.

Some Middle East experts say they believe peace cannot be achieved in the Middle
East without the full participation of Syria, and that would mean allowing the
Soviet Union to play a major role due to its ties with Damascus.

Washington is prepared to convey Israel's insistence that the Soviet Union
establish diplomatic relations as a price for Israel's attending an
international conference with the Soviet Union, but there is skepticism that
Moscow is interested at this time in such a step.

Key Issue Is Afghanistan

The issue of most importance to the Soviet Union is Afghanistan, where more than
100,000 Soviet troops have been involved in an inconclusive guerrilla war for
six years, against insurgents who have received some covert military help from
the United States, via Pakistan. Negotiations for a political solution have
dragged on for years, and Moscow has refused to set a date for a troop
withdrawal.

American officials say they have so far seen nothing to indicate any progress on
this issue.

In response to the American charges of Soviet interference in Afghanistan's
internal affairs, the Soviet side is expected to raise the question of American
military support for the insurgents in Afghanistan and for the anti-Government
forces in Nicaragua.

Concern About Nicaragua

On Nicaragua, the United States will raise its concern about Soviet military
supplies to the region, mostly through Cuba, and to warn that this was leading
to increased tensions in the region.

Another area of particular sensitivity is southern Africa, where both sides are
committed to carrying out Security Council Resolution 435 of 1978 calling for
the independence of South-West Africa, which is also known as Namibia. The
United States has linked the end of South African control over Namibia to the
withdrawal of 30,000 Cuban combat forces from neigboring Angola.

More recently, there has been discussion in Washington of supplying help to
anti-Government rebels in Angola, who are also aided by South Africa. The
Russians are certain to point to this as an American effort to undercut the
worldwide campaign against South Africa.

Another issue raised repeatedly by the United States is the continuing
occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam, which props up a pro-Hanoi Government in
Phnom Penh. The United States wants to see the withdrawal of the Vietnamese, who
have been militarily and economically supported by the Soviet Union, and
agreement on internationally supervised elections in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Calls for Meeting On Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 16


Vietnam asked the United States today to send a high-level delegation to Hanoi
to finish details of the two-year Vietnamese plan to account for missing
Americans. It also announced that it would soon return the remains of seven
Americans.

''We should have that meeting as soon as possible to facilitate the
implementation of the two-year plan,'' said Tran Hoan, head of the North
American desk at the Foreign Ministry.

Mr. Hoan spoke three days before the start of the first joint United
States-Vietnamese excavation of remains. He said the effort to search farmland
where a B-52 bomber crashed near Hanoi would serve to ''put an end to the things
of the past and to turn a new page in relations.''

Mr. Hoan also said Vietnam would return the remains of seven more missing
Americans immediately after the completion of excavation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Olympic Chief Optimistic

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 5; Page 5, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 16


After attending a meeting of sports ministers from 13 Soviet-bloc nations, Juan
Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, described today
the Olympic movement as ''very united'' and predicted ''some very successful''
Summer Games in Seoul in 1988.

But Samaranch said the socialist countries had not made a final decision on
whether they would attend the 1988 Olympics planned for Seoul, South Korea.
''All that can be said now is that the socialist countries are preparing their
teams. They will make a final decision only six months before the Games, when
the I.O.C. will send out the official invitations,'' he said.

One problem, he acknowledged, involves North Korea and the holding of the
Olympic Games in the South Korean capital. ''The Games were awarded to Seoul and
the Games will be held in Seoul,'' he said.

The 34th Socialist Countries Sports Ministers' Conference issued a communique
Friday supporting proposals made by North Korea for the two Koreas to co-host
the Games and establish a joint Olympic team.

Samaranch said if the proposal to be co-host of the Games meant ''to split the
Games in two, the answer is no. That is not possible.'' But he said the I.O.C.
is working ''to present some conditions to North Korea that can enable them to
accept an invitation to take part in the Games.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIGGING A SHELTER AND A GRAVE

BYLINE: By Grace Paley; Grace Paley's most recent story collection is ''Later
the Same Day.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


THE NUCLEAR AGE By Tim O'Brien. 312 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.

WHAT subjects! The probable end of the world, survival, madness. Whose madness?
One-person madness or world-madness. Fear. When Tim O'Brien's new novel, ''The
Nuclear Age,'' begins, the year is 1995 and a man is digging a deep hole in his
backyard. Why? Because the world hasn't changed too much and neither has he. The
world is still accumulating its thousands of nuclear death heads. And he,
although he now owns the blonde wife and clever child any American male assumes
is his due, is still the boy we meet in flashbacks. About 40 years earlier,
William Cowling was a child suffering such extreme clear-sightedness that he was
unable to put on the soft cloth of faith threaded with reason and common sense
with which most children begin to dress their terror as soon as they hear the
bad news we grown-ups have to tell them.

In books, in real life, we say to them, ''Well it's true what you learned in the
street the other day, there are these thousands of bombs. There is the
possibility that people could get awfully angry and push some button somewhere.
Yes, it has happened before, but no one's that crazy and anyway (we may add if
we happened to have signed a couple of antinuke petitions) we won't let it
happen.'' Since children have to thicken their little bones, get meatier and
absorb tremendous amounts of difficult knowledge, they're happy to think, of
course no one is that crazy and besides my body doesn't have time for so much
fear.

Still, the information is there and for this child, William, the pinkest,
fattest cloud of parental love can't obscure the fact that it did happen once,
no twice, and he can see clearly how, out of the middle of Kansas a missile is
rising, rising. No one is paying attention.

His knowledge is so sure that he begins to build a bomb shelter under the
Ping-Pong table in the basement. He hears about the usefulness to this
enterprise of lead and buys lots of pencils. His father has to say sadly when he
sees the dozens of lead pencils covering the table, ''I hate to break the news,
kiddo, but pencils don't contain real lead.''

In the sections dealing with William's childhood there's a kind of gentle but
rugged play with the American family - with the idea of the American family.
Because Mr. O'Brien is truthful, not mean or vengeful, he is able to be pretty
tough though kind.

Time passes. William acquires a strategy of silence, a natural arrogance. There
is no one worth speaking to. He's the only one who knows or cares. He lives
through the famous 60's which burn into the 70's the way they really did, with
the American bombing of Cambodia, the fall of Saigon. In the course of these
years he becomes a member of a group of antiwar campus radicals who with their
mixed agendas, guns, armor dreams, disturb the purity of his vision but not the
clarity. They all eventually descend into a military underground in Florida and
Cuba. When the Vietnam War ends they rise as he does into big money, real
estate, uranium. Suddenly I'm angry with Tim O'Brien.

What's wrong here? Is it my sense of the history of that period, my own
experience of the deep-in and far-out women and men I knew and still know? It
seems as though Mr. O'Brien has become afraid of the political meaning of
William's sensible madness. Where William is consistently clear-sighted (which
means he is more and more not out of his mind but out of the world's mind), Mr.
O'Brien becomes devious and settles for mockery which usually means easy narrow
characterization. In the case of the women this was particularly painful to me.
William's love of Bobbi, the blonde poetry-writing stewardess, and his long
pursuit of her seem fictionally just right. But the other women, his political
comrades, are overly unattractive or extraordinarily beautiful. They seem to be
the interfering author's cliched decision. This is a tack a writer would take
who is not particularly interested in the life and art of the nuclear age - or
in any age for that matter. I believe that Mr. O'Brien is profoundly interested
and probably dark with grief because of it, so I'm sorry to see these easy
flaws.

What to do? What to do? William older, richer, madder, trying to be as American
as possible, owns a shovel and a stewardess wife. The hole he is digging in his
backyard has become deeper. He has barricaded his wife and little girl in the
upstairs bedroom. He is now using dynamite to deepen the hole when necessary. We
begin to wonder whether he's digging for protection or burial.

I wish the novel could have been either more surreal or less. It falls into an
untranscending middle which muffles the important cry of ''Doom, doom.'' I do
wonder with William why we are not all out on the street corners and village
greens crying ''Stop!'' I wish either William or Mr. O'Brien had been more
thoughtful about the powerful places from which the real madness radiates; I
know it's not from my worried next-door neighbor. Is this because of the general
discomfort American writers have confronting political complexity, or the way we
are all stuck (even against our will) in a trough of private, individualistic
complaint? Still, I thank Tim O'Brien (who wrote that wonderful, inventive
novel, ''Going After Cacciato'') for pouring these important concerns into
fiction, which is not fed often enough with such disparate and essential themes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


FATHER AND SON. By F. Forrester Church. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Offspring often
are savage or saccharine, whining or windy in memoirs about their parents. This
''personal biography,'' as the author calls it, is none of the above. Frank
Church, for 24 years the Democratic Senator from Idaho, died of cancer last
year. The author is his namesake, minister of All Souls Unitarian Church in
Manhattan and clearly a person of determination and insight. This biography
shows us a man who was diagnosed as having terminal cancer at age 23, but who
went on to build a 35-year career in politics. He fought Lyndon Johnson on
Vietnam early and often; drafted and helped pass the Cooper-Church amendment,
which limited American involvement in Southeast Asia; helped rein in the Central
Intelligence Agency, and sought the Democratic Presidential nomination. Despite
the distractions of office, the elder Church showed his son how to live and, in
the end, showed all of us how to die. The son, now in his 30's, did better than
survive a strong father; he kept his own ego sufficiently in check to lead his
own life while sharing his parents' problems and achievements. If Frank Church
has a monument, it is that he made his son think his father was a great and good
man. In these days, that is an accomplishment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Frank and F. Forrester Church

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
CHILD OF THE '80'S PRESSES A FATHER TO PLAY HIS ROLE

BYLINE: By GILBERT W. CASS; Gilbert W. Cass is a high school principal in
Madison.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 38, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1666 words


THE liberal posture I acquired in the battles of the 1960's keeps me from
wearing my fatherhood as neatly and as conveniently as other fellows. My sons,
who are all but full grown, suffered under a parent with an urge to free them
rather than to hold them.

I never could buy into the formula that imposes on children of middle-class
parents a standard of behavior that includes telltale alligators on shirts, that
well-known scrubbed look, a position on the Little League and a room (always
neatly arranged) replete with heroic posters and curtains that match the spread.
All of this struck me vaguely as some sort of preparation for the venerable and
stuffy boardrooms of the future.

My reaction to the world after 1963 was that it did not make any kind of sense;
that solving my own life's riddle was complicated enough without trying to solve
someone else's. The world had not fared so well when one nation imposed its
notion of order on another. Why would that formula work in parenting? Children,
I concluded, were best left to flower as they might - not neglected, you
understand - but not injected with chemicals to kill the jiggers; not
transplanted to a manure processed by modern methods.

The fates have dealt with us cruelly or well; you decide. Stated in mathematical
terms, my wife and I have two sets of children. In the first set there are two
boys, in the second set there is my daughter. The first set is several years
older than the second. The sons were raised in turbulent waters. Before they
were out of infancy, it was apparent to many young Americans that despite our
opposition to the war in Vietnam, to the mistreatment of blacks in the North as
well as in the South and to the litany of other travesties of justice, that life
was fundamentally insensible. These atrocities would continue or be repeated in
one form or another. For a while, perhaps forever, some lost faith.

By 1975 this loss of faith had been confirmed by Watergate and its aftermath
-the demise of the Great Society - the failure of the civil rights movement and
the subsequent disillusionment of the Carter Presidency. It was in this context
that my first experience with parenthood was shaped.

Since the world had fared so badly from having an older generation force its
opinions on a younger one, who was I to funnel my children into this or that
life style? Not that I expected to be a stranger to them, but I wanted them to
emerge. To be sure, we had rules; I was no anarchist Some basic structures were
provided and there were expectations of a general sort. But no one was badgered
to become a ''company man.'' If you did not care to follow the crowd after you
had been shown the direction in which it moved (inexorably on), you might then
choose your own direction, but you must choose. No inertia permitted.

My oldest son, bored with parental urging, recoiled from the idea of organized
play at age 5. He developed opinions about games such as Hide and Seek that
parroted those espoused by Jim Bouton about baseball - that there was something
sinister and suspicious about it. On the contrary, my younger son had an almost
compelling urge to be a satisfactory child. In keeping with the tribal rites of
our society, he developed a keen interest in sports. As a parent I could not
bring myself to perform my portion of the rite, in which I would have badgered
him toward some ephemeral definition of the American dream. To this day, his
interest in sports has not waned. He is not a participator, but he continues to
regard the Boston Red Sox possessively. ''Did we win today?'' or ''Did you see
who we got in this trade?''

What might have been the result of encouragement from his father? The approval
from his peers and of society in general? Perhaps a more measureable success; a
college scholarship, the fame and the adoration that comes with it? Or perhaps
it might have yielded fleeting moments of glory on some Saturdays in some
autumns. Would that have been worth it?

Ten years later, my daughter has established a motif that is both conventional
and provocative. It is conventional because Emily is a child of the mainstream,
a child of the Reagan Presidency. It is provocative because it has brought me in
touch with behaviors I had regarded until now as -well, as parental. With the
boys I had done so little; demonstrated an interest in what interested them from
day to day and insidiously imposed my own value system on them (they like to
read, they write and speak amazingly well), but I had pledged no central role in
their lives.

But here was a child of the world! A joiner, a participator, a player who wanted
her parents to share this world with her. Yes, she would be a Girl Scout. Yes,
she would go to overnight camp. Yes, she would play in the school band. Yes,
yes, yes.

The chief form of this participation has been her dedication to playing in the
town's soccer league. It began simply enough, as I suppose do all adventures
that change the world for us. A few practices, a few games, a few dollars, a few
gallons of gas, some parental cheering. One way it changed everything was that
the team was phenomenally successful.

Here were girls, age 10, tasting not one victory but many, grasping in a vague,
subconscious way what it is to be a winner. It may be no less a thing than a
cultural revolution for girls at any age, never mind the age of 10, to establish
themselves as winners. A man with a son who is a winner is engaged in a rite of
passage that is saturated with history. But when women establish themselves as
winners from the age of 10, we are in a brave new world. My perspective on
''women, age 10'' has taken on new contours and it occurs to me that I may yet
encounter the feelings attendant to the rituals of parenthood that I have
heretofore missed.

Emily's participation on the soccer team has been level-headed. A bright child,
she understands her position and is willing, even anxious to practice. At the
end of each game she expresses an interest in hearing what her parents think of
her practice. She presses us to play our proper role.

My perception of this may be wrong, but I felt early on some invisible tension,
some unexpressed expectation, that I, her father, had a latch on this game and
her ability to play it. In short, I sensed my opinion was important to her. It
was here that I could become parental. This sense that I had an informed opinion
brought us to the basic level of fathers and daughters. It's simple: Dad knows.

Mind you, it is one thing to know, as a parent does, whether God carries an
umbrella or to know why the sand gets cooler and wetter as one digs down with
one's hand. At the very least, these matters can be guessed. But, try sitting at
the wheel of the car as a 10-year-old jumps into the passenger seat and closes
the door, leaving you alone with her. She looks you in the eye and says, ''What
did you think?'' She does not expect the response ''O.K.'' or ''You were
great.'' It is a more apocalyptic sort of ''What did you think?'' Behind it are
three statements: 1) I know you know; 2) If you don't tell me the truth, I'll
know you are not telling me the truth, and 3) I already know how I did so you'd
better make this good.

At moments like this you need to be resourceful, to put your experience to work.
At moments like this, unlike almost any you would meet in the flow and crush of
the marketplace, you need to be yourself. You are at this occasion on the brink
of being found out for stupid or weak or lazy or ignorant. In the beginning I
failed at these dialogues. I would slip out the side door. I would begin with
something like, ''Well, honey . . . '' I talked attitude, I talked attempt. I
did not speak in Fahrenheit or in centigrade. I gave a general forecast. To this
she gave no answer, of course, only a turning away, a fiddling with some loose
portion of the uniform. It was a disappointment for her, a feeling that I had
dealt her out when honesty counted.

I watched from week to week. As I watched, I began to understand the game better
and to understand that Emily wanted to be good. I determined to be helpful, to
develop a better role for myself. Unwittingly, I was becoming that parent I was
loathe to become - peddling confidence and encouragement, cheerleading on the
sidelines.

After a game near the end of the season, we went through our confrontation in
the car once again. The door closed. We were alone. After a few moments we both
began to speak at once. She with ''What did you think?'' and I with ''Emily,
you've got one or two things to work on.'' She looked at me, willing to have me
go on. I remembered how to be a good teacher: brief, clear, ask questions, know
your audience. I told her I needed to know more about the position she was
playing and what she was allowed to do and I told her that I would need paper
and pencil to try to figure some things out.

We chatted the rest of the way home about her position and the other positions
and the rules surrounding the position. I knew she understood the game. Here we
were, the two of us, talking business. Real business. A person could not get in
this conversation if he did not listen carefully, respond with good questions
and make solid suggestions. Here were two people talking and you knew that they
were interested in each other and what each had to say. This was one-to-one,
man-to-woman.

Later, at home, I sat in the family room to await the running of the Belmont
Stakes. It was dark and cool in the room; the television burbled and the VCR was
ready to take history and save it. Emily crossed the room to me and thrust
something in my face. Paper and pencil. ''Well?'' she said, as she looked at me,
eye-level. During the next 20 minutes we drew diagrams of plays and together set
some goals to be met at future games. For the time, I felt like a professional
dad. The VCR got the race. Good race. Great soccer season. Wonderful life.
Gilbert W. Cass is a high school principal in Madison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SUMMIT: WHAT IT'S ALL ABOUT;
The Summit Record

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


July 1955.President Eisenhower meets in Geneva with Nikolai A. Bulganin, British
and French leaders. Results: The ''Spirit of Geneva'' began to thaw the cold
war. General discussion; no agreements. September 1959. Mr. Eisenhower and
Nikita S. Khrushchev meet at Camp David, Md. Results: ''The Spirit of Camp
David'' - a general feeling that scientific and cultural exchanges would be
good, and that disarmament is the world's main problem - but no concrete
results. May 1960. Mr. Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev go to Paris, but the
Russian uses the shooting down of the American U-2 spy plane over the Soviet
Union to torpedo the meeting. Results: Increased tensions. June 1961. Mr.
Khrushchev and President Kennedy, in Vienna, have heated exchanges. Results: No
formal agreements. A year later, the Soviet Union tries to put missiles in Cuba;
U.S. forces their removal. June 1967.President Johnson meets in Glassboro, N.J.,
with Aleksei N. Kosygin to discuss Middle East, the Vietnam War and nuclear
arms. Results: No results on Vietnam; seeds sown for later arms talks. May 1972.
President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev, in Moscow, sign first treaties setting
ceilings on strategic nuclear arms and limiting antiballistic missile systems.
Results: They agree to keep negotiating on arms; regional issues still divide
them. June 1973. Mr. Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev meet in Washington. Results:
Agreement to try to complete a new arms treaty by 1974; agreements on practical
issues. June-July 1974. Mr. Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev meet in Moscow and Yalta.
Results: Treaty banning underground nuclear arms tests with yields exceeding 150
kilotons; 10-year economic pact. November 1974. President Ford and Mr. Brezhnev,
in Vladivostok, reach tentative pact limiting missile launchers and bombers and
lay base for second strategic arms treaty. Results: Treaty not completed before
President Carter takes office; talks go back to starting point. June 1979. Mr.
Carter and Mr. Brezhnev sign the second strategic arms limitation treaty in
Vienna. Results: Though United States Senate never approves treaty, both sides
agree to observe limits informally.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of past summit meetings between the U.S. and Russia

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SUMMIT;
'THE BRIEFINGS WAR': Q. AND A. IN ENGLISH AND RUSSIAN

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Nov. 17


The Soviet briefing followed the established pattern: a recitation of Soviet
positions, a fiery exchange with a dissident, attacks on American policies and
some snipes at the Reagan Administration.

The difference today, however, was that with the arrival of the American
delegation on Saturday night for the summit meeting, the Soviet monopoly on news
briefings came to an end.

Right after Georgi A. Arbatov, Yevgeny P. Velikhov and Col. Gen. Nikolai F.
Chervov left the stage at the International Conference Center, it was the
Americans' turn. Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security
adviser, went onstage with the White House spokesmen, Larry Speakes, and the
deputy spokesman, Edward P. Djerejian.

'The Briefings War'

If General Chervov, the Soviet military disarmament spokesman, fiercely assailed
Mr. Reagan's space-defense plan, the Strategic Defense Initiative, and accused
the United States of having no constructive answer to Soviet proposals, Mr.
McFarlane said the Soviet military program had driven the United States to the
''Star Wars'' plan.

Bemused journalists dubbed it ''the briefings war,'' and it continued later when
a briefing by Mr. speakes was broadcast over closed-circuit television back to
the conference center, where the Soviet publicity and press organizations had
set up shop.

The Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and his wife, Raisa, along with Foreign
Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and the rest of the main Soviet contingent are
scheduled to arrive here on Monday morning.

Soviet sources said the team included Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, a former Ambassador
to Canada, whom Mr. Gorbachev has placed at the head of the Communist Party's
propaganda department.

Author of Anti-U.S. Book

Mr. Yakovlev, 61 years old, accompanied Mr. Gorbachev to London last December
and to Paris last month, and he is believed by some diplomats to be a major
contributor to the Kremlin's new public relations policies. Mr. Yakovlev is also
the author of critical books about the United States, of which the most recent
is ''From Truman to Reagan.''

Others in Mr. Gorbachev's entourage include include Georgi M. Korniyenko, a
Deputy Foreign Minister and an expert on the United States; Anatoly F. Dobrynin,
the Soviet Ambassador to Washington, and Andrei M. Alexandrov-Agentov, the
foreign affairs aide to the Soviet leader. Leonid M. Zamyatin, the chief Kremlin
spokeman who has been in Geneva since last week, is also numbered in the
official entourage.

The newcomers will join a team of Soviet experts and journalists that often
seems to have an impact considerably in excess of its size, partly because the
notion of effective public relations by the Kremlin in the West still seems a
novelty.

About a dozen experts, led by Mr. Arbatov, head of the Institute of U.S. and
Canadian Studies; Mr. Velikhov, vice president of the Soviet Academy of
Sciences, and Roald Z. Sagdeyev, director of the Institute of Space Research,
continued to give briefings and interviews to some 3,000 reporters, most of them
from the West, who have converged on Geneva. The Soviet Union's own press
contingent, by contrast, consists of 38 reporters and 7 technicians.

Question From a Dissident

At their separate briefings today, General Chervov and Mr. McFarlane recited the
tallies of missiles and warheads, the claims and charges that have flown back
and forth between Moscow and Washington in the maneuvering of the last weeks.
But the telling points were often outside the familiar agenda.

Soon after the Soviet briefing got under way, a slight Russian woman stood and
demanded to know how many Russian dissidents were in labor camps for anti-Soviet
propaganda.

The Soviet officials tried to return to an earlier question, but the woman
loudly persisted.

She was Irina Grivnina, a Soviet dissident who served time in labor camps for
her campaigns against Soviet misuse of psychiatry against dissidents, and who
was allowed to immigrate to the Netherlands in late October in what was then
seen as an effort to influence the Dutch decision on deploying American cruise
missiles. The Dutch chose to deploy the missiles, and here was Mrs. Grivnina,
covering the summit meeting for the Dutch magazine Elseviers and assailing
senior Soviet officials in a way that would have landed her quickly back in
prison in the Soviet Union.

'Glad You Asked'

Mr. McFarlane's briefing was also not without its heated moments. At one point
Genrikh Borovik, a senior political commentator and one of the Soviet
correspondents who interviewed Mr. Reagan two weeks ago, asked why Washington
did not change its ''aggressive policies'' in places like Vietnam, Chile,
Grenada, El Salvador and Nicaragua.

Fumbling with his translation headset, Mr. McFarlane asked that the question be
repeated, and Mr. Borovik, to the delight of the audience, began anew, this time
in English.

''I'm glad you asked that,'' Mr. McFarlane said when he had heard the question,
and he proceeded with a long attack on the Soviet presence in Afghanistan, an
issue he had referred to only obliquely until then.

As a result of fairly broad accreditation requirements, far from all the
''journalists'' in the hall were reporters, as Mrs. Grivnina demonstrated, and
the crowded hall often threw together unlikely partners. Mrs. Grivnina, for
example, sat near Mr. Borovik, and elsewhere in the hall representatives of
other groups - Jewish, right-wing and church groups among them - passed out
their leaflets among American and Soviet officials.

In one of the more curious pairings, Vladimir B. Lomeiko, the chief spokesman of
the Soviet Foreign Ministry, sat in front of Mr. Reagan's son Ronald Jr., who
came to Geneva to write about the summit meeting for Playboy magazine. Neither
Mr. Lomeiko nor the younger Mr. Reagan seemed aware of each other.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Back to Bipartisanship

BYLINE: By John Temple Swing; John Temple Swing is acting president of the
Council on Foreign Relations.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


The conventional wisdom is that a bipartisan foreign policy is dead, the victim
of Vietnam, Iran, Afghanistan and an all-guns, no-butter President. Don't be too
sure: There may be life in the old bipartisanship yet, and President Reagan has
a rare historic opportunity - starting at the summit meeting - to restore it to
robust health.

The argument that bipartisanship in foreign policy is dead runs like this: Until
Vietnam, consensus in foreign policy held center-stage, benefitting from an
unwritten alliance between the moderates in both principal political parties and
leaving the ideologies of left and the right on the fringes. Not until Barry
Goldwater came along in 1964 did a fringe candidate capture a major party
ticket; and Mr. Goldwater was emphatically rejected in the general election.

Vietnam split both major parties. Liberal Democrats, led by Eugene McCarthy and
disgusted with what to them was an immoral and unnecessary war, deserted the
center and contributed heavily to the electorate's repudiation of Hubert H.
Humphrey in 1968. Meanwhile, conservative Republicans, furious at the moderates
for selling out a war that ''could have been won,'' captured their party and, by
1980, the White House itself. They were aided in no small measure by what many
be-lieved was a liberal Democratic President's failure of will in Iran, and the
subsequent Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

It soon became clear that President Reagan's militant foreign policy views lay
to the right even of Mr. Goldwater's. His overwhelming re-election triumph in
1984 seemed, therefore, to confirm that ''bipartisanship'' was dead.

While this analysis has validity, it overlooks an essential part of the story.
William Schneider, an analyst of public opinion, reminds us that the majority of
the American people for decades have consistently favored both strength and
peace, a duality that lies at the heart of a bipartisan foreign policy. Brought
to bear on the most critical relationship of our times, that between the
superpowers, this roughly translates into: ''Remain strong so that the Russians
can't push us around, but, when the opportunity arises, negotiate arms control
agreements with them.''

To a large extent, their perceived success in achieving both these goals
enhanced the popularity of two very different Presidents, John F. Kennedy and
Richard M. Nixon. In his first term, however, Ronald Reagan gave us only half
the equation: strength, but no progress whatsoever toward arms control.

Now, as the summit meeting approaches, he has an opportunity to redress this
imbalance. With the Soviet offer to reduce nuclear warheads to 6,000 (and
land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles to 3,600), coupled with the
Administration's cautious response (accepting the general concept and expressing
a willingness to limit our own air-launched cruise missile warheads to 1,500),
the ingredients for real progress may be at hand. Politically, protected on his
right flank, the President can afford to move - much as President Lyndon B.
Johnson, a Southerner, could afford to move on civil rights.

In many ways, the real test for the President will be whether his instincts will
lead him to unite his Administration and sustain it in the months ahead during
what is bound to be a lengthy, trying pursuit of a realistic arms control
agreement. There are reasons for hope. As various observers have pointed out,
the President's staff has always included ideologues and pragmatics, but when
forced to choose Mr. Reagan opts for the pragmatists.

If, as it now appears, the opportunity is there, the President should grab it.
He can count on having the American people solidly behind him, for he will have
brought about a new synthesis of those two central ingredients of a bipartisan
foreign policy: peace as well as strength. This is the only foreign policy that
can ever work over the long haul, for it is the only one the majority of
Americans have shown they willingly support.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LON NOL, 72, DIES; LED CAMBODIA IN EARLY 1970'S

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


Lon Nol, the Cambodian general whose pro-American military Government ruled his
country for five years until it was overwhelmed by Khmer Rouge forces in 1975,
died yesterday at St. Jude's Hospital in Fullerton, Calif. He was 72 years old
and lived in Fullerton.

A hospital spokesman, Ruth Conboy, said Mr. Lon Nol was admitted to the hospital
emergency room in the early morning and died at 10 A.M. His son, Rithy Lon, said
Mr. Lon Nol had been suffering from heart disease.

In the years since his Government was ousted, Mr. Lon Nol had lived quietly in
Hawaii and California. Unlike former Cambodian leaders, he remained inactive in
the country's affairs or in the problems of Cambodian refugees in the United
States.

Toppled a Dynasty

General Lon Nol took center stage in the history of Cambodia in March 1970 when
he and other military leaders toppled the 1,168-year-old Khmer Dynasty, led by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and replaced it with a republic.

When he was forced out almost five years later, flying out of the Phnom Penh
airport, Mr. Lon Nol left behind a legacy of corruption and military defeat.

But the failings of his Government would pale by what was to come. His departure
from Cambodia was soon followed by the arrival of the Communist Khmer Rouge
guerrillas, who initiated the methodical destruction of Cambodia and the mass
killing of three million of their fellow countrymen.

''If the other side took over,'' Mr. Lon Nol said two weeks before he left
Cambodia, ''they would kill all the educated people - the teachers, the artists,
the intellectuals - and that would be a step towards barbarism.''

Son of a Civil Servant

Lon Nol was born on Nov. 13, 1913, the son of Lon Hin, a minor official in the
province of Preyveng, adjoining the Vietnamese border. His grandfather was once
the governor of the province. As a son of a civil servant faithful to the French
administration, the young Lon Nol received a good education - elementary school
in Phnom Penh, high school from 1928 to 1934 at the Lycee Chasseloup-Laubat in
Saigon.

After graduation, he was given a job in the judicial administration of Siemreap,
near the ancient temples of Angkor. In 1937, he entered the administrative
service, and eight years later, as the Japanese were being expelled, he became
governor of the province of Kratie, on the left bank of the Mekong River.

It did not take him long to make his way to Phnom Penh. By 1949, he had risen to
director of the administrative service. In 1952, he was commissioned a
lieutenant colonel and given command of an infantry battalion.

The successful campaigns that Colonel Lon Nol led against the Vietminh as the
French retreated from Indochina helped to keep Cambodia independent.

In 1955, he became military Chief of Staff in Phnom Penh, and soon he became
Defense Minister. In 1961, he rose to the rank of lieutenant general.

Won Sihanouk's Trust

Mr. Lon Nol won Prince Sihanouk's trust and held a broad succession of top
ministries - Foreign Affairs, Political Coordination, Information and Tourism,
as well as Defense.

In 1966, the Prince appointed Mr. Lon Nol as Prime Minister for the first time.
Traveling frequently in the countryside, Mr. Lon Nol began to build a following
among local provincial chiefs, a loyalty that was said to worry the Prince.

He resigned his post as Prime Minister in 1967 after a serious car accident that
left him hospitalized for several months. But in August 1969, faced with an
economic crisis and Government corruption, the Prince called Mr. Lon Nol back
into service as Prime Minister of a ''salvation Government.''

Seven months later, with Prince Sihanouk absent on a visit to Moscow, the
Government closed the airport and the borders, convened Parliament and announced
the overthrow of the Prince as chief of state.

Vowed to End Corruption

The new Government announced its intention to rout the Communist rebels and end
the corruption that had encouraged urban support for the removal of Prince
Sihanouk.

But with the tidal wave of American military aid, the corruption would grow. The
Cambodian Army went from 37,000 soldiers to more than 200,000 in two years.

As it grew, some commanders and recruiters began taking the pay of nonexistant
soldiers, and other commanders would sometimes not pay the troops who did exist.
Hungry soldiers often resorted to pillaging villages, alienating the peasants
from the Government cause.

Shortly after the Lon Nol regime took power, the United States renewed its
bombing raids against Vietcong bases inside Cambodia, and American and South
Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia to strike against the Communists.

After the invasion, the alienation of Cambodian peasants in the countryside
grew, and a full-fledged civil war developed. In five years, from 1970 to 1975,
the Khmer Rouge grew from about 3,000 guerrillas to about 30,000.

When the final Khmer Rouge insurgent offensive started in 1975 on New Year's
Day, Mr. Lon Nol was a reclusive and physically crippled leader taking a
vacation at the beach resort of Kompong Som on the Gulf of Siam, about 140 miles
from the capital. On April 1, he left in secrecy, accompanied by a party of 32
family members and associates.

Lon Nol is survived by his wife, Sovanna; five sons, Rith Lon and Rithy Lon of
Fullerton, Calif.; Vicheth Lon of Anaheim, Calif.; Dara Lon of Merced, Calif.,
and Rasmey Lon of Long Beach, Calif.; four daughters, Stephanie of Fullerton;
Laura Det Cheav and Lon Keng of France, and Samnang Thon of LaVerne, Calif., and
six grandchildren.

A funeral service is planned for noon Saturday at the Neels Mortuary in Brea,
Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lon Nol (AP)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Experts in Vietnam To Excavate Crash Site

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: YEN THUONG, Vietnam, Nov. 18


A team of American experts and a plane filled with heavy equipment arrived in
Hanoi today to begin the first joint excavation of an American warplane crash
site in Vietnam.

With hundreds of people watching, the American team drove a 21,000-pound
excavator along a narrow dirt road to the crash site at Yen Thuong village, 9
miles north of Hanoi, where they hope to uncover the remains of at least four
American men still listed as missing in action.

The excavation is scheduled to begin Tuesday and to take at least 10 days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MALAYSIA LEADER IS GOING TO CHINA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Nov. 18


Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad will leave Wednesday on a visit to China. The
trip is seen as an indication of Southeast Asia's interest in improving
relations with China.

The Chinese, who backed armed revolution in Southeast Asia from the 1950'
through the 1970's, are still regarded as a potential threat. But Southeast
Asian leaders say they cannot afford to ignore the political and economic
developments now occurring in China, and the openings for trade and investment
they may provide.

Dr. Mahathir's visit follows a visit to China by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore. A former Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore, Goh Keng Swee, who is
credited with being the economic brain behind Singapore's growth, has become an
adviser to China in developing coastal areas known as New Economic Zones.

Both Indonesia and Vietnam, while sharing a distrust of the Chinese, have sent
trade delegations to Peking. Indonesia, which holds China responsible for a
Communist insurgency in the 1960's, has had no diplomatic ties with Peking for
18 years. Vietnam is facing Chinese-supported Cambodian rebels in Cambodia.

Link to the Overseas Chinese

Throughout the region, overseas Chinese, drawing on their linguistic and
cultural ties with China, are reported to be looking for opportunities to sell
their goods and services or invest their capital there.

It is this natural bond between the overseas Chinese and China that continues to
cause uneasiness in Southeast Asia. There are frequent calls from regional
politicians and commentators for caution in dealing with China. Fears are fueled
by China's reluctance to relinquish party-to-party ties with the Communist Party
of Malaya, which still fields pockets of guerrillas along the Thai-Malaysian
border.

''As long as they continue to hang on to this stand, we cannot have the sort of
relations we have with other countries,'' Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia
said last week.

Malaysia and Thailand established diplomatic links with Peking in the
mid-1970's, when China cut off material support for the rebels, many of them
ethnic Chinese. On his trip to China, Dr. Mahathir is expected to discuss the
problem of the remaining, moral support for the insurgency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ENTREPRENEUR WITH OLD-WORLD CHARM

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


Nicholas L. Deak, the chairman of Deak & Company and a canny entrepreneur known
for his Old World charm, created the country's largest retail business for
dealing in foreign currencies, with about 35 offices in 15 American cities and
numerous offices abroad.

Deak-Perera money-exchange offices have been common sights at international
airports and in the business districts of major cities for years. Countless
American and foreign tourists have relied on them for their dollars, pounds,
francs or pesos.

Mr. Deak, who was slain yesterday at his Manhattan office, took advantage of his
European contacts and diplomatic skills to build lucrative businesses in what
were generally obscure areas for most Americans, including trade with Eastern
European countries after World War II.

His forte appeared to be in exploiting an occasionally shadowy niche of the
international financial market - moving wealth, be it currency or gold, across
borders.

Accused of Laundering Money

After the Vietnam War, for example, he had offices at Vietnamese refugee camps
in Southeast Asia that bought gold from the refugees. More recently, his
companies had conducted a brisk banking business in South America, taking
deposits and allowing withdrawals in other countries.

This approach created a small international empire and a fortune that Forbes
magazine once estimated at $400 million. His group consisted of a broad range of
units in several countries, including banks in Switzerland and New York State.

But last December his successes were marred when most of his companies were
forced to seek protection from creditors under Chapter XI of the Federal
bankruptcy code. The company's offices in South America had suffered a serious
run by depositors after a Federal crime commission report alleged that Deak &
Company was involved in laundering drug money.

Business associates and friends remembered Mr. Deak yesterday as a proud,
dignified man.

''He was very dignified, but never pompous,'' said Dr. Henry G. Jarecki,
chairman of the Mocatta Metals Corporation, a large precious-metals dealer.
''Because he was so proud, his recent bankruptcy problems really took something
out of him.''

Dr. Jarecki recalled a characteristic mentioned by many others who knew Mr.
Deak, who lived on an estate in Scarsdale, N.Y. ''He was proud of how vigorous
and healthy he was,'' Dr. Jarecki said. ''He was a jogger and he used to run to
my house, which is about eight miles away from his.''

Mr. Deak, a native of Hungary who was said to have spoken five languages
fluently, built his group in the United States as an international trading
company. He first formed Deak & Company in 1939, and then closed it to serve as
a senior intelligence officer in the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor
of the Central Intelligence Agency, during World War II.

He reopened the company after the war, and it emerged as a trade link between
his native Hungary and the United States. Later, he bought the Perera group, a
foreign-exchange dealer, to expand his base.

Dealer in Gold Bullion

In 1949 he made news by offering to import Hungarian manganese ore and aluminum
and copper sheets, which were in short supply in the United States. He also
bought and sold such currencies as the Yugoslav dinar, Czechoslovak crown and
the Hungarian forint in the post-war years.

Deak-Perera also became a major retail dealer in gold bullion and gold coins,
such as the South African Kruggerand. It halted Kruggerand sales last August
because of political pressures.

''Nicholas Deak was a pioneer in this business,'' said Luis Vigdor, a senior
vice president of Manfra Tordella & Brookes Inc., a large retail currency
trader. ''We were in the same basic business, but he was way ahead in building a
lot of retail shops for currency exchange at airports and things. He also
pioneered new ways of owning gold when that market caught on.''

Mr. Vigdor said Mr. Deak, for example, had helped create gold certificates,
which allowed individuals to own gold without taking physical possession of the
precious metal.

Deak-Perera ran into serious problems last year when a Federal crime commission
alleged that it helped launder drug money. It was also said to have helped
transfer overseas funds used in other illegal activities.

The company, for example, was said to have been used by the Lockheed Corporation
as a conduit to transfer to Japan $8.3 million in cash that was used to bribe
Japanese officials.

In 1978, Deak and one of its officers were convicted of failing to report $11
million of deposits by two Philippine businessmen. Later, Deak & Company was
alleged to have moved $7.6 million in cash for a cocaine ring.

When the Federal report appeared with some of these allegations, Deak's business
in South America was hit hard, Mr. Deak's son, R. Leslie, said at that time.
Customers were scared away, he said, and the withdrawal of their funds made
several units in the group insolvent.

In the wake of the bankruptcy filing, the sale of Deak's Swiss banking unit was
negotiated and an affiliate in Hong Kong was closed by the government. Last
September a Singapore lawyer, Chan Cher Boon, agreed to buy Deak & Company. The
sale has not closed and Mr. Deak was still chairman, according to his son.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article on Tuesday about the slaying of Nicholas L. Deak, the founder of Deak
& Company, the foreign-exchange concern, discussed allegations made in October
1984 by a Federal commission on organized crime that the company had been used
to launder drug money.

The article failed to include a response from the Deak family. The family has
denied the commission's allegations that it was involved in illegal activity.
The family has also said it was not aware that the company had been used by
others in illegal activities.

GRAPHIC: photo of Nicholas Deak (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
A B-52 Crash Site Yields Human Bones

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: YEN THUONG, Vietnam, Nov. 19


The first joint United States-Vietnamese search for Americans missing in the
Vietnam War found human remains today at a rural commune where a B-52 bomber
crashed 13 years ago, an American spokesman said.

The spokesman, Joe Harvey, said bone and aircraft fragments were found soon
after American and Vietnamese searchers began excavating at the Yen Thuong
commune six miles north of Hanoi.

The fragments will be flown to Hawaii for analysis, Mr. Harvey said.

American technical experts and 11 tons of equipment were flown into Hanoi Monday
and convoyed to Yen Thuong to search for the aircraft and four crewmen, shot
down in December 1972 while on a bombing raid over Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Families in Glomar Case Settle for $51 Million

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 135 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Nov. 19


Families of crew members killed or missing in the sinking of the Glomar Java Sea
off the coast of Vietnam in 1983 have agreed to a $51 million settlement.

Fred Hagans, an attorney in charge of a committee of lawyers representing the
relatives of the 81 crew members, said the settlement was the largest in United
States maritime history, with the ship's owner agreeing to pay $38.5 million to
35 families.

Relatives of the victims filed suit after a ruling by the National
Transportation Safety Board last year cited Global Marine of Houston, owner of
the drilling ship, and the Atlantic Richfield Company for negligence. The ship,
leased to Arco, sank in a typhoon on Oct. 13, 1983, in the South China Sea.

Attorneys for Global Marine and Arco said the companies did not accept blame for
the deaths.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A Reason for Testing U.S. Resolve in Angola

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 397 words


To the Editor:

Throughout the world, our enemies grow stronger, and our friends are engulfed by
the tide of totalitarian barbarism. ''Angola Is No Place to Test U.S. Resolve,''
by Robert H. Johnson (Op-Ed, Oct. 25), exemplifies the type of thinking that has
led to this situation.

Mr. Johnson states that if we oppose the Communists in Angola, they'll just
respond by ''upping the ante'' anyway. So why bother? Let's just roll over and
play dead.

Even more objectionable than this defeatist attitude is his distortion of
history. He states that the Cuban troops and Soviet advisers were invited in by
the ''Angola leadership,'' to defend itself against outside attacks. This
implies there was some legitimate government to invite the Cubans in.

The situation was otherwise. The oldest Angolan liberation movement was the
Union of Angolan Peoples (U.P.A., from its Portuguese initials) founded by
Holden Roberto. The U.P.A. was the first movement to fight against the
Portuguese colonists in the early 1960's. It was pro-West and had ties to the
United States.

When Angola became independent in 1975, the U.P.A. was allied with Jonas
Savimbi's National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (Unita), which was
composed of the southern Angolan tribes. Together, these two movements
controlled much more Angolan territory than the small Popular Movement for the
Liberation of Angola (M.P.L.A.), a group of Communist intellectuals financed by
the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence agency. They certainly represented a much
larger proportion of the Angolan population than the Soviet-backed group.

However, the Communist M.P.L.A. was able to install a Government in 1974, with
the help of 5,000 Cuban troops and 500 Russian advisers. The Russians shipped in
massive amounts of arms, including a squadron of MIG-21's, T-34 tanks and
122-millimeter artillery.

The United States Government, paralyzed by the Clark Amendment, in the wake of
Vietnam and Watergate, was unable to help our friends, even though they
certainly represented the Angolan people.

It is interesting that Senator Dick Clark of Iowa argued that the minority
Government in Luanda, installed by the Communists, would certainly fall on its
own. Now, 10 years later, it is still in place, and Unita has been forced to
turn to South Africa for help. HERSCHEL L. SCHLUSSEL Garden City, Mich., Oct.
28, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 20, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


SOME AMERICAN MEN. By Gloria Emerson. 315 pages. Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

''T

HIS is a book,'' Gloria Emerson writes in the prologue to this volume,
''suggesting why some men of different generations and class behave as they do,
how they defend themselves and have made their own trails, what they fear and
what they believe is required of them.''

It's always a little hazardous making generalizations about any large group of
people - especially members of the opposite sex. One runs the risk of sounding
self-righteous and dogmatic on the one hand, ingratiating and naive on the
other. In this case, Miss Emerson, the author of ''Winners and Losers,'' an
award-winning study of the Vietnam War, comes across as essentially well-meaning
but also a bit pretentious and condescending.

She starts by taking a sort of post-feminist viewpoint, implying that men today
actually have a much harder time of it than women: in the wake of all the
changes wrought by the women's movement, she argues, men have had to contend
with a lot of heavy new expectations on the part of women and society, and
they've also had to continue to deal with the old-fashioned definitions of
masculinity on which they were raised. Miss Emerson points out that men are
still forced to define themselves by their work (and consequently are hurt more
by the vagaries of unemployment than women, who still have the option of
choosing a career), and she reiterates various familiar observations about the
emotional costs incurred by the stiff-upper-lip school of macho self-reliance.

At times, Miss Emerson's attempts to portray the male condition curdle into
sentimentalism. ''No one cringed or turned away at the sight of a man in pain,''
she writes, noting that, in contrast, the sight of a woman in pain tends to
elicit surprise or distress. More frequently, her narrative assumes a tone of
startled sympathy that verges on the patronizing. ''In a decade when so much has
changed at last for American women,'' she writes, ''it has been odd, and even
unsettling, to keep making discoveries about men during a time when they have
been denounced as childlike, brutish, inchoate, unfeeling, bullies, and
deficient in both decency and imagination.''

She speaks of ''the possibility that many more men were capable of change,'' and
notes her own astonishment at the ''intricacy of their memories.'' Such passages
not only have a circular logic (she sets up an absurd premise - that men are
naturally unfeeling or incapable of change - only to knock it down), but also
attest to a certain smugness on the part of the author. It's as though Miss
Emerson were undertaking an anthropological study of an exotic new variety of
human being and were startled to discover - surprise! suprise! - individual
specimens actually capable of generosity, tenderness and warmth.

Besides being riddled with unsubstantiated (and sometimes dubious) generalities
- ''It is not commonplace to hear a man sounding happy,'' Miss Emerson asserts -
''Some American Men'' also suffers from a lack of coherent organization. The
book rambles around through the last three decades, commenting desultorily on
men's relationships to their work, to their country, to their fathers and to
women. There are lengthy digressions on unemployment, the American success ethic
and the Vietnam War, and shorter digressions on such matters as diet foods,
trench foot, Guyana and Miss Emerson's own experiences with men, war and soup
kitchens.

The personal reminiscences are frequently illuminating, even touching, though
the reader wonders why Miss Emerson talks about herself sometimes in the third
person and sometimes in the first. Equally distracting is her failure to
identify which names in her story are pseudonyms and which are not; the author's
note merely observes that ''in nearly all cases permission was given to use real
names.''

Happily, though, Miss Emerson has conducted her interviews with diligence and
insight. And her portraits of individual men are so carefully observed, so dense
with emotional and physical details, that the reader moves through ''Some
American Men'' quickly, impatiently wading through passages of murky
philosophizing in anticipation of the next interview.

Most of the men Miss Emerson has talked with are thoughtful and articulate, and
she sets down their life histories with almost novelistic care, turning them
from case studies into people we feel we know. We meet Stona James Fitch, a
member of the class of '83 at Princeton, who combines the charm and savoir-faire
of a Fitzgerald hero with the rebellious posturing of a contemporary James Dean;
Peter Godoff, a spirited young entrepreneur who reinvents his fortunes, moving
from his family's car dealership to the record industry to his management of his
own diet-dessert business, and Barry Whitfield, a 35-year-old Ford worker who's
trying to cope with another indefinite layoff.

Many of the profiles are tinged with the sadness of deferred dreams and the
savage ironies of adult life. Gilbert Hunn, a talented doctor who went to
Thailand to help Cambodian refugees, returns home to California, experiences a
kind of spiritual fatigue, starts wandering the world again and dies in a freak
mountain-climbing accident in Kenya. And Dan Loney, a Vietnam veteran who came
out of the war believing that nothing more can hurt him, returns to America only
to father a child apparently suffering from the maiming effects of Agent Orange.

Fascinating as these individual stories are, they tend to read more like
outtakes from a series of magazine articles than parts of an organic book. In
fact, while Miss Emerson explains that ''the men chosen for this book are those
whose thoughts about themselves and their own lives provide a range of
expressions of masculinity in this country, for better or for worse,'' the
narrative of ''Some American Men'' is so sprawling and rudimentary that the
reader is never quite sure why a particular individual has been selected - or
what his place in the book is supposed to reveal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gloria Emerson (Susan Meiselas)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN VIETNAM, A SEARCH FOR MISSING AMERICANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sgt. Randall Nash, left, and Capt. Paul Bethke searching in Yen Thuong
near Hanoi for remains of four Americans believed killed in 1972 crash of a B-52
bomber. (AP)

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
More Wreckage Found At Vietnam Crash Site

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: YEN THUONG, Vietnam, Nov. 20


United States and Vietnamese workers found more pieces of metal and fabric-like
material today from an American airplane that the Vietnamese Government says is
a B-52 that crashed in a rural garden 13 years ago. Human bone fragments were
found earlier, but it was not yet determined whether they were the remains of
American airmen.

The Vietnamese have reported that an American bomber with four airmen aboard
crashed after it was struck by missiles in December 1972.

However, American military experts at the site, nine miles from Hanoi, said they
could not yet draw any firm conclusions from the bone fragments or determine
whether the plane was a B-52.

The excavation, by 10 Vietnamese and 12 Americans, is the first joint effort to
account for the 1,797 Americans listed as missing in action from the Vietnam
war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOVERNOR'S PLAN NOT TO RUN MYSTIFIES NEBRASKANS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Neb.


Robert Kerrey was talking about ''the joy of being Governor of Nebraska.''

''It takes a tremendous amount of spirit and energy,'' he said in an interview.
''It feels good because you discover that as Governor you can make a
difference.''

The 42-year-old Democratic Governor spoke with evident sincerity. Yet several
days before the interview he spread shock and dismay in his party by renouncing
the chance to continue beyond the end of his current term in January 1987. He
will not seek a second term, he said.

The words came from a Governor who had attracted national attention, a man of
''star quality,'' as Lynn Cutler, vice chairman of the Democratic National
Committee, put it. He has become highly popular in his predominantly Republican
state, and was given an approval rating of 74 percent in a recent newspaper
poll.

Hero Status a Factor

Not the least of his attractions were his status as a war hero, a Medal of Honor
winner who became a distance runner despite losing a leg in Vietnam, and the
glamour he has acquired through the frequent visits of the movie star Debra
Winger to the Executive Mansion.

''Nebraskans,'' said one state political analyst, ''appreciate the fact that a
movie star seems to like their Governor.''

The Governor's announcement, mystifying many and stirring speculation over his
possible reasons, disappointed some state and national Democrats. It subtracted
one promising figure, many say, from a list of prospective national leaders, and
at the same time it threw wide open a race for an office that had seemed easy to
keep.

It Raises Republican Hopes

For the Republicans, the majority party in Nebraska, Mr. Kerrey's decision
raised hopes of regaining a post they regard as rightfully theirs, although
Democrats often overcome their numerical superiority, and it revived interest
among prospective candidates who had been daunted by the prospect of challenging
a popular Governor.

For Nebraskans in general, one Democratic leader said there was also wide
disappointment.

''This takes a lot of the fun out of the political scene,'' said John Cavanaugh,
a former Democratic Congressman. ''Bob Kerrey was going to be a national figure,
and Nebraska Democrats in general don't play on the national stage, at least not
since William Jennings Bryan was last nominated for President, back in 1908.

''People enjoy his independence, his freshness. And his social life gave
pleasure to a lot of people.''

The Speculation Continues

The Governor's explanation did little to dispel the mystery, ease the shock for
Democrats or quiet speculation. He said his decision was ''based on the feeling
that it is time for me to move on to a future different from being an elected
politician.''

''I look inside myself and do not feel the requisite things which would lead me
to seek re-election,'' he continued. ''In my heart there is lacking the
necessary call for 'four more years.' ''

If there were deeper reasons, an interview produced little more than glimmers.

Close friends tend to take Mr. Kerrey's explanation at face value. Mr. Cavanaugh
said: ''Bob told me privately the same thing he said publicly, that he really
didn't feel a commitment. Bob Kerrey was never really a politician. He never
viewed himself as a career politician and never wanted to be one.''

A Surprise to 'Everyone'

''Obviously, it caught everyone by surprise,'' James Pribyl, his former campaign
manager, said of the Governor's decision. ''My Lord, what political figure could
walk away from the opportunities that lay in front of him?''

An Omaha political figure said: ''Look at this scenario. You've got a popular
Governor who is widely perceived as doing a good job. He got things done. He
hasn't been afraid to make hard decisions.

''He faced an easy re-election campaign, and he had a chance to run for Senator
in 1990, when he would still be only 47. Of course the Democrats were shocked.''

Some politicians do not despair. One is Thomas Monaghan, the Democratic state
chairman. ''This has made my days hectic,'' said Mr. Monaghan. ''It has taken a
popular figure out of the scene, but we have no shortage of good candidates.''

Among those most frequently mentioned are Eugene Mahoney, an influential former
legislator who is now director of the Game and Parks Commission, and Mayor Mike
Boyle of Omaha.

On the other side, Kermit Brashear, the Republican State chairman, sees an
''opportunity to capture the governorship in a state where we have a voter
edge.'' When no other prominent Republican had seemed willing to face Mr.
Kerrey, Mr. Brashear had promised to consider it. Now, he noted, several other
Republicans show interest, including Representative Harold J. Daub and Nancy
Hoch, a Board of Regents member who ran in 1984 against Senator James J. Exon
and was narrowly defeated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gov. Kerrey (NYT/Tom Plambeck)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Forgotten Refugees

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Refugees are still fleeing Indochina, but concern for them and the rate of their
resettlement has fallen sharply. Governments respond best when a calamity makes
headlines, as when 500,000 boat people fled Vietnam in 1979. Permanent homes
were found at the rate of about 25,000 a month. But 160,000 still live in
temporary camps, and only about 5,000 a month are now being resettled.

The world needs a lobby for yesterday's victims. What makes it harder for the
most recent refugees from Indochina is that they are less likely than their
predecessors to have relatives elsewhere or the skills that host countries want.
So they may languish for years in Hong Kong or Thailand, which cannot absorb
them, as the wards of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

But the totals are not indigestible. Since 1979, the United States has admitted
580,000 Indochinese refugees; by any fair reckoning, it has done its share.
France, Canada and Australia have each absorbed more than 90,000. Meanwhile,
West Germany has taken 23,000, Britain 19,000, Japan 4,000. A world lobby for
the victims could do worse than to ask these other countries to do better.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon;
The Steady Rise of the Submariners

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 20


Quietly, the way they drive their ships under the seven seas, the Navy's
submariners have broken the hold of naval aviators on the top rungs of their
service.

Not many years ago, when aviators ruled the Navy, few top admirals were
submariners. But of 10 four-star admirals today, four are submariners, including
William J. Crowe Jr., the new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Adm.
James D. Watkins, the Chief of Naval Operations.

At the three-star level, the submariners include Vice Adm. Frank B. Kelso, now
commander of the Sixth Fleet, one of the Navy's four main fleets; Vice Adm.
Albert J. Baciocco Jr., director of research and development, and Vice Adm.
Powell F. Carter Jr., director of the staff for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Among the rear admirals, Charles R. Larsen is Superintendent of the Naval
Academy in nearby Annapolis, Md., Daniel L. Cooper is director of budget and
reports, and William D. Smith is director of fiscal management, submariners all.


Brightest and Best-Trained

Until recently, those and other critical jobs in the Navy Department in
Washington and with the fleets at sea were held by aviators or officers whose
careers had been in surface ships. Senior submariners dealt only with submarines
and not with other sections of the Navy. But as some of the Navy's brightest and
best-trained officers made their careers in submarines, the situation began to
change.

The rule of the aviators was a vestige of World War II, when the admirals who
led fast-attack carriers in strikes across the Pacific returned after the war to
champion the cause of naval aviation. Naval aviators also fought in the Korean
and Vietnam wars, where submarines had little role; the services tend to promote
officers with combat experience.

For many years, moreover, there was a shortage of nuclear-trained submarine
officers. Those officers available were forced to spend much of their career at
sea, out of the running for prestigious staff jobs and major commands ashore.

Naval officers give three specific reasons for the steady rise of the
submariners:

* The legacy of Adm. Hyman G. Rickover, the unorthodox officer who forced a
reluctant Navy to turn to nuclear power, then hand-picked 25 years ago the
officers who are attaining top rank today.

* The politicking of the aggressive Navy Secretary, John F. Lehman Jr., who has
unified the three factions of the Navy - air, surface, submarine - by persuading
them to set aside some of their rivalry and by assauging their concerns with
large sums of money for each from Congress.

* The deft hand of Admiral Watkins, the first Chief of Naval Operations to wear
dolphins, the badge of the submariner, since Fleet Adm. Chester W. Nimitz right
after World War II. Admiral Watkins has a strong hand in ''slating,'' or picking
assignments for senior officers.

Beginning in the 1950's, Admiral Rickover drove the Navy, against the will of
the ruling admirals of that day, into nuclear power, first with the submarine
Nautilus and later with nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and surface ships.

In grueling interviews, the admiral personally selected officers for training in
nuclear-powered submarines. Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen say in their
biography of him: ''By 1960, Rickover would be skimming the top-ranking
graduates of the Naval Academy and colleges whose Naval Reserve Officers
Training Corps programs had Rickover's approval.''

They're Gaining Senior Rank

It is those officers who are today gaining senior rank in the Navy. ''There's
just too much brain power in that group to keep them down,'' a naval officer
said.

Other naval officers credit Mr. Lehman for getting leaders of the three factions
to agree, back in 1981, to tamp their intraservice rivalry. Part of that deal
was to bring the submariners up on a par with the air and surface factions.

Admiral Watkins has some influence on the boards that promote officers to
commodore and rear admiral, naval officers say, but he has also been able to
promote the cause of submariners through assignments and by insisting that more
submariners attend advanced service schools. Submariners are also getting more
shore duty on key staffs.

All in all, the future of submariners appears promising, in both the near term
and the long range. Consider, for example, the submariners currently coming from
the Naval Academy and civilian colleges.

About 200 of 1,000 Annapolis graduates in each class of recent years, the large
majority in the upper reaches of the class, have selected nuclear-power training
and submarines. Indeed, in the last three years, the No. 1 male midshipman in
each class has chosen submarines for his duty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Music/Noted in Brief;
'Beehive,' Satirizing Pop Music of the 60's

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


''Beehive,'' a revue that weaves three dozen 60's pop songs into a
tongue-in-cheek history of the decade, bursts with so much vocal talent and zany
humor that one can forgive the show for seeming to have only half a brain in its
head. Like its prototype, ''Leader of the Pack,'' ''Beehive'' (the title refers
to the hair style) strings together songs that are funny in hindsight for their
attentiveness to the fashions of the day. The show, which began an open-ended
run at Sweetwater's (170 Amsterdam Avenue, at 68th Street) on Tuesday, is
performed by a cast of six young women costumed in parodies of period fashions.
The material has been grouped into four blocks, covering teen-age girl talk, the
women of the British Invasion, soul music and Janis Joplin (skillfully
impersonated by Laura Theodore). Where ''Beehive'' succeeds best is in
re-creating the silly, party-loving spirit of the early and mid-60's. In the
show's wittiest sequence, singers doing cartoon impersonations of Connie
Francis, Annette Funicello, Brenda Lee and Leslie Gore have a singing bee,
sharing their old hits. The conference climaxes with Pattie Darcy's rip-roaring
recreations of two musical melodramas by the Shangri-Las. The formidable task of
impersonating both Tina Turner and Aretha Franklin falls to the young pop-soul
singer Peggi Blu, and she meets it more than halfway, delivering ''Proud Mary''
and ''Respect'' with power and zeal to spare. The show's musical high point is a
medley of ''A Natural Woman'' and ''Do Right Woman,'' sung by Miss Blu with Miss
Darcy. ''Beehive'' falters when it becomes contemplative. Between sections, a
narrator (Adriane Lenox) reminisces about the 60's. Her reactions to the
assassination of President Kennedy, civil-rights upheavals and the Vietnam War
are interpolated into the song ''Is That All There Is?'' The idea of using the
song to describe a collective anesthetization is daring, but too sketchy in its
execution to make an emotional impact. Created and directed by Larry Gallagher
with music arranged and conducted by the club's house bandleader, Skip Brevis,
''Beehive'' is a hot little nightclub revue that would like to be something
grander. The development process will not be easy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Don't Forget the Afghans

BYLINE: By Orrin G. Hatch; Orrin G. Hatch is a Republican Senator from Utah

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A popular analogy applied to the Soviet war against the Afghan people is that
Afghanistan is Moscow's ''Vietnam.'' That's superficially true. According to
recent reports, the war has not won the wholehearted support of the Soviet
people or even - as the high desertion rate suggests - the Soviet soldiers sent
to Afghanistan. Thus, in the sense that it is an unpopular war, Afghanistan can
indeed be said to be ''Moscow's Vietnam.'' But there the analogy ends.

The Kremlin does not as a rule pay close attention to domestic public opinion.
And unlike the war in Vietnam, the one in Afghanistan is largely hidden from the
eyes of the world. These two factors make it possible for Babrak Karmal's puppet
regime to pursue its campaign to ''Sovietize'' Afghan society and to destroy the
freedom-fighters, the mujahideen.

The mujahideen have two fundamental strengths: the support of the majority of
their countrymen and their own determination and raw courage. Poorly equipped
and disorganized at the outset, they have become increasingly effective. They
control large areas of the countryside. Much to the Soviet Union's
consternation, the ''limited contingent'' dispatched to Afghanistan has not been
able to crush the mujahideen.

Moscow's strategy is not aimed at winning a military victory per se but at
cutting off the mujahideen from their base of support by terrorizing the Afghan
people. The systematic bombardment of villages drives thousands of ''internal
refugees'' into the cities, where presumably Soviet forces can exercise greater
control over them. Concurrently, the secret police is conducting a broad
campaign to arrest, interrogate and torture people suspected of opposing the
regime.

A former officer of the security police has described the following types of
torture: giving electric shocks, tearing out finger nails, plucking out the
beards of some prisoners, pressing on the throats of prisoners to force them to
open their mouths while the guards urinate into them, setting police dogs on
detainees, raping women in front of family members and other vile acts.

These are more than ''human rights violations.'' For what is happening is not
only torture but, in the strictest sense, genocide.

Of the approximately 16 million Afghans in the country in 1980, an estimated one
million have been executed or starved to death since the Soviet invasion.
According to a report by Afghan Aid, a charitable organization, about half a
million Afghans are in danger of starvation. Some four million refugees - more
than one-quarter of the population - have fled to neighboring Pakistan and Iran.

But the Afghan horror story has not penetrated our consciousness. It has not
entered our lives. This is the key difference between Afghanistan and Vietnam.
As one recent study has stated: ''Vietnam was a high-tech television war;
Afghanistan is one of those old fashioned encounters that takes place in the
dark.'' Television cameras are not allowed inside Afghanistan to film the
children whose hands have been blown off or the tens of thousands of other
mutilated victims of the Karmal regime.

But this is no excuse for the de facto blackout by much of the world's media.
Some three million Afghans refugees have fled to Pakistan; each one has a story
to tell.

Meanwhile, a far greater effort must be made to assist the freedom-fighters in
their public-information campaign. The $500,000 grant Congress has approved for
the Afghan media project, sponsored by the United States Information Agency, is
a step in the right direction. This worthwhile initiative needs to be augmented
by other efforts. The newly established Radio Free Afghanistan, which broadcasts
into Afghanistan for a half an hour a day, should be upgraded and expanded.
Mujahideen liaison offices should be established in cities such as New York,
Paris and Toyko to help raise money for the resistance fighters and to tell
their story to the world.

Vietnam was fought in our living rooms on the evening news. Afghanistan is
largely out of sight, out of mind. Soviet objectives in the region have not
changed. Arrests, torture and executions continue unabated. To ignore all this
is to do a grave injustice to the Afghan people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS;
THE LAW FIRM THAT TOXIC WASTE BUILT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY, L.I., Nov. 21


The tip-off that something big was going on at the law firm came when the bagel
situation got out of control. Until a few years ago, a lawyer stopped on the way
to work and picked up a bag of bagels to brighten up Friday morning coffee
breaks.

Pretty soon it got too big for a lawyer to handle, and a legal secretary took it
over. Then it became too much for one secretary, and several secretaries pitched
in. Finally, it was too much even for several secretaries. ''They were bringing
in bags of bagels as big as a filing cabinet,'' said Philip Weinberg, a partner
and former aide to Nelson A. Rockefeller.

It's up to 18 dozen bagels now, and if current growth projections are on target,
within a year they will need 24 dozen bagels every Friday.

Word is spreading within the legal community. Rivkin, Radler, Dunne & Bayh is
looking for a bagel place that will deliver.

The Garden City law firm is one of the 10 fastest-growing in the country,
according to a recent National Law Journal survey. With 150 lawyers, it is the
biggest suburban firm in the United States.

''Clients keep telling me to move to New York City,'' said Leonard Rivkin, the
firm's founder. ''One client in San Francisco says, 'You know I like you, Len,
but if I refer someone to you, it sounds a lot better if I say Len Rivkin, a New
York City lawyer.' ''

Mr. Rivkin built his practice from 10 to 150 lawyers in a decade, in large part
by defending corporations accused of pollution and environmental damage. He
defended the Dow Chemical Company in the lengthy Agent Orange case brought by
Vietnam veterans. Dow was so pleased, he said -''the amount they had to pay in
the settlement was so small'' - that word has spread, bringing more business.

The firm has defended asbestos companies and their insurers against 2,000 health
claims, as well as a variety of firms sued for toxic-waste damage. ''We are
representing clients at more than 300 toxic-waste sites nationally, more than
any firm in America,'' Mr. Rivkin said.

He expects to hire 50 more lawyers within a year, as businesses face a growing
number of toxic-waste suits. ''In the next two to five years there will be a
massive amount of personal-injury class actions from waste sites,'' Mr. Rivkin
said. ''Anybody that has a malignancy or birth defect within two to three miles
of a dump will sue. It'll catch on like Agent Orange.

''Businesses will need our environmental expertise.''

There are many signs of the firm's prosperity. Next spring it will move into
96,000 square feet of space -twice its current size - in a brand-new, all-glass
building nearby. Earlier this week the firm sponsored its second annual
symposium on hazardous-waste litigation, at Hofstra University.

And in October a Washington office, headed by the former United States Senator
Birch Bayh, opened.

Given the liberal record of Mr. Bayh, who was an Indiana Democrat, there was
some surprise at his move to the firm. When Marion Edey, a Washington
environmental activist, heard, she said: ''It is a bit of a disappointment. We
may have hoped for better for someone like Bayh.''

Mr. Bayh himself said he wondered whether he was going to work for the wrong
side. ''Yes, I did, I thought about it,'' he said. ''I can't remember how many
hours, how many minutes, how much worry.

''I decided one of the major problems confronting us is how to deal with
byproducts of all the goods produced in this country. In the process of
defending firms that produce these products, as one goes before Government
regulatory agencies, hopefully you have the opportunity to impress on the
clients the importance of handling these substances in a reasonable way. At the
same time, you want the Government not to kill the goose that laid the golden
egg. ''It's an interesting challenge.'' Mr. Rivkin was delighted, although he
said Mr. Bayh would be treated no differently from any of the 14 other senior
partners. ''The more he makes for himself, the more he makes for us,'' Mr.
Rivkin said.

''He told me one of his concerns when he left the Senate was, 'Will my friends
in the Senate remember me when I'm not there?' '' Mr. Rivkin said. At the
opening of the firm's Washington office, 21 Senators came. Mr. Rivkin discussed
fishing with former Vice President Walter F. Mondale. ''It was almost
awe-inspiring,'' Mr. Rivkin said. Mr. Rivkin started on his own 35 years ago in
Freeport, suing insurance companies over personal-injury claims and handling
real-estate closings. He charged $18.75 a closing, provided builders guaranteed
him three a day.

Twenty years ago, he said, he got two good verdicts against an insurance company
- ''I hit them twice, as we say in law.'' The company asked him to switch sides,
representing insurance interests, and that was the beginning of the boom.
''Someone asked, 'Lenny, how big do you want to grow?' I said, 'I know no
number. Wherever the demand takes us.' '' The firm is so cramped in its current
space, in some cases three lawyers share a phone.

Not long ago a major Long Island company - Mr. Rivkin prefers not to name it -
being taken to court in a pollution case called a Washington law firm, looking
for help. ''The Washington attorney referred them to us,'' Mr. Rivkin said.
''They were looking in Washington and we are less than 15 minutes away.''

''There's no question you are looked down upon when they hear you're from the
suburbs,'' he said. ''They expect some guy with clams in his pants. But it's an
advantage. People underestimate you.''

As Mr. Rivkin spoke, the phone rang. It was a doctor looking for work as an
expert witness in environmental cases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Leonard Rivkin (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A U.S.-Vietnam Team Confirms It Found Jet

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Friday, Nov. 22


An American-Vietnamese team searching for the remains of four American airmen
near Hanoi has confirmed that it found a United States Air Force B-52 bomber
that went down in the Vietnam War, a spokesman said today.

The spokesman, Capt. Virginia Pridyla, said the team found a ''number of larger
aircraft parts'' as well as operator manuals Thursday. Those were enough to
determine that the plane was a B-52, she said. But she said the exact
identification of the plane could not yet be made.

The excavation will continue today and is scheduled to conclude next Friday, she
said.

Vietnamese workers who are digging with the American team say four airmen were
killed when a B-52 was shot down on Dec. 20, 1972. It plunged into the
agricultural commune of Yen Thuong, nine miles north of Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: BARYSHNIKOV IN 'WHITE NIGHTS,' TALE OF TWO DEFECTORS

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


AS star vehicles go, Taylor Hackford's ''White Nights'' is an Edsel. The film,
which has nothing to do with Fyodor Dostoyevsky's ''White Nights,'' moves, but
it isn't going anywhere, and although it's newly manufactured, it's simply a
modification of the basic design created for the Cold War movies of the 1950's.

The only reason to buy it - and it's a compelling one - is Mikhail Baryshnikov,
the Russian ballet star who defected to the West in 1974 and made his debut as a
dancer-actor in ''The Turning Point.'' With ''White Nights,'' it's evident that
he's almost as much of a powerhouse personality in films as he is in the dance
world. Unlike Rudolf Nureyev, to whom the motion picture camera isn't especially
kind, discovering a lightweight presence within the one-of-a-kind ballet star,
Mr. Baryshnikov brings to the screen all of the dynamic force and intelligence
that distinguish his dance performances.

Co-starring with Mr. Baryshnikov is Gregory Hines, who's a great tap dancer but
not in the same league with Mr. Baryshnikov as a film personality, certainly not
with the kind of material that's offered by the ludicrous screenplay by James
Goldman and Eric Hughes.

In ''White Nights,'' Mr. Baryshnikov plays Nikolai Rodchenko, a Russian ballet
star who, after having defected eight years earlier, suddenly finds himself back
in the Soviet Union when the 747 jet carrying him from an engagement in Paris to
one in Tokyo accidentally crash-lands at a top-secret base in Siberia.

Mr. Hines plays Raymond Greenwood, a Harlem-born and bred professional dancer
who, disenchanted with America by his Vietnam experiences, has defected to the
Soviet Union. After a certain initial celebrity in Russia, Raymond has begun to
bore Soviet authorities, who've banished him to Siberia and what looks to be a
permanent traveling tap company of ''Porgy and Bess.''

Chance and the Russian secret police bring the two men together. The K.G.B., as
represented by an urbane, vicious, Marlboro-smoking agent named Chaiko (Jerzy
Skolimowski), blackmails the American defector and his Russian wife, Darya
(Isabella Rossellini), to spy on Nikolai and to try to persuade him to recant
and dance once again with Leningrad's Kirov Ballet company.

Nothing about the two defectors' growing friendship and mutual respect is
believable, though it could, theoretically, be plausible. Further, the narrative
is so loosely organized that after the film has been under way for an hour,
you're still waiting for it to start. By the time the locale shifts from Siberia
to Leningrad, and the film has turned into an escape melodrama - Raymond having
decided he's as fed up with the Soviet Union as Nikolai, ''White Nights''
reveals its true nature: the film is an idea that, in the jargon of Hollywood,
has yet to be ''fleshed out.''

The supporting performances are all good. That fine English actress Helen Mirren
appears as Nikolai's former lover and co-star, whose career in the Soviet Union
was almost wrecked by Nikolai's defection. Geraldine Page, for once allowed to
act her age and to wear clothes that don't look as if they came from a thrift
shop, plays Nikolai's American manager.

The Polish born and bred Skolimowski, himself a director of some repute
(''Moonlighting,'' ''The Shout''), is so reasonable as the K.G.B. fellow that
you believe him when he says to Nikolai, ''You were a great dancer, but what a
pathetic man.'' Although Miss Rossellini has made films in Italy, the film
pretends to be ''introducing'' her to movie audiences. She looks lovely but has
nothing to do but look worried when her husband drinks too much.

In spite of a long, embarrassingly directed scene in which Mr. Hines's Raymond
talks about racial discrimination in the United States and how the Vietnam War
turned American men into murderers and rapists, the character still elects to
return home, apparently to carry on the good fight through democratic processes.
At the same time, the movie's view of the Soviet Union is drab and nasty enough
to satisfy the most committed hard-liners, even those who might disagree with
Raymond's views about Vietnam.

However, ''White Nights,'' which opens today at the Ziegfeld theater, isn't
about politics. It's the sort of makeshift melodrama in which the K.G.B. agent
shouts, as his American hostages are escaping his clutches, ''Call out the
militia! Cover all the foreign consulates!'' A line like that belongs in a James
Bond movie, not something that aspires to the seriousness of ''White Nights.''

Mr. Hackford has directed two good movies, ''An Officer and a Gentleman'' and
''Against All Odds.'' ''White Nights'' is only tolerable when Mr. Baryshnikov is
on screen, especially when he is dancing alone or with Mr. Hines, with whom he
does a couple of ballet-tap numbers that are of an order of excellence that has
nothing to do with the rest of the movie.

''White Nights,'' which has been rated PG-13 (''Parental Guidance Suggested''
for those younger than 13), contains some vulgar language. Back in the U.S.S.R.
WHITE NIGHTS, directed by Taylor Hackford; screenplay by James Goldman and Eric
Hughes; story by James Goldman; director of photography, David Watkin; edited by
Fredric Steinkamp and William Steinkamp; choreographed by Twyla Tharp; music
score by Michel Colombier; produced by Mr. Hackford and William S. Gilmore;
released by Columbia Pictures.

At the Ziegfeld, 141 West 54th Street. Running time: 135 minutes. This film is
rated PG-13.

Nikolai (Kolya) Rodchenko

Mikhail Baryshnikov Raymond GreenwoodGregory Hines Colonel ChaikoJerzy
Skolimowski Galina IvanovaHelen Mirren Anne WyattGeraldine Page Darya
GreenwoodIsabella Rossellini Wynn ScottJohn Glover Captain KiriginStefan Gryff
Chuck MalarekWilliam Hootkins Ambassador SmithShane Rimmer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mikhail Baryshnikov

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
GENEVA SUMMIT COVERAGE, A MEDIA 'HAPPENING'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 33, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


HOW did it play? What did it mean, or, as Ted Koppel asked on ABC, ''Did anyone
get the story straight?'' On television, the summit conference between Ronald
Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev was made up of smiles, handshakes, shouted
questions and discussions about the answers. It may not have been television's
finest hour, but it was a long way from its worst.

In general, we got the summit in perspective. Yes, all the anchormen were in
Geneva; yes, they could just as easily have stayed home. Still, most of the
coverage was restrained. On ABC's ''This Week With David Brinkley'' last Sunday,
Mr. Brinkley asked George Will and Sam Donaldson what Geneva might give us.

''More summits and ballet,'' Mr. Will answered. Mr. Donaldson replied, ''A
headline: The summit was a success.'' Both were more or less correct. Moments
after Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev read their statements early yesterday, Walter
Rodgers of ABC summed things up this way: ''Very sweeping, very general, a
statement of principle, but what did they agree to?''

In a way, Mr. Rodgers was also touching on a problem that afflicted the
coverage: In the absence of substantive agreement or, so far as the cameras were
concerned, substantive disagreement, what was there to report? Television abhors
a vacuum; something must fill time. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger's
controversial letter to Mr. Reagan was used to the point of being beaten to
death.

In the letter, Mr. Weinberger asked Mr. Reagan to make no promise to continue to
honor the 1979 strategic arms treaty and to avoid a ''restrictive''
interpretation of the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty. Stories about the
letter appeared in The New York Times and The Washington Post on Saturday.
Television kept it alive through Tuesday.

The television reports, however, were not so much about the letter; they were
about the controversy surrounding the letter. On television, conflict plays
better than calm. On NBC last week, Chris Wallace spoke about ''the battle for
Reagan's mind.'' Hard-liners and moderates were locked in contention. The
Weinberger letter seemed like more of the same. On Saturday night on NBC, Connie
Chung said the letter had ''tainted'' Mr. Reagan's arrival in Geneva. Mr.
Wallace reported ''open and bloody warfare'' in the Administration. On NBC's
''Meet the Press'' on Sunday, Marvin Kalb confronted Robert C. McFarlane, the
President's national security adviser.

''Could the Secretary remain in the Cabinet?'' he asked.

''You're distorting this,'' Mr. McFarlane replied. ''I don't think I am,'' Mr.
Kalb said.  For just a moment, it seemed that the ''open and bloody warfare''
Mr. Wallace had mentioned might break out live on television. Then the two men
backed off. The next morning on CBS, Terence Smith spoke about a ''visibly
divided'' Administration. In interviews, experts offered their own
interpretations.

Robert S. McNamara, for example, told Maria Shriver on CBS, ''I've never seen
such disarray in the United States Government.'' One wondered: Mr. McNamara was
Secretary of Defense when the Johnson Administration was torn up by Vietnam.
What was also ignored in the reporting and commentary, meanwhile, was the
substance of Mr. Weinberger's letter. What about the 1979 strategic arms treaty?
Would Mr. Reagan pledge to honor it?

In fact, at a news conference on Sunday, mostly unnoticed on television, Mr.
McFarlane had said it was ''unlikely'' that Mr. Reagan would reaffirm the
treaty. This seemed to shed light on the ''battle for Reagan's mind.'' On
television, however, battles are more interesting than their resolutions. The
decision on the treaty was not big news.

Meanwhile, reporters took the Soviet temperature. How was Georgi Arbatov, a
leading Soviet expert on the United States, feeling today? He seemed to appear
at least once on each news program. At the beginning of the week he glowered.
There are ''no such cowboys'' as Mr. Weinberger in the Soviet Union, he told
Leslie Stahl on Sunday on CBS. The next morning he told Bryant Gumbel on NBC
that he was hearing ''crap'' from the American side. Mr. Gumbel, who seemed to
think Mr. Arbatov was an old dear, grinned and grinned.

Nonetheless, something unusual was tempering much of the coverage. Anchormen and
correspondents are criticized by some conservatives as being oblivious to the
Communist menace, if not actually sympathetic to Communist aims. In turn,
anchormen and correspondents say the conservatives do not understand
journalistic neutrality. It is a dreary argument, although passionately pursued.

However, consider one of the earliest pieces of summit coverage. On Oct. 1, Mr.
Gorbachev was seen on ABC's ''Nightline'' in an extended interview from earlier
that day with three French journalists in Moscow. He said, among other things,
that there was no ''other country in the world in which Jews have the social and
political rights to the same extent'' that they have in the Soviet Union.

Mr. Koppel, commenting on this, said to former Secretary of State Alexander
Haig, his guest on ''Nightline,'' ''Boy, you've got to admire this guy's gall,
don't you? He really does! I mean, he says no demonstrations because, really,
nothing to demonstrate about, right?''

It was an unusual outburst for Mr. Koppel, and it may have marked a small
watershed in television reporting. Anchormen this week frequently told us which
side they were on.

Thus we had Dan Rather introducing a report on the Soviet press by Bruce Morton
on CBS. No matter what Soviet reporters say, Mr. Rather declared, ''You still
end up with the party line.'' That same night on NBC, Tom Brokaw was talking
about the Soviet spokesmen who were being seen all over television. ''All their
answers follow a common line,'' he said, ''the party line.'' The next night, Mr.
Jennings mentioned the Soviet journalists: ''They don't have to be told the
party line - they are part of it.''

Moreover, commentators were explicit about the Rev. Jesse Jackson's visit with
Mr. Gorbachev. ''The Russians couldn't be more pleased with the Gorbachev-Jesse
Jackson get-together,'' Mr. Rather said. ''For the price of putting up with some
embarrassment on human rights, they got this in return: TV footage that will
play well back home in the Third World and beyond.''

In the end, it was clear the summit was a success. Mr. Arbatov, making the
rounds of the morning news programs yesterday, proved it. He told Mr. Gumbel
that it was probably ''a simplification to regard Reagan as a captive of the
military-industrial complex.'' He was giving him now, he said, ''the benefit of
the doubt.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWISTS AT THE SUMMIT: INSIDE THE GENEVA TALKS

BYLINE: The following article is based on reporting by Bernard Gwertzman and
Bernard Weinraub and was written by Mr. Weinraub

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3597 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 23


In the predawn hours before President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev left
Geneva on Thursday, American officials grew concerned about the outcome of the
summit meeting and devised a ''blow-up scenario'' to limit political damage in
case the meeting collapsed at the final ceremony.

''We had a nightmare vision with world headlines saying, 'Summit Breaks Up Over
'Star Wars,' '' an American official said.

The specter of a collapse - and the resolution of this last-minute hitch with
the agreement on a joint statement -were among accounts of the summit meeting
pieced together from descriptions provided by officials of the White House, the
State Department and the Pentagon who had been close to the negotiating sessions
and the leaders' private talks.

The President described the private talks to Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, Robert C. McFarlane, his national security adviser, and Donald T. Regan,
his chief of staff. Details were provided to other officials, and their
descriptions were used to reconstruct these episodes.

The exchanges between the President and Mr. Gorbachev ranged in tone from heated
to humorous, shedding light not only on the personalities of the leaders but
also on their efforts to avoid a collision while adhering to their conflicting
policies. Gorbachev Recalls a Cartoon These are some of the twists of events at
the summit meeting as described by the officials:

* At dinner at the Soviet Mission, Mr. Gorbachev, toasting Mr. Reagan, described
a cartoon he had seen in a Western newspaper. It showed Mr. Reagan on one side
of an abyss, Mr. Gorbachev on the other. In the caption, Mr. Gorbachev said, Mr.
Reagan was saying: ''We need a better relationship. You take the first step.''
As Mr. Gorbachev spoke, Mr. Reagan broke into laughter and applauded.

* The two sides threatened to leave without final statements if they did not
achieve satisfactory wording, and an all-night battle developed. The United
States, for example, insisted that a section on halting the spread of chemical
weapons should also call for a ban on ''use.'' The Russians refused, and the
Americans finally dropped the word.

* The Americans decided not to denounce the Russians publicly on human rights,
largely on the recommendation of former President Richard M. Nixon, who had said
that public criticism would stiffen Soviet resistance.

* As the two leaders walked to a chateau pool house, Mr. Reagan told Mr.
Gorbachev that he was miffed at a comment made the previous day by Georgi A.
Arbatov, the Soviet expert on American affairs, who said Mr. Reagan had been a
grade-B movie actor. ''Tell Arbatov they weren't all B-movies,'' Mr. Reagan
said.

* The negotiators struggled with two statements on arms control, and only the
intercession of Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev late Wednesday made a compromise
possible, hours before the final ceremony.

* The discussion on regional disputes was often sharp, but Mr. Reagan came away
convinced that Mr. Gorbachev was looking for a diplomatic solution of the
conflict in Afghanistan, where 100,000 Soviet troops have been bogged down since
1979.

* Nancy Reagan not only helped her husband select the room where he would first
meet Mr. Gorbachev, but also suggested that the two men walk to the pool house
for a private talk. ''Reagan kept saying there are plenty of nice rooms, but
Nancy insisted that a walk outdoors would be helpful,'' an official said. ''She
was right.''

* As the two delegations were having coffee after dinner, Secretary of State
George P. Shultz, normally mild-mannered, lost his temper at a Soviet official
and, pointing his finger, told Mr. Gorbachev that the official, Georgi M.
Korniyenko, a First Deputy Foreign Minister, was ''an obstructionist'' and was
thwarting the possibility of a joint statement. ''Mr. General Secretary,'' Mr.
Shultz said, ''this man is not doing what you want.'' Mr. Gorbachev whispered to
an aide. The statement was agreed upon hours later. One Topic: Human Rights
Officials said that, in the private talks, Mr. Reagan had raised the general
issue of Soviet human rights violations, such as the problem of separated Soviet
spouses of Americans. dissidents and Jews seeking to emigrate. But the officials
said the President had not mentioned any specific cases.

White House officials said Mr. Gorbachev had responded by saying that Jews in
the Soviet Union were not being discriminated against and that many Jews had
risen to high positions. He also reportedly denied that there were still many
Jews who wanted to leave the Soviet Union, as Mr. Reagan contended there were.

Officials were tight-lipped about this aspect of the discussions, adhering to
Mr. Reagan's insistence that public condemnation of the Russians would be
counterproductive.

Mr. Reagan was reportedly convinced that the personal assessments he and Mr.
Gorbachev would make of each other at their first meeting, even in the first
hour, would be crucial, not only to the outcome of the summit meeting, but also
to relations between the two countries.

Mr. Reagan had told aides that he felt that in the 1961 meeting between
President John F. Kennedy and Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader ''walked
over Kennedy and Kennedy knew it.''

That meeting, Mr. Reagan had said, led to the Cuban missile crisis, Mr.
Kennedy's call-up of reserves in the Berlin crisis and an increase of American
advisers in Vietnam.

This summit meeting, the first since President Carter and Leonid I. Brezhnev met
in Vienna in 1979, began Tuesday at 10 A.M., when Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev
walked up the steps of a 19th-century chateau outside Geneva and began an
hourlong private talk.

According to a State Department official's account, Mr. Reagan said quietly to
Mr. Gorbachev:

''You come from a modest background, and so do I. We are both family men. We are
husbands, we have children. Here we are. The world is watching us.''

Early on, during the formal sessions, the Americans and the Russians agreed not
to disclose substance until the talks were over. American officials, however,
painted a generally positive picture of the meetings, including the six hours of
private talks. It was only in the last day that they revealed the intensity of
disagreements.

''Was the tone belligerent between Reagan and Gorbachev?'' a White House
official asked, then answered himself, ''No.''

''It was very strong and categorical and positive but not angry,'' he said.
''When Gorbachev wanted to make a point he would gesticulate but there was no
table-pounding. They had good, frank, direct, let-it-all-hang-out exchanges.''

According to officials, the two leaders argued both when alone and in the formal
sessions. At times the exchanges were tense, as, for instance, when at one point
in the formal talks the two sides were discussing the President's proposal to
build a space-based missile defense.

A White House aide quoted Mr. Gorbachev as having said to Mr. Reagan, ''Just
answer, just answer, just answer.''

Mr. Reagan, the official said, replied coldly, ''I will if you will let me.''
'Always Looking At the Soviets'

The following exchange also was reported: Mr. Reagan told Mr. Gorbachev, ''You
have no right to be in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Angola. No right! This is Soviet
aggression. It is destabilizing.''

Mr. Gorbachev responded: ''There is no basis for this! None at all. These are
people struggling for national liberation.''

Another White House official heard Mr. Gorbachev tell Mr. Reagan: ''You
Americans are always looking at the Soviets as the cause of all the problems in
the third world. We are telling you this is not the case. There is not a Soviet
aim in every crisis. But you perceive that and base your policies on that
assumption. How do you explain Nicaragua? How do you explain Vietnam?''

Other exchanges were more lighthearted. As the two men, in a private talk, were
discussing Mr. Reagan's movie career, Mr. Gorbachev reportedly said he had seen
one of Mr. Reagan's movies but had forgotten the title. Mr. Gorbachev described
it as a film in which Mr. Reagan portrayed a young man whose legs were amputated
by a vicious surgeon.

Mr. Reagan beamed and said it was the best film he made, ''King's Row.''

On Wednesday, when Mr. Reagan met his aides for lunch to discuss the afternoon
agenda on nuclear missiles, an aide said the encounter might be a tough one. The
White House aide said Mr. Reagan grinned and then said: ''I know what I will do.
I will put my hands on my hips and say: 'What happened to that nice session we
had this morning? Why are you doing this to me now?' '' The Schedule Was
Negotiable The original agenda for the talks was not followed, officials said.
For instance, the first session on Tuesday morning was supposed to deal with an
overview of Soviet-American relations, preceded by a 15-minute private meeting.
But when the two leaders returned from their meeting, which had lasted a full
hour, they found themselves locked in a debate over the space-based defense
program.

While the two sides waited for the leaders to return from the private meeting,
one of the President's assistants walked up to Mr. Shultz, looked at his watch
and said: ''They were supposed to meet for 15 minutes and they have been there
for three-quarters of an hour. Shall I go in and break it up?''

Mr. Shultz later recalled: ''I said: 'If you are dumb enough to go in and try to
break it up, you don't deserve to be employed here. Let them break it up when
they choose.' ''

On Tuesday, before the group broke for lunch, Mr. Reagan outlined his concern
about Soviet involvement in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia and
Nicaragua.

In the afternoon, when arms control was on the agenda, Mr. Gorbachev started off
with a criticism of Mr. Reagan's views on regional issues. The same disjointed
pattern was followed Wedneday.

Mr. Reagan told his aides that he was impressed with Mr. Gorbachev.

''It was Reagan's idea from the start to have extended one-on-one sessions,'' an
aide said. ''He was very conscious of the Soviet mentality that we have never
given them credit as a superpower. They always feel we see them as inferior, as
poorer, that they haven't kept pace with us technologically. He wanted to assure
them, he wanted to put all that in perspective.

''In his talks with Gorbachev, he constantly referred to 'we two.' He kept
saying that our countries are the only ones to prevent a war and start a war.
There was a chemistry between the two, but Reagan kept telling us: 'Look, this
is our main adversary in the world.

Let's not forget that.' ''

The discussion of a final statement began when Mr. Shultz went to Moscow earlier
in the month. The Soviet side had suggested a communique, and Mr. Shultz came
with proposed language. There was ''semi-agreement'' in Moscow, a State
Department official said, on some points, but the two sides were far apart on
arms control.

In Washington, an interagency group headed by Robert C. McFarlane, the national
security adviser, worked out a statement on control talks as a possible guide
for a communique. Mr. Reagan handed the statement to Mr. Gorbachev on Tuesday.

Among the points were a commitment to continue to adhere to the 1972 treaty on
antiballistic missiles and to form a joint program to on space-based defense if
American research proved successful.

The statement also called for early progress in the Geneva arms talks in areas
where there was common ground, such as in the proposal for 50 percent cuts in
comparable systems and the idea of an interim agreement limiting medium-range
weapons. The United States wanted the medium-range weapons be limited to
land-based weapons.

Another point was a statement about the need for strict verification and
compliance.

Soviet Rejects Arms Proposal On Wednesday morning, the Russians rejected the
American draft and, instead, proposed a statement of their own calling for
preventing an arms race in space and ending the arms race on earth, two points
that had already been agreed to in a communique Jan. 8 preparing for the Geneva
arms control talks.

In the Soviet interpretation, the stipulations of Jan. 8 in effect ruled out any
research on a space-based defense program.

At a working lunch at the United States mission on Wednesday, Mr. McFarlane took
the lead in working out a compromise, combing the Jan. 8 communique with the
American points. But the Soviet side initially rejected that approach also.

Thus, by Wednesday afternoon, a deadlock seemed to cast a shadow over the summit
meeting.

''I kind of felt it was like a football game, the fourth quarter and we were
going in zero-to-zero,'' a White House official said. ''Everyone was getting
uneasy.''

New complications arose when the Soviet side began insisting that it would not
sign any cultural exchange accord or other agreement on Thursday if the arms
control language was not worked out.

The Russians said they did not want to sign only ''minor'' agreements. The
United States insisted it was ready to leave Geneva without a joint document if
it was not satisfied.

''Shultz said that he did not believe Gorbachev had thrown the switch yet, had
told his people what to do, but if there is no agreement and it all falls apart
we should be prepared,'' a White House official said. ''We created a blow-up
scenario. We would make our statement. Our whole tone was: 'You guys don't want
to agree, fine. We won't agree. We'll go home.' ''

Through the night, the two sides labored in what one official called a ''kind of
chicken war,'' each refusing to make the major concession. The American group
was led by Rozanne L. Ridgway, the Assistant Secretary of State for European and
Canadian Affairs, and included Richard N. Perle, Assistant Secretary of Defense;
Jack F. Matlock Jr. and Robert E. Linhard of the National Security Council
staff; Robie M. Palmer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and
Canadian Affairs, and Bruce G. Burton, an aide to Paul H. Nitze, the arms
control adviser.

The Soviet team was led by Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, chief of the United States
Department in the Foreign Ministry; Viktor P. Karpov, the arms negotiator, and
Oleg M. Sokolov, the second-ranking diplomat at the Soviet Embassy in
Washington.

Shultz Loses His Temper It was that evening that Mr. Shultz was described as
uncharacteristically losing his temper.

Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, and Mr. Gorbachev and his wife, Raisa, were
sipping coffee before a blazing fireplace with a handful of aides at the Maison
de Saussure, the 18th-century gray stone chateau where the Reagans were staying.
At that meeting, the two leaders agreed to make separate personal statements on
Thursday.

''They agreed the statements should emphasize the positive and not the
negative,'' a White House official said.

At that point, the question of a joint American-Soviet statement came up, but
Mr. Shultz was called away on a phone call. It was from Miss Ridgway, who was in
charge of the working group drafting the document. She told Mr. Shultz that, in
the words of one official, there had been a Soviet ''pullback'' and a joint
statement was running into difficulty. It was 10:40 P.M.

According to witnesses, Mr. Shultz returned to the room and, when the subject of
a joint statement came up, arose and pointed his finger at Mr. Korniyenko, the
First Deputy Foreign Minister. The witnesses said that Mr. Shultz remarked:
''You, you, you are holding it up, we cannot do business with you.''

Turning to Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Shultz said, ''Mr. General Secretary, we cannot do
business with this man.''

Afterward, Mr. Shultz told Mr. Reagan, ''I apologize if you thought I was too
hard.''

Mr. Reagan replied, ''Absolutely not.''

By 4:30 A.M. the Russians had agreed to the compromise approach worked out by
the United States, but won concessions from the Americans, who agreed to drop a
reference to the space-based defense program and to eliminate ''land-based'' as
the description of the medium-range weapons to be negotiated.

The Soviet side did not want the adjective ''land-based'' included because such
a formulation would exclude American bombers in Western Europe as well as
British and French submarine-launched missiles.

The compromise did not eliminate any differences in substance, but allowed each
to assert that the wording backed its own arguments. The Americans said it
helped their argument that progress in reducing nuclear arms should not be
linked to a prior accord on not going ahead with space-based defenses. The
Soviet side insisted that the the Jan. 8 communique fortified its argument that
the space-based defenses were intimately linked to arms reduction.

At least one result of the summit meeting was that tensions between the State
Department and the Pentagon were, for the moment, smoothed over, in the
aftermath of the disclosure of a letter by Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger to the President. The letter, warning Mr. Reagan to take a hard line
on arms control, was not issued officially, but The New York Times and The
Washington Post obtained copies of it and published reports on its contents.

After the disclosure of the letter, one White House official told a reporter in
Geneva that he felt it was designed to disrupt the summit meeting. Mr.
Weinberger ordered an investigation into the disclosure.

Defense Department officials said they had been kept out of the talks on the
first day, but that Mr. Shultz had included Mr. Perle in the second day of
talks. At a Cabinet meeting on Friday, Mr. Shultz reportedly lauded the work of
Miss Ridgway and Mr. Perle, saying that ''they worked arm in arm together.''
Gorbachev, Public and Private One element of the summit meeting that especially
interested Mr. Reagan and American officials was Mr. Gorbachev's leadership
style and personality.

American officials noted that in the private talks between the two men, the
Soviet leader referred to the space-based defense program by the Russian
initials ''S.O.I.'' which are also used in the Soviet press for ''S.D.I.,'' for
the Strategic Defense Initiative, the term Mr. Reagan prefers.

Publicly, Mr. Gorbachev called the program by the popular term ''Star Wars,''
which Mr. Reagan resents.

''Clearly, he was the man in charge,'' one American said of Mr. Gorbachev's
relations with other Soviet officials. ''Others were a bit reluctant to make
decisions without consulting him, but when the decision-making came to him, he
made it and made it instantly without flinching, without asking for our
position.''

A White House official, for example, said that when Larry Speakes, the White
House spokesman, and Leonid M. Zamyatin, the Soviet spokesman, decided to
withhold reports on the substance of the talks, Mr. Zamyatin approached Mr.
Gorbachev while photographers were taking pictures.

''Zamyatin said to him in Russian what the proposal was,'' the White House
official said. ''He never looked at Zamyatin. He just said instantly, 'We'll do
it.' ''

Mr. Gorbachev's decisiveness was also underscored at one point as Mr. Reagan
escorted him to his ZIL limousine outside Fleur d'Eau, the chateau where the
first round of talks was held.

''Reagan thought the moment was right as they stood there by the car, and asked
him to come to the United States,'' a White House official said. ''Gorbachev
immediately accepted and said: 'May I ask you to come to Russia?' The President
said, 'Yes.' ''

Mr. Gorbachev is tentatively scheduled to visit the United States next June, and
the President plans to go to the Soviet Union in 1987.

Mr. Regan, the White House chief of staff, said Mr. Gorbachev's attitudes
differed between the formal, plenary sessions and the private talks ''The
vehemence was always in the plenary,'' Mr. Regan said. ''Gorbachev was very
quiet, more persuasive, more congenial, as the President described it to me, in
his one-on-one.'' Aide Says Reagan 'Learned a Lot'

Officials said Mr. Reagan had sought a summit meeting in part because he wanted
to dispel the assertions of critics that he was more interested in a military
build-up than in peace. At the same time, a White House official said, Mr.
Reagan plainly ''learned a lot.''

''He comes away not having changed his view that fundamental differences exist
between us and that this new leader is a very strong advocate of Soviet
interests,'' the official said. ''He came away with a certain amount of healthy
respect for Gorbachev, respect for this leader who is a strong advocate and very
good interlocutor.

''He also comes away with the knowledge that there is a hell of a lot left to be
done, it is just the beginning now.'' Officials said that Nancy Reagan had
played a pivotal role. ''Her presence was felt in Reagan's mind,'' a White House
official said. ''She has an influence in terms of looking for accommodation. She
is extremely anxious for success, anxious for him to accomplish something with
the Russians, anxious for his place in history. She has more of a sense of
history than he does. He plays his role every day, she looks to the future and
how the future sees him.''

Mr. Reagan himself told a group of editors on Friday: ''We sat there in a room
and I told him, here we are and between us we could come up with things that
could probably bring peace for years and generations to come. And if we could
erase these things that have made us suspicious of each other.

''I think I'm some judge of acting, so I don't think he was acting,'' Mr. Reagan
said. ''He, I believe, is just as sincere as we are in wanting an answer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev (AP)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Barbara J. Willmarth Becomes a Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 71, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


Barbara Jane Willmarth, a vice president of the Citicorp Investment Bank in New
York, and Edward William Callahan, the vice president of health, safety and
environmental sciences for Allied-Signal Inc. in Morristown, N.J., were married
yesterday. The Rev. Thomas D. Bowers performed the ceremony at St. Bartholomew's
Episcopal Church in New York.

Marilyn LaMarche was matron of honor. John Callahan was best man for his
brother.

Mrs. Callahan is the daughter of Jane Collard Willmarth of Newport News, Va.,
and the late Dr. Charles Lindsay Willmarth, a urologist who served as an Army
colonel in command of the American hospital at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam. Mr.
Callahan's parents are Clara S. Callahan of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and the late
William P. Callahan, who was vice president of sales for Armour & Company in New
York.

The bride, a member of the New York Junior League, graduated from George
Washington University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Mr. Callahan is a graduate of Cornell University. His previous marriage ended in
divorce, as did that of the bride.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
YOUNG ACTORS SEEK THEIR OWN TRUTHS ABOUT VIETNAM

BYLINE: By NINA DARNTON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1759 words


When Herbert Ross began to direct ''The Boys of Winter,'' John Pielmeier's new
play about the Vietnam War, he realized that part of his task was to educate -
not the audience, but the actors.

The play, which is scheduled to open next Sunday at the Biltmore, posed an
unusual problem. It deals with a traumatic and polarizing period of American
history that most of the audience lived through and remembers vividly. But the
actors playing the young soldiers who fought and died in Vietnam were children
when the play's action took place. Growing to manhood when the country had a
volunteer army, they never faced the draft. Some had not heard of Quang Tri
province or the Tet offensive. One of them had never heard of My Lai.

''The Boys of Winter'' revolves around an incident that happened outside the
play's action: two days after most of his unit is wiped out by the Vietcong,
Bonney, the commanding officer, walks into a village and calmly shoots seven
innocent civilians, including two young boys and an old woman. During the course
of the play each character, including Bonney, gives an explanation for why he
did it.

The play's opening was delayed recently to allow the playwright to complete some
rewriting of certain sequences that, the producers and writer agreed, remained
overly ambiguous. Mr. Ross, who had a previous commitment to direct a movie,
moved on, and Michael Lindsay-Hogg, who directed Mr. Pielmeier's first Broadway
play, ''Agnes of God,'' was brought in. With the help of Mr. Lindsay-Hogg, Mr.
Pielmeier is working to sharpen the focus of the play.

Mr. Ross left behind a far more informed cast than he found. From the first
rehearsals the eight actors playing seven American soldiers and one Vietnamese
guide underwent an elaborate training and education program. They read a long
list of books, including Michael Herr's ''Dispatches'' and Ron Kovic's ''Born on
the Fourth of July.'' They saw films and television documentaries. They had long
conversations with Vietnam veterans, including Mr. Kovic, who was wounded and
paralyzed during his second tour of duty in Vietnam and became a prominent
anti-war activist. Mr. Kovic lives in a hotel down the street from the theater
and has seen the play in rehearsals several times, joining the cast afterward
for drinks and conversation.

As part of rehearsals the actors also attended a mock version of boot camp. They
were trained by two marine veterans of Vietnam who put them through close-order
drill, manual of arms and rigorous physical training, designed to give them a
taste of the real thing.

''They had it for only an hour a day,'' said one of the drill instructors, J.
Kenneth Campbell, who is now an actor. Mr. Campbell played a drill sergeant in
the Public Theater's production of ''Tracers,'' another play about Vietnam, last
year. ''But it was the same idea as what we really went through,'' he said.
''How do you make a guy give up his personality, change his outlook on life,
think with his spinal cord, react like a unit? I taught them what it was like to
walk into an ambush, what they would have to do to survive. I taught them about
arms, about mines and booby traps. If one of them messed up, I made the others
do push-ups so they learned to work together. It's playing with the mind. It's
training people to keep going till they drop.''

The actors got regulation military haircuts and did more bends and thrusts,
jumping jacks and sit-ups than they thought possible. They marched and chanted.
''Sound off'' they sang, ''sound off. Before we get back from Vietnam -
Charlie's gonna wish we dropped a bomb -Sound off,'' building slowly to a climax
of ''kill, kill, maim, maim, kill VC.''

''We approximated the training the best we could,'' said Mr. Campbell. ''And I
think the seed of what it's like was there. But there was so much around it that
was missing, of course. Even when they got their hair cut, now it's not such a
big thing, people wear short hair. But we were the Beatles generation. When they
cut our hair off, it was like losing your soul. Everyone knew you were in the
service. It was an immediate mark of alienation from your generation.''

In the end, Mr. Campbell said, ''they looked pretty good. I thought, if you give
me six more weeks with these guys I'll win the outstanding platoon award.''

Everyone involved believes the training was important. The actors not only
learned the kind of history and detail necessary for them to portray soldiers in
the field, they were also welded into a psychological unit, an acting company
that operated like a military company, close-knit, without stars and without
separate dressing rooms. ''I got so brainwashed,'' joked Wesley Snipes, who
plays the character named L. B., ''that I started calling everyone sir, even
women.''

Some of the actors became so intensely preoccupied with the war that they began
to be affected outside rehearsals, even to the extent of having their sleep
disturbed. Ron Kovic said that he had been spending some time with actors Matt
Dillon, 21, and Andrew McCarthy, 22, reading aloud to them from his book, which
chronicles his experiences in the war, his treatment when he returned home and
his disillusionment. ''I was struck that these young men were just born in 1964,
the year I joined the Army,'' he said. ''They remind me of myself then; young,
innocent. They admitted to me they had just begun having nightmares about
Vietnam, trying to understand the war. I've been having nightmares about it for
18 years. It was a bond. I felt connected to this new generation.''

The play tries to deal with the terrible cost of war, the tragedy of loss and
dehumanization. But it also touches on such themes as loss of innocence, the
allure of war and the heightened sensibilities it produces, and the effects war
has had on American society.

''One of the things John is also writing about,'' said Mr. Lindsay-Hogg, ''is
the abiding bond formed between dissimilar men under jeopardy. It's about
different forms of love and the survival of love when people are about to die.''

Mr. Pielmeier is 37 years old and had a medical deferment during the Vietnam
years that kept him out of the Army. He was commissioned to write this play by
Bernie Sofronski, one of the producers. ''I was asked to write a play about a
man accused of committing war crimes. Bernie was fascinated by First Lieut.
William L. Calley Jr.,'' he said, referring to the man convicted for his
participation in the My Lai massacre. ''I was not fascinated by him. I wasn't
interested in telling his story. But I was interested in writing a play about
men's feelings in war, about the relationship between men. I chose Vietnam
because if you're going to write about a war now, that's the only war to write
about.''

Mr. Pielmeier said that as he began to study the Vietnam period he became
fascinated by the description of how ordinary Lieutenant Calley seemed to be.
''I decided to write a play about a man whom I felt for who committed an
atrocity,'' he said. ''It's probably one of the themes that connects this play
with 'Agnes of God,' the theme of innocence with blood on one's hands. I'm
always fascinated by that.''

Mr. Pielmeier, who was raised a Catholic and whose plays deal with themes of
guilt and punishment, says he doesn't believe in sin. ''Sin has such a religious
context for me that it tends to diminish the true horror of an act,'' he said.
''I believe in responsibility. I believe that one should do one's best. Maybe
for me innocence with blood on your hands is my way of talking about sin.''

Some theatergoers may find the tone of the play, which restates the conflicts
and agonies of the Vietnam War years, oddly discordant with the tenor of these
times, where films like ''Rambo'' and ''Missing in Action'' have presented a
heroic image of war, even attempting to revise the history of the period.
''Americans just can't come to grips with the idea that we lost,'' said Brian
Tarantina, who plays one of the soldiers in the play. ''We're trying to win it
in the movies. That's what 'Rambo' is all about.''

The process of emotionally involving young men in the Vietnam War has produced a
curious effect on the cast. To someone who lived through the Vietnam period, it
is somewhat like time travel. Once again 20-year-old boys are speaking with
passionate fury about the war in Vietnam. They have just heard Gen. William C.
Westmoreland say, in the documentary ''Hearts and Minds,'' that Orientals put a
different value on human life than we do. And they are as outraged as people
their age were 11 years ago. They are filled with anger at the government, even
though that particular government is long gone.

But the passing time has added a new dimension. They also feel a deep respect
and compassion for the veterans themselves, whom they see as the war's most
tragic victims. Many of them even think they can better understand the
attraction war held for some of the soldiers.

''Whey you talk to the vets you get the feeling that some of them went over to
find meaning - they were looking for relationships, a cause, something to
channel their energy,'' said Tony Plana, who plays Sarge. ''Everyone talks about
how there's nothing in the world like an ambush,'' said D. W. Moffett, who plays
Bonney. ''It's heightened experience, like sex or drugs. That's what the play
deals with. It deals with how it feels for these very young people to be put
through that experience,'' he said.

''I've heard someone say that the reason Mr. Reagan is so hawkish is that he's
never fought in a war. It's a fantasy to him, the way it was a fantasy for a lot
of people before they really knew about it.''

The play stresses the special relationships - the deep comradeship -among the
men in the field. One of the advantages of the military drill, according to the
actors, was that it helped to instill some of that quality of friendship in the
company. ''They tried to re-create boot camp, which they did pretty
authentically,'' said Matt Dillon, who makes his Broadway debut in this play.
Mr. Dillon, a popular movie star among teen-agers, is probably the best known of
the play's eight actors. ''They always use a scapegoat, and they picked on me,''
he said good-naturedly.

''Matt has an unbelievable ability to stay on his right foot when the guy yells
left,'' said Mr. Moffett, to the general agreement and laughter of the group.
''But you really learn how to take orders,'' said Tony Plana. ''Yeah, Tony,''
said Brian Tarantina, ''but did you learn how to take direction?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY THE PHILIPPINES IS MAKING ITS NEIGHBORS NERVOUS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


For the noncommunist nations of Southeast Asia, trouble in the Philippines is
trouble in the family. No ally of President Ferdinand Marcos within the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to which the Philippines belongs along
with Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei and Thailand, will publicly
criticize a fellow member of Asean. That is not their style.

But in every country there are officials who ask in private how the errant
brother went wrong.

''If something happens to the

Philippines, then there's trouble for Asean,'' an official said.

''We have been working slowly, through consensus, to draw the region together.
This could upset the whole thing.''

To its Southeast Asian neighbors, the Philippines has always been a little
different. Culturally, it is the society most shaped by Western influences,
regional leaders suggest. It was Catholicized by the Spanish, who also left
their imprint in enough other areas of life to give the country what many Asians
sense is a Latin feeling.

''The first time I went there on an official visit,'' a diplomat recalled, ''I
was struck by the dramatic showmanship. So much was done for emotion, for
effect. The Marcos family are like that.''

Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia has said that, to the
Indonesian mind, the Philippines lacked the egalitarianism of other nations in
the region while suffering from a propensity for oligarchies. ''People don't
become Communists for nothing,'' he said. Others also see in the Philippines a
style of personal rule that has not marked the development of its neighbors. Lee
Kuan Yew's Singapore, however prissy and occasionally authoritarian, is in no
way comparable, even critics of Mr. Lee acknowledge. Under Mr. Lee's tutelage,
the people of Singapore have reaped huge benefits in nearly every aspect of
life.

In Indonesia, the late President

Sukarno, bitter though he was at the end of his reign, allowed himself to be
eased aside peacefully.

In contrast, the Philippines is known as the one country where no official can
make a decision - or even leave the country - without permission from the top.
While a Malaysian or Thai in government service has freedom to make decisions or
at least offer advice to those who do, Filipino counterparts are much more
circumscribed.

There are other differences, say officials who have worked with the Filipinos in
developing the regional association. Despite an education system modeled on the
American one - and a long familiarity with the English language - the
Philippines has not developed the kind of technocratic society that has
generated much of the progress enjoyed by other members of the association.

Where the Philippines has become the most conspiciously odd man out is, of
course, in the growth of its guerrilla armies at a time when the last embers of
leftist revolution are being extinguished in almost every other country in the
region. Southeast Asian leaders feel Filipino rebels are home-grown, not
fostered from abroad. In any event, until their increasing strength began to
preoccupy the association's leaders, the leaders' biggest worry was Cambodia
and, by extension, Vietnam. Officials say hopes had been high that a compromise
could be found to end the Cambodian war so that all three Indochinese countries
- Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos - could in some way become integrated into regional
development as neighbors, albeit with different economic systems.

Now association officials say they have had to turn their attention more and
more toward Manila. The Philippine economy is faltering at a time when recession
and slower growth have hit the region, but association members are nevertheless
doing their best to cushion Manila through their banks and other sources of
assistance. Economic support is about all they can give the Filipinos, officials
say, because the first unwritten rule of the association is that there will be
no political interference among members.

Unsettled times in the Philippines raise another troubling prospect. What,
officals ask, if a leftist revolution could reawaken and ally itself with an
Islamic crusade? No country in the region is unmindful of the fearful shadow of
Iran.

Last week, in fact, Malaysian police fought their bloodiest battle in 16 years
with an Islamic fundamentalist preacher and nearly 400 of his followers holed up
in a fortified compound in Kedah state. Eighteen people, including the sect
leader, were killed, and 159 were arrested, Deputy Prime Minister Musa Hitam
told a shocked Parliament.

At their most desperate, a few of Manila's neighbors have even suggested that
perhaps a military coup might be what is needed to avert a radical takeover in
the Philippines. Not so, says Jusuf Wanandi, executive director of Jakarta's
influential Center for Strategic and International Studies. ''Even assuming the
armed forces would be capable of accomplishing such a takeover and of running
the country thereafter, the resulting regime would lack all legitimacy,'' he
wrote last week in Asia's leading newsmagazine, the Far Eastern Economic Review.

It would be better, Mr. Wanandi went on, to view the present crisis as a ''vital
and necessary'' step toward the Filipinos' rediscovery of their national
character and its expression.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Southeast Asia; Photo of Ferdinand E. Marcos

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRUE VIRTUE

BYLINE: By Joseph Epstein

SECTION: Section 6; Page 64, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4581 words


THE LANGUAGE, IF MY RECENT EX-perience be any guide, badly needs a new word. The
word needed is one to describe those people who are extremely confident about
their own virtue and whose spectacular confidence nicely feeds their general
feeling of superiority. They are superior to me, or so they have made plain, and
they are probably superior to you, if only you will give them the opportunity to
demonstrate it. The people I have in mind have a superiority complex; they are
completely convinced of their own moral superiority. I think of them as
''virtucrats,'' for they are empowered by the unfaltering sense of their own
virtue.

Roughly a year and a half ago, in the midst of the Democratic primaries, I went
to lunch with an old acquaintance, a Chicago journalist. It was at an Italian
restaurant and both the food and the talk seemed fine. All was humming along
jollily when the journalist began extolling Gary Hart, who at that point in the
primaries had begun showing remarkably well. Normally, I prefer to let sleeping
dogmas lie, my own and the next person's, but I have this thing about Gary Hart.
In four words - I dislike him intensely. I dislike his self-righteousness, his
promises to make government ''compassionate'' again, his general virtuousness,
so often self-proclaimed and so endlessly implied.

As my luncheon companion went on and on about what a helluva guy Gary Hart was,
I felt this sentence gurgling in my throat - a sentence I have used, in the
mostly liberal circles in which I travel, to enliven dull parties and,
sometimes, to end lively ones - and then, whoosh, it was out. ''I voted for
Reagan in 1980,'' I said, ''and shall probably do so again.'' There, you might
say, went the lunch. To the veal limone on the plate before me was now added an
ample side order of political bile.

After I had allowed that I had voted for Ronald Reagan and would probably do so
again, my lunch companion said he thought Reagan dangerously stupid. I requested
examples of his stupidity, but none was forthcoming. He added that the men
around Reagan were a terrible and dangerous lot, yet here, too, impressive
examples were wanting. He brought up Central America. I said I thought it worth
defending, even with its wretched regimes, especially since the Communists were
willing to go to such lengths to put and sometimes to keep leftist governments
in power there. He said that we drive these people into the arms of the
Communists. I said it seemed to me that it doesn't usually turn out to be a very
long drive.

When the salad arrived, I went on the offensive. I claimed that, despite the
frequent Laurel and Hardy-like antics of the C.I.A., despite the patent
interests of American business abroad, I thought the humanitarianism of the
United States in its dealings with other nations, through the supplying of food
and money and technical assistance, was impressively generous and in fact
unsurpassed by any other modern nation I knew. He brought up multinational
corporations. I responded that multinationals didn't quite seem to represent the
worst the world >had to offer in the way of evil just now. As for things at
home, I asked him how he could be so certain that the success of the Reagan
Administration in lowering inflation didn't do more for the poor than a great
many welfare programs that seemed to be dead-ended. I asked when would the time
come when a black leader or any liberal politician would address himself to the
problem of black youth crime, which makes life hell in so many black
neighborhoods. Dessert arrived. I gulped mine; swept up in the passion of
polemic, I cannot tell you what it was.

Here I ought to insert that I have never lost a political argument in my life,
which is surely an impressive fact, though it tends to pale somewhat when I add
that neither have I ever won one. But that afternoon, as we left the restaurant,
I believed I had scored a point or two. Out on the sidewalk, as we were about to
go for the car, my companion agreed that much of what I had said was cogent.
''Of course,'' he added, ''your position is made a lot easier by your not caring
about people.''

Let us pause for a moment while I remove the dagger from my back, the arrow from
my heart, the knee from my groin. A virtucrat had struck. While pausing, let us
consider what has really been said here. I read it to mean that I may be right
or I may be wrong in my views, but, right or wrong, I have demonstrated that I
do not care about people. I have therefore a small heart and a mean spirit,
which is to say, right or wrong, I am finally wrong. I am wrong above all in not
being as good a man as the man who sat across from me at lunch. He has virtue, I
don't - case closed.

F LIP THE CALENDAR forward to roughly six months ago, when I was in my office at
the university where I teach, talking with a student. My telephone rang. A young
woman whose name I didn't quite catch identified herself as a reporter for the
school's daily newspaper.

''Mr. Epstein,'' she said, ''I am writing a piece on gay life on campus, and I
note that you once said that you'd rather your sons be murderers or dope addicts
than homosexuals. Is this true?''

Fifteen years ago, in Harper's, I had indeeed written a longish essay about
homosexuality that had stirred a certain amount of controversy: the then nascent
Gay Liberation Movement had ''zapped'' - as the word then was -Harper's offices,
and I had received hundreds of letters both for and against what I had written.
I can of course recall my general views in that article - that the origins of
homosexuality remain for the most part a mystery; that, with the exception of a
small number of extraordinary people, homosexuality has brought much grief to
its practitioners - but I could not, after 15 years, recall all that I had
written in that essay. I was, nonetheless, quite certain that I could not have
said that I would rather have my sons be murderers or dope addicts than
homosexuals, and this for a simple reason: I believe no such thing, nor have I
ever believed it.

''Where did you find such a statement?'' I asked.

She named a textbook, a gay liberation reader, where, she said, a gay friend of
hers had seen my position thus characterized.

''I am fairly certain that I never said any such thing,'' I said. ''And I would
be grateful to you if you didn't print that I did, unless you find proof of my
having done so. I hope you will consider very carefully before you do such a
thing.''

''Then you don't believe what you are reported as believing?''

''No,'' I said, ''of course not.''

''Well, let me ask you this: do you ever attack or demean homosexuals or
homosexuality in your classrooms?'' This was a monumentally insulting question,
but this young woman, beginning to sound very comfortable in the virtue of her
own position, seemed not in the least aware that it was.

''If I did,'' I said, ''I would be a pretty disgraceful teacher, wouldn't I? As
it happens, I don't even think a university teacher ought to reveal his politics
in the classrooms, let alone attack anyone for his sexual disposition.''

''Well, I'll tell you what,'' she said. ''I'm not going to print this story,
especially since you tell me that you never bring your views on homosexuality
into the classroom and never attack anyone because they're gay.''

Here I felt an unusual mixture of emotions: relief combined with rage.
Meanwhile, the stink of virtue seemed to be wafting out of the phone.

''You know, Professor Epstein,'' she said, truly flying on virtumatic now, ''I
happen to be Jewish, and when I was little I used to come home from school and
complain to my father about the black kids in our school. My father corrected
me. He said that I, as a Jew, had a special responsibility not to look down upon
anyone else. I don't know about you, professor, but I always thought my father
was right - and I still think he is.''

The telephone receiver shook in my hand. There was nothing for it but to listen
to this young woman, ablaze now with her own goodness, lecturing to me about her
enlightened views. My student sat passively across the desk from me. I must have
been red - quite possibly blue - in the face. ''Miss,'' I finally said in
exasperation, ''you seem to be mainly telling me about what a fine person you
are, which is perhaps a sign that we ought to end this conversation.'' But she
never heard me, so happy was she in her work; and she continued to rattle on
until I announced that I had a student waiting and must now hang up.

I N BOTH THESE STORIES SOME of the characteristics of the virtucrat are
revealed, chief among them his belief in his own moral superiority. The
virtucrat is certain he has virtue on his side. The virtue being laid claim to
is public virtue; it is the virtue that comes from the certainty that one's own
opinions are the only correct opinions. The virtucrat is a prig, but a prig in
the realm of opinion. The old priggery was sniffy about private life; the prig
of former years was contemptuous of the drinker, or of the woman who smoked in
public, or of the promiscuousness of either sex. The new prig, the virtucrat,
holds it against you if you don't hold his views on Nicaragua, or nuclear power,
or abortion. But the old prig and the new prig are joined in their warm feelings
of self-congratulation and their cold contempt for those with whom they
disagree.

How can the virtucrat be so confident of his virtue? Virtue, true moral
excellence, is rare at any time and given to few at all times, especially in the
public realm. In the dialogue bearing his name, Plato's character Meno asks
Socrates if he thinks virtue can be taught, to which Socrates replies that he
cannot teach it for the sound reason that he is not certain what it is.
Maimonides struggled with the question of whether the virtuous man is he who
does good things in spite of a craving to do bad, or he whose natural craving,
whose whole soul, longs to do good. But the virtucrat is beyond all this
philosophical fiddle. He knows where virtue resides - it resides in him. He is a
modern Diogenes who, in search of one good man, knocked off after turning his
lantern on himself.

Nor is the virtucrat much troubled by the fact that virtue in public life seems
so scarce a phenomenon. When one attempts to think of people in the recent
modern age who have had it, the term ''short list'' suddenly becomes vivid. Here
is mine: Mother Teresa, Martin Luther King Jr., perhaps Lech Walesa. In American
government, the only name I can think of is that of George Marshall. Short
though my list is, there are people who would argue with some of the names on
it.

None of which, of course, stops vast hordes of people from claiming virtue for
themselves. As a starter, consider our national political parties at last year's
conventions. Their ostensible tasks were to put together platforms and to
nominate candidates for election. But their real business, with the television
cameras upon them, was to impress upon the nation how each of them was the true
repository of goodness - that is to say, the standard bearer of political
virtue. Mario Cuomo's keynote address, which I thought so brilliant in delivery,
turns out upon reading to be an invitation to members of the Democratic Party to
recall that they comprise the political party that ''cares,'' that they are and
always have been the party that is concerned for the welfare of all -that they,
in short, have the lock on virtue.

The Republican convention, with its moral majoritarian ministers scurrying about
and its politicians flush with an economic boom, was saying essentially the same
thing as its rivals; though the terms were different - providing opportunity
instead of caring - the message was the same: virtue rests with us. Such claims
have always given American politics its comic piquancy; and it has kept American
politicians the subject of deserved and abiding distrust on the part of the
populace they supposedly represent.

Much virtucratic behavior is unconscious, or at least not altogether conscious.
Sometimes people do not know that the massage behind their message is one of
their own egos. Thus the morning after last year's Presidential election, on the
''CBS Morning News,'' a Mondale supporter in Chicago, a woman who appeared
stunned by the completeness of Reagan's victory, when asked her response to the
election results, replied that she worried that the ''country isn't good
enough.'' Did she know that what she was really saying is that the country isn't
as good as she, who voted otherwise? Possibly not. But then an avowedly
conservative administration in Washington is a fine spur to virtucratic remarks,
allowing those who didn't vote for it to come on quite as self-righteous as a
PBS documentary on an endangered species. At a National Book Critics Circle
panel on the current literary scene, for example, the literary critic Elizabeth
Hardwick, announcing that there has been a reversal of liberalization in the
country and that she was sure minorities would feel it in literature, went on to
remark: ''There is a belief now that you don't have to worry about women. There
is no longer affirmative action of the heart.'' Spoken like a real virtucrat.
Remarks are not literature, Gertrude Stein once supposedly told Ernest
Hemingway. Neither, when they are made without risk or cost of any sort, are
remarks virtue.

It's not all that difficult to spot a virtucrat. Whatever he may ostensibly be
saying, what he is really saying is, ''I'm fundamentally a damn fine person.''
Understanding this is a great aid in the contemporary world. It helps one to
understand why so many people espouse opinions that they don't finally believe
in; merely enunciating those opinions - opinions held to be congruous with
goodness -makes them feel good. Unfortunately, one test for virtue is that
applied for charm: if you think you are charming, this test runs, you probably
aren't. The same holds for virtue; whoever claims it -even implies he has it -
probably doesn't have it.

Another, more arduous test is that of experience. Has one's virtue been tested
under fire? One may not care for Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's politics or writing -
I happen to admire both - but there can be no disputing his moral authority, his
right to claim (though I am not aware that he has ever directly claimed it) the
heroic virtues of moral and physical courage. Similarly, no one can speak out
against the Nazi death camps with anything like the same authority of those who
have in fact survived them. One can deplore the death camps, an easy enough
thing to do; one can be pledged never to forget them; but unless one can answer
positively the old vaudeville comedian's question, ''Vas ya dere, Sharlie?'' one
cannot attain virtue from one's strong feelings about them.

The famous Scribner's editor Maxwell Perkins wrote that: ''One of my deepest
convictions is that the terrible harms that are done in this world are not done
by deliberately evil people, who are not numerous, and are soon found out. They
are done by the Good - by those who are so sure they are good that they are sure
that God is with them. Nothing can stop them, for they are certain they are
right.'' Confidence in his own goodness is, of course, another sign of the
virtucrat.

Our society seems to require a certain number of professional virtucrats:
columnists, editorial writers, broadcast commentators. I recall a television
editorial on the subject of black youth crime I not long ago heard delivered by
Bill Moyers, who is one of our leading professional virtucrats. Mr. Moyer's
raison d'etre - or, as they used to say at the old Stage Delicatessen, his
shtick - is demonstrating serious moral concern. He speaks, he is paid to speak,
for virtue. Thus, toward the close of his editorial on black youth crime, Mr.
Moyers concluded that no one is facing the issue ''squarely. So it keeps ticking
away.'' Dissolve and go to commercial. But before we do, perhaps it is best to
be clear about one thing. Someone is facing the issue squarely; and that someone
is Bill Moyers. If the clock runs out and the bomb explodes, it sure as hell
isn't going to be his fault. He has already told us what to do: create better
education, more jobs, strengthen the black family, a few simple items like that.
The rest of us, less morally sensitive, turn away. But not to worry. We sleep
tonight, for there is Bill Moyers, awake all night, sitting there doubtless in
the dark, facing the issue.

This may seem unfair to Bill Moyers, who is trapped in a hopeless form, the
editorial, the virtucratic genre par excellence, which requires a moral refrain
line usually sung with a booming chorus of self-congratulation. What is true of
editorialists tends also to apply to the majority of newspaper columnists. But
it need not always apply. In his columns Walter Lippmann did not profess to be
morally better than the Presidents he so often advised and who so often ignored
his advice; nor did he assume they were vicious if they did not immediately come
'round to his view. But most contemporary columnists - names on request - seem
positively excited by the task of making clear that they know where virtue lies
- to speak plainly, they know it lies with them.

A virtucrat is for all international amity but personally refuses to set foot in
Germany, which he can never forgive for the Nazi Holocaust. No nonunion lettuce
nor nonunion grapes are permitted to pass his lips; he shops with an eye out for
avoiding the products of firms connected with the many political causes and
events he detests; no Dow chemicals in his house, thank you very much, not even
to clean his toilet. He distrusts technology, and drives a BMW. He thinks
himself a member of E.M. Forster's ''aristocracy of the sensitive, the
considerate and the plucky,'' and has no use whatsoever for people whom he
judges not to be of it. Sensitive, considerate, plucky, he is ''a
people-oriented person,'' open to the new, hospitable to the young, caring about
the downtrodden. He has, for example, no trouble with affirmative-action
programs. If some people have to hurt by them, well, he reasons, many more
people were hurt without them; if standards lapse and quality slips because of
them, so be it.

For him, justice is the overwhelming, the architectonic, the transcendent
consideration. Yet no single philosophy can hope to encompass his wide-ranging
virtue, though the songs of Joan Baez do capture something of the capacious
spirit behind it -the Joan Baez songs of which V.S. Naipaul, in ''A Bend in the
River,'' wrote: ''You couldn't listen to sweet songs about injustice unless you
expected justice and received it much of the time. You couldn't sing songs about
the end of the world unless . . . you felt that the world was going on and you
were safe in it.''

As a man with a very low reputation for virtue used to like to say, let me be
perfectly clear about this: virtue is a fine, a beautiful, a wondrous thing. But
true virtue must always be distinguished from the claims to virtue. Among the
mysteries of virtue is its way of turning up in unexpected places. Anyone who
has read ''Schindler's List,'' Thomas Keneally's book on Oskar Schindler, the
German industrialist, bon vivant and hustler, who time after time risked his
life to save Jews from the Nazi death camps, cannot but wonder whence this man's
inexplicable virtue derived. But then virtue often comes to the fore in
situations of crisis: in slave-labor camps, in jails, in the streets of mean
cities.

If the presence of true virtue seems quite as mysterious as the presence of
evil, the presence of self-proclaimed virtue is no mystery at all. It refreshes
the spirit to proclaim one's own high ideals; it may be even sweeter merely to
imply them. What is more, it tends to pay off: many virtucrats do a brisk
business in awards, honors and other riches of this earth. Orwell's sound advice
that ''Saints should always be judged guilty until they are proved innocent'' is
not for the most part gen-erally followed in regard to virtucrats. Proclaim your
own virtue often enough and other people may come to believe it. In time, you
may come to believe it yourself.

If you can't make a convincing case for being virtuous on your own, perhaps you
can climb aboard one or another wagon of group virtue. When blacks a few years
back spoke of having ''soul,'' they were essentially making a case for their own
special street-acquired virtue; Jews as a group often do the same thing in other
ways. The older Protestant upper classes in this country, who once relied rather
heavily on the notion of class virtue, no longer have the nerve openly to claim
it.

Virtue is also available in generations. Ask anyone who came of age in the late
1960's or early 70's what it was like to grow up then, and he or she will tell
you how exhilarating it was. What they really mean by exhilarating, I believe,
is how virtuous it felt, theirs being the generation, as its members like to
think themselves, that got the nation out of Vietnam, broke down its
hypocritical middle-class mores, and in all, represented America in its highest
idealism. There has always been something slightly sanctimonious, something a
touch superior, about the 60's generation, who could even claim smoking pot as
an act of serious social significance. Theirs was the virtue generation.

Many leading virtucrats are men and women of the left. There are reasons for
this. The left has always styled itself the side of the heart, leaving the right
with the liver. Those who are on the left have always needed to feel that they
are good-hearted. Conservatives and those on the right are usually willing to
settle for thinking they are obviously correct; liberals and those on the left,
along with thinking themselves correct, must also feel they are good. For them,
what they construe to be good is tantamount to being correct. Disagree with
someone on the right and he is likely to think you obtuse, wrong, foolish, a
dope. Disagree with someone on the left and he is more likely to think you
selfish, a sell-out, insensitive, possibly evil. Smugness tends to be the
reigning sin of the right; self-righteousness that of the left.

Virtue first showed up as a strong strain on the left in the French Revolution.
Camus noted the hunger for virtue in Saint-Just, that virtucrat of the
revolution who, in the institutions he devised for the new French republic,
''refused to allow children to eat meat until the age of 16 and . . . dreamed of
a nation that was both vegetarian and revolutionary.'' Orwell noted something of
this same penchant for virtue on the left of his own day, when, criticizing his
fellow socialists in the second half of ''The Road to Wigan Pier,'' he wrote:
''One sometimes gets the impression that the mere words 'Socialism' and
'Communism' draw towards them with magnetic force every fruit-juice drinker,
nudist, sandal-wearer, sex-maniac, Quaker, 'Nature Cure' quack, pacifist and
feminist.'' The virtucrats among the Bolsheviks wanted nothing more than for
everyone else to be as good as they - and were perfectly ready to kill them if
they didn't come up to the mark.

Some subjects bring out the virtucrat in people more than do others, and at the
moment it appears to be the subjects in which the left is principally interested
that are chief among them. Individualism and hatred of government in-tervention
don't quite trip the virtue glands on the right as they once did; at least
conservatives don't seem to get in anything like the same moral sweat about them
that they used to. Nowadays, those on the right only let the virtue pour out of
them on the subject of abortion and perhaps school prayer. Their phrase
''pro-life'' is a piece of virtucratic advertising genius, leaving as it does
opponents with the position of being ''anti-life.'' But a perfectly matched set
of virtucratic opinions today would include being for a clean environment; for
all art; for the demands of all minorities; for all the nations of the third
world; and for being against oppression; against hunger; against violence;
against war and above all nuclear war (''You Can't Hug a Child With Nuclear
Arms'' reads a fine new virtucratic bumper sticker).

What makes these opinions virtucratic rather than (shall we say) serious is
that, first, one doesn't have to do much about them after announcing one is for
them and that, second, one has to dig around pretty thoroughly to find people
who are really for the things the virtucrat is against. Take the most
significant item among these opinions: war, especially nuclear war. I should
like to have someone tell me who is for nuclear war; I should like to be
presented with some names. Isn't the argument, in fact, about how best do we
avoid nuclear war, through what degrees of deterrence, negotiation, and the rest
of it. I should have thought there are grounds for serious argument here.

I don't believe the virtucrat does. On all these subjects he imputes bad faith
to those whose views aren't congruent with his own. But one sometimes has to
wonder if argument and agreement is really of utmost interest to the virtucrat.
He requires opposition in the way the old avant-garde required a bourgeoisie, in
the way snobs require a crude lower-middle class -the virtucrat requires
opposition, that is, in order to define himself. He is certain that he himself
is large-hearted and great-souled, and I sometimes think he may be secretly
pleased when the rest of us, including his own country, fail to meet his own
high standards. In letting him down we raise him up in his own estimation.

None of this, I hope it is clear, is intended to imply in any way that there are
no good causes or that morality is hopelessly antiquated in a complicated modern
world. Neither is so. Max Weber makes a penetrating, I think a crucial,
distinction on this point when he notes that there exists an ethics of
responsibility and an ethics of conviction. The ethics of responsibility
requires accepting unpleasant truths, the limits of knowledge and of human
nature, the cost of actions and sometimes the cost of refusing to take actions.
The ethics of conscience requires reminding humankind of its moral duty to live
up to its highest potentiality and restraining it from acting solely out of
expedient or base motives. Clearly, those societies function best in which the
practitioners of the ethics of responsibility and those of the ethics of
conscience are at least roughly well-matched.

In this scheme the virtucrat obviously sees himself as a proponent of the ethics
of conviction. The problem he presents, however, is that he is all conviction -
virtue pure and unadulterated. It was Camus who, considering the virtucrats of
the French Revolution, wrote: ''Pure and unadulterated virtue is homicidal.''
And so in modern history it has proven, the more zealous for virtue the
revolutionaries of the modern era have been, the greater the number of corpses
they have piled up. The virtucrats I have been writing about here cannot be
charged with anything so lethal. But what they often do kill is good causes by
tying their own easy virtue to them, and they badly maim the ideal of morality
in public life through the fraudulence of their own shoddy examples. Let us,
then, know them as virtucrats, and know, too, that their most serious function
lies in helping to make very clear what true virtue isn't.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BURMA'S ERODING ISOLATION

BYLINE: By Barbara Crossette; Barbara Crossette is chief of The New York Times's
Bangkok bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 138, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3877 words


SHE ARRIVES UNNO-ticed, a young woman selling pineapples at the busy ferry slip
in Mandalay. Arranging her wares on a board, she dips into her basket for a
handful of white flower buds. With small puffs of breath, she blows each into a
blossom to decorate each fruit. The last flower she tucks un-self-consciously
into her black hair.

The inherent beauty and grace of the Burmese have been remarked upon for as long
as foreigners have come to Burma. At the turn of the century, R. G. Talbot
Kelly, a British painter and travel writer, observed: ''These people have so
much that is innately pretty in their composition that nature itself seems to be
beautified by their presence. Even the poorest have a peculiar faculty for
arranging and wearing their simple garments to advantage.''

For the Burmese, appearance is testimony to a sense of decorum and dignity,
explains a Western-educated Burmese woman, moving quickly to the larger
preoccupation with self-esteem that arises when the Burmese are persuaded to
talk about themselves as a nation. ''We are careful not to disgrace the
family,'' she says.

At independence from Britain in 1948, the Burmese had varying political visions
for their country. Most, though, agreed that after the psychological, social and
economic dislocations of British rule, they wanted no more foreign domination -
certainly no more Westernization. They wanted to develop in their own way the
abundant resources of Burma's rich and beautiful land.

Today, nearly 38 years later, they are still waiting for the chance to create a
nation in their own image. Ruled by an authoritarian and often xenophobic
military bureaucracy under the secretive Gen. Ne Win, who took power in 1962 and
isolated Burma from almost all foreign assistance and influence, the proud
Burmese nevertheless find themselves haunted by the world outside.

The dilemma is played out in small tragicomic moments. Two recent graduates of
Rangoon University, trying to sell themselves as tour guides, stumble with
diminishing confidence through an explanation of Buddhist Lent and the holy day
of Waso. Finally, one blurts out: ''I am so sorry. We don't know the festival
days. We only know what days the foreign flights come in.''

Burma has been on increasingly cordial terms with a number of countries,
including the United States, West Germany, Australia and Japan for a bit more
than a decade. More recently, there have also been improvements in Rangoon's
links with China, a country whose economic policy changes are watched closely by
the Burmese. Despite the Government's loosely defined socialist philosophy,
international Communism has always been seen as a danger, at least by the older
officers. One of Burma's longest-running insurgencies is Communist. Over the
last 15 years, Burma's relations with the Soviet Union have grown chillier.

Living under a state-imposed philosophy called The Burmese Way to Socialism,
this nation of 36 million people feels acutely its growing dependence on Asian
neighbors who chose the paths of industrialization and the free-market economy.
Poor and caught in a net of surveillance, the Burmese find everyday life a
continual test of their resourcefulness and resilience. Many prepare for jobs
and graduate with skills only to find that they are unemployable.

Like many in poor countries, they seem to have responded collectively by opting
out, abandoning the official Way and creating an unofficial system of their own,
a sympathetic, symbiotic method of survival. A little ''pocket money'' to
low-paid civil servants smooths necessary transactions; ''moonlighting'' in
legal or not-so-legal private businesses makes a bureaucratic life viable. The
black market has become a way of life.

''See these?'' a middle-aged man says to a visitor in Rangoon as he unwraps a
small packet of rubies and jade outside the Shwedagon Pagoda, the country's
holiest site. ''With these, I go to Thailand to buy sport shirts and spare parts
for my car.''

A few days later, another man, an elderly writer dressed in a cotton shirt and
the traditional longyi, or sarong, remarks sadly: ''Everything you see on my
body has come over the border. Years ago, if someone had come to my door selling
these things, I would have chased him away, thinking they were stolen goods.
Now, I buy without asking, because I don't know if I will get another chance.''
AT PRECISELY 8:15 every weekday morning in Rangoon, traffic along a well-defined
route through the capital city's busy thoroughfares comes to a sudden halt.
There are no flashing lights or sirens, just silence as a sleek black car rolls
past, its white-curtained windows hiding the passenger from view.

''The President,'' a taxi driver explains, ''We have to be quiet and not move,
or I will lose my license.''

President San Yu's daily motorcade may be a hint of things to come. Until
recently, San Yu, who assumed the ceremonial duties of the presidency from Ne
Win four years ago, was thought to have little real authority to bolster such
displays of self-importance. All power rested with Ne Win, Chairman of the Burma
Socialist Program Party (B.S.P.P.), the country's only legal political
organization, and its sole decision-maker.

Last summer, San Yu's fortunes changed suddenly when the B.S.P.P. held its Fifth
Party Congress and Ne Win, now 74, surprised much of the diplomatic corps and
many other Burma-watchers by naming San Yu, 67, to the newly created post of
Deputy Party Chairman, placing him in direct line of succession.

Diplomats in Rangoon describe San Yu as a man who may have once been influenced
by Soviet-style socialism but who now seems to be an unknown ideological
quantity. One calls him ''a loyal and colorless character,'' adding: ''But this
may be just what Ne Win wants. The Chairman wants no jockeying for position in
the hierarchy after his death. He wants to leave behind the Burma he has created
- and he believes it is his Burma.''

The fate of Brig. Gen. Tin Oo, head of security and intelligence until 1983 and
once regarded as Ne Win's likely successor, is often recalled by Burmese and
foreigners alike to illustrate the point. Tin Oo, now in prison, convicted of
misuse of state funds, may have been developing a political presence Ne Win
found threatening, a diplomat suggests.

San Yu, a former general and army chief of staff, is described as a martinet by
those who served with him. He seems not to have relaxed his rigid style of
discipline in civilian political life. His autocratic and humorless manner has
become the focus of frustration and bitterness for many Burmese, especially in
view of reliable reports of his wife's role in a corruption scandal involving
real-estate deals and misuse of Government construction materials.

San Yu has come to symbolize all the unwarranted privilege of a military caste
abhorrent to a traditionally cultured, literate and nonviolent people - from the
exclusive military hospitals with their unlimited Western medical supplies to
foreign cars to special shops stocking luxury goods in one of the world's
poorest nations. On the other hand, Ne Win, though universally feared, is a
member in good standing of the generation of Burmese liberators who campaigned
for independence in the 1930's and 40's. It is an image he fosters. Taking over
the new Burmese national armed forces before independence, he distinguished
himself as head of a caretaker military government from 1958 to 1960 that put
the badly divided country back on track economically and strategically after a
period of drift and dissension under the indecisive and visionary Prime Minister
Nu. Since Ne Win overthrew Nu in 1962, there have been no democratic elections.

''What you have to understand,'' explains a Burmese exile in Bangkok who is not
a fan of Burma's leader, ''is that Ne Win gave the Burmese back their pride.''

''I don't know if many would agree with that assessment,'' a diplomat with long
service in Burma comments. ''But he did give them back their Burmese heartland.
For that, he might even be elected President if there were a free vote.''

After World War II, the Burmese Army under Ne Win succeeded against a host of
ethnic and political insurgencies bringing warfare to the edges of Rangoon and
threatening the nation with disintegration. The insurrections continue, but at a
greater distance from the rich Irrawaddy delta, the country's agricultural
center.

The years of battle with Karen, Shan, Kachin, Arakanese and other ethnic armies
opposed to rule by Burmans, the country's ethnic majority, have brought the
Burmese military establishment into direct confrontation with Communist
insurgents, now more or less confined to the guerrillas of the Burma Communist
Party (B.C.P.), who have been pushed into the northeast along the Chinese
border.

In the past, China, by supporting the B.C.P., posed a greater problem than the
Soviet Union for Ne Win. However, Chinese backing recently has appeared to stop.
For example, a B.C.P. radio station based in China's Yunnan Province went off
the air last spring. Burmese leaders, including Ne Win, have visited China. Ne
Win's visit was a significant step in gaining Chinese recognition of his
legitimacy as party chairman, since Peking traditionally values party-to-party
ties and had long maintained links with only the B.C.P. China's President Li
Xiannian paid a state visit to Burma last March.

Rangoon, experts say, may reap the benefit of the new Chinese leadership's
rethinking to deal a double blow to the rebellious northeast, attacking both
military targets and the opium fields that now finance the guerrillas. According
to reports in Rangoon, Burmese pilots are already being trained in the United
States for crop-eradication missions.

Some Burmese and foreign students of the country's politics and insurgencies
speculate that Vietnam - with or without the Soviet Union -might step into
China's role as backer of the B.C.P. As yet, no evidence supports this. The
Vietnamese, struggling to improve their own economy, are already well extended
militarily in Cambodia. On the Thai border, Karen rebels tell reporters it is
Rangoon, not the insurgencies, that Hanoi is trying to influence.

B URMESE POLITICAL observers watch the visits to China with special interest.
Will Ne Win, they wonder, be influenced by Deng Xioaping? The Chinese leader is
now a hero throughout much of Southeast Asia for his pragmatic analysis of his
country's economic problems and his bold decisions to remedy them. But no
Burmese commentator or diplomat with experience in Burma is prepared to predict
that Ne Win is capable or willing to follow his lead. ''This man just does not
have Deng's intelligence,'' a diplomat says.

The philosophical base of Burma's economy, which badly needs new directions,
remains vaguely socialist, formed by the Marxist and Fabian thinking prevalent
among the anticolonial movements of the 1930's - when Burma's first generation
of leaders was coming of political age. To them, the theories matched the
realities around them: Capitalism in prewar Burma meant exploitation by European
banks, eviction by foreign landlords and indebtedness to Chinese merchants and
Indian money lenders.

When the Ne Win Government came to power, these ideas were codified, often
contradictorily, in two documents - The Burmese Way to Socialism and The System
of Correlation of Man and His Environment. ''Man matters most'' was the noble
motto enunciated by the Burma Socialist Program Party. But practice overtook
theory. Military officers with little education and no experience rose to the
helms of vital institutions, and the intrusion of the state in every area of the
economy, including wholesale nationalizations, soon took its toll. By the late
1960's, most analysts were describing Burma as an economic shambles.

In the early 1970's, Burma's economy underwent reform, some hard-line leftists
responsible for promoting rigid state control were moved aside, and a brief
period of Soviet influence came to an end. Although the Russians still maintain
a large diplomatic presence in Rangoon, some Burma-watchers say that relations
cooled when the Russians could not provide the kind of economic development that
Ne Win wanted, or when their advice proved to be a recipe for disaster.

Burma turned instead to West Germany, Japan and, on a smaller scale, the United
States, among other countries. It also began to rely more on international
lending and development institutions. Some economic growth followed, but Burma
has not escaped the damage of the recent world recession. As recently as last
August, at the Fifth Party Congress of the B.S.P.P., the Government publicly
stated it would cooperate more with foreigners, albeit temporarily, in Burma's
development.

Diplomats and development experts working in Burma say that the cooperative
process is very slow. Success in projects involving industry, agriculture,
public services and the building of an infrastructure hinge on personal contacts
with suspicious and professionally uneven ministry officials and on an almost
clandestine decision-making process.

''Why didn't you tell me this sooner!'' shouted an elegantly attired British
businessman to a Burmese contact recently, shattering the peaceful, genteel
lunch hour at the Strand Hotel in Rangoon. ''We go this far, and now I hear
about the 3 percent!''

U HLA SOE, A 28-year-old physicist, is one of many young Burmese lost to
development because the official system cannot absorb him. After eight years in
higher education, he joined Rangoon University's faculty at the lowest academic
rung for a year before concluding that his salary of $50 a month would not
sustain him.

With a friend, a student of computer technology in a country without computers,
he borrowed $6,250 to buy a third-hand American car. Hla Soe says he now hopes
to earn $90 to $120 a month as a taxicab driver. Some of the money will go to
supporting his retired father and mother during a time of rising prices so that
they can ''live the way we have always lived,'' he says. But at every
opportunity, he returns to the university, his intellectual home.

Central to Burma's unofficial economy is the importing, legally or otherwise, of
foreign goods. Burma has shortages in almost every commodity and produces
virtually no luxury items. Of the two ways to break into the import trade, the
more common route is smuggling, either for oneself or as a wholesale
distributor.

The country's precious stones and metals, teak, tin and even cattle pass through
a porous, uncontrolled frontier riddled by insurgencies and corruption. In some
sections, insurgents engage in smuggling and collect taxes from other smugglers.
Opium and refined heroin also flow through. Hard currency, goods and even such
services as Thai dentistry return.

The route to Thailand, until recently the destination of most illegal exports
and the source of many black-market goods, is easy, according to the traders.

''We take a boat to Moulmein,'' explains a slight woman with no jungle
experience. ''Then we go a bit to a village where there are elephants to take us
over the mountains. The crossing takes 17 hours. We take along 4,000 kyats,''
the equivalent of nearly $500, ''half for the Karen border guards and half for
the Thais. Oh yes, and at the last minute we have to change into Thai clothes
-jeans and T-shirts and sunglasses. Then we get the bus to Bangkok. We come back
the same way on a free pass, no problem. Those who don't want to come back -
there are some but not many -they buy a Thai passport and go somewhere else.''

The Burmese Army is now actively engaged in closing some, if not all, of the
smugglers' access through Karen- dominated country. But as it does, new routes
open, and more goods are arriving from Singapore and Malaysia's Penang Island to
take the place of Thai products.

Although permission to go abroad is rare, some Burmese in certain jobs can now
legally bring back limited foreign goods if appropriate duties are paid. This
somewhat relaxed system has catapulted the merchant seaman to a level of
prestige in Burmese society. ''The young women always used to want to marry a
doctor or some other professional man,'' says a mother of three daughters,
partly in jest. ''Now a girl's greatest wish is to marry a seaman.''

Sailors are changing the outward face of Rangoon, where until recently traffic
was dominated by the durable American cars of the 1950's. Allowed to bring home
one motor vehicle a year, sailors sustain whole industries in the Japanese port
of Kobe devoted to converting pickups and larger trucks into private buses.
''Kobe Irrawaddy Trading Co. Ltd.,'' says a minibus in Rangoon. Because duties
on small vans and pickups are considerably less than on sedans and motorcycles,
vehicles the Government wants to limit, pickups also serve as family cars.

P LEASE SIT HERE IN the shade and rest,'' a monk says to a visitor passing the
gate of a hillside monastery in the sacred city of Sagaing. ''Did you bring any
books?''

He is a scholar and teacher, he says, who has lived for nearly 20 years among
the monasteries and pagodas of this town overlooking the Irrawaddy River,
southwest of Mandalay. Sagaing is now the home of more than 5,000 monks and
nuns. The concentration of men in red and rust robes and women in orange and
pale peach only emphasizes the pervasive role of Buddhism in the daily life of
central Burma.

The Sagaing monk readily accepts a map from the hand of a woman - a small
gesture but generally taboo, one that would have been a monumental offense in a
Thai monastery. ''I have heard about these rules in Thailand,'' he says. ''Burma
is different.''

In contrast to Southeast Asia's other major Theravada Buddhist nations, Sri
Lanka and Thailand, where the monkhood has been politicized and religious
practice ritualized to a greater degree, Burma's Buddhism -part of one of the
religion's two primary schools - appears refreshingly down-to-earth. Some
scholars interpret it as a sign of weakness or of the degradation of religion
under military rule; others, as a reflection of the egalitarianism and humanism
that set Burmese society apart.

The monk wants to discuss the difficulties he has in keeping intellectually fit.
Bookstores are poorly stocked, he says, and the books he wants are very
expensive. Some Westerners who have made pilgrimages to Sagaing mail reading
material to him, but few books reach him because postal workers steal them for
their resale value, he says.

Like most Burmese, he talks freely of the military dictatorship. ''The
Government knows it cannot challenge the Buddhist Church. The monks would fight.
''But it controls the freedom of monks as it controls the freedom of other
citizens. It is hard for us to travel. I had requested to go to Sri Lanka to
learn the Singhalese language so that I could study their Buddhist books. It was
refused. I can't go to India, where every Buddhist wants to make a pilgrimage.''

''Our monastery schools are losing pupils,'' he adds, ''because parents fear if
children are not sent to Government schools, they will not get jobs.'' Pagodas
and monasteries remain a solace mostly for the children of the very poor who
cannot afford the $15 to $20 a year in books and materials that each child needs
for public school.

W HEN INVIDIOUS comparisons are made, it is most frequently the Thai who serve
as a foil for the Burmese, whose kings were the scourge of Siam for generations.
The sacking of the Siamese capital of Ayutthaya in the 18th century forced them
to move the capital to Bangkok, a site thought to be safe from Burmese attack.
To see Thailand thrive while Burma suffers deprivation hurts many Burmese, who
consider themselves more civilized and self-controlled.

''We may need less state control here,'' a middle-aged journalist says, ''but we
don't need the accompanying vices of Thailand.''

Burmese are scandalized by the presence of scantily clad Thai prostitutes who,
they say, are imported by West German and other contractors working on
Government projects. Some of these women can be seen lounging in the lobby of
the Inya Lake Hotel, a Russian-built cement monolith that is incongruous in the
tropical atmosphere of Rangoon, itself a 19th-century British colonial city.

''The hotel clerks are shocked,'' a tour guide says. ''If these were tourists,
hotel security would run them off into another room and make them cover their
bodies. But they can do nothing with these girls. The Germans are here as
Government advisers.''

Fraternizing with foreigners is not encouraged by the Ne Win Government, and
tourists are allowed to visit for only seven days (up from the original 24
hours, later three days). But the Burmese seize any opportunity for unexpectedly
substantive conversations: Chinese economic policies, world terrorism, the
quality of life elsewhere. They are avid readers. Although the four Burmese and
two English-language dailies offer no independent local news, they are devoured
for articles on foreign affairs published unabridged from international news
agencies. Balance, as always, is maintained - Tass and The Associated Press may
share the top of a page. Such international evenhandedness is a constant theme
of the Ne Win Government, which withdrew from the developing nations' Nonaligned
Movement in 1979 because it was thought to be drifting toward the Soviet Union
under Cuba's chairmanship. Both Israel and Egypt have embassies in Rangoon.

The use of English, inherited from the British, is still widespread in Burma.
The language, swept aside during the years of isolation, is making a dramatic
official comeback. Beginning this year in the ninth grade (there are 10 grades
in the pre-university system), English is being reintroduced as the medium of
instruction. Each year, another grade will be added on, down to kindergarten,
until all children will be taught all subjects in English except Burmese
language and literature.

Diplomats caution against reading too much into the revival of English. Rumor
has it that Ne Win made the decision after his daughter went to Britain for
graduate medical work and failed a language-qualifying exam. ''You'll hear a lot
of stories like this,'' a diplomat says. ''Even if they aren't strictly true,
they will give you a good idea how Burma is run on the whim of one man.''

Although there have been violent incidents in modern Burmese history, violence
has not been a hallmark of political life. ''We are a forgiving and forgetting
people,'' a man in his 60's tells a guest in his home. ''It is easy for any
government to rule here.''

There have been occasional protests, particularly from students. These have been
quickly and decisively suppressed. But no one speaks of torture. There is no
feeling of a police state on Rangoon's run-down streets and broken sidewalks
with their gaping holes open to the sewers below.

There is, however, a sense of sad resignation. In a small cafe in Mandalay, a
middle-aged man remarks how little he sees of his family as he goes from job to
job. ''We don't care about who is the government,'' he says. ''We just want
something done about the economy. We Burmese work so hard and have nothing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of flags on the road from Rangoon toe Pegu (Mitch Epstien); Photo
of a Rangoon tire repair shop; Photo of a flower seller opening a lotus blossom

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILL THE TANK SURVIVE?

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton;

SECTION: Section 6; Page 104, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3464 words


FROM THE TEXAS HILLTOP, YOU could see the M-1 Abrams tanks moving to attack
their targets under the harsh summer sun. Their pace was far faster than that of
the tanks of a generation or even a decade ago. As they moved, the guns spoke.
The barrels were steady as the vehicles moved at 40 miles an hour over broken
ground. ''There she is,'' said Col. Benjamin W. Covington 3d, ''the best damn
tank in the world.''

Colonel Covington, until recently a brigade commander in the Second Armored
Division at Fort Hood, could be right. The Abrams, now being fitted with a
120-millimeter gun capable of firing high-penetration rounds two and a half
miles, is a formidable weapons system, far more powerful than any other American
tank. In addition to the main weapon, the tank carries three machine guns - two
7.62-millimeter and one 50-caliber - for its four-man crew. It is also fast,
with an acknowledged speed of 45 miles an hour, and agile, able to turn 90
degrees while traveling at 30 miles an hour.

To the United States Army, the Abrams is the equal of the long-awaited new
Soviet tank, the T-80, which has not yet been deployed, and the superior of the
T-72, currently the Russians' main battle tank.

The Department of Defense has budgeted $19.5 billion for research, development,
testing and production of the Abrams, which is intended to answer a family of
formidable Soviet tanks spawned since the last American tank, the M-60, was
designed and produced in 1960. The Abrams also represents the Army's doctrine
that modern tanks, cooperating with infantry, artillery and air power, can
subdue the next generation of antitank weapons and retain their place as the
ultimate arbiters of conventional conflict.

Those who build and use tanks, however, understand the seriousness of the
challenge from antitank guided weapons. As their range, striking power and
mobility increase, these weapons, which can be fired from the ground, armored
vehicles, helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, represent the most powerful force
in the world in antitank warfare.

The tank's history in warfare has been an illustrious one. In World War I,
armored vehicles restored mobility to the European battlefield, long confined to
trenches and dugouts by the power of machine guns and field guns. World War II
battles in Western Europe, North Africa and the Soviet Union solidified the
tank's position as the dominant force.

Ironically, it was the Germans who exploited the tank - which had originally
been deployed with murderous effect against them in World War I. In 1939 and
1940, the Panzer armored divisions led the Germans to victories in Poland and
France.

German superiority did not last long. By 1942, the Americans, British and
Russians were building more tanks, although not always better ones, than the
Germans. Thousands of tanks enabled the Allies to sweep into the heart of
Germany and force surrender.

Today, despite the challenge of more sophisticated antitank guided weapons,
armor retains a decisive role in American strategic planning. Soviet forces in
East Germany and other Warsaw Pact nations, which together are seen to be the
most serious threat to the United States and the Atlantic alliance, have an
overall superiority in numbers of tanks of four to one over NATO forces.

Conventional military wisdom is that any Communist attack can be met effectively
by NATO forces in which West German, British and American tanks play a leading
role. Under the present NATO strategy of a forward defense in West Germany,
tanks operating with infantry, artillery and ground-attack helicopters are seen
as the only combination likely to halt and repel a breakthrough - which many
experts consider inevitable - in the NATO defenses.

A war in northwest Europe is likely to be fought mainly on the plains and in the
forests of Germany. But as West Germany's urban sprawl continues, attacking
Eastern armies could find themselves moving from forest to plain to city and
back to open country. Such circumstances would provide Western defenders
abundant opportunity to engage hostile armor with both tanks and antitank
weapons. The United States Army also understands that today, as in 1939-1945,
tank superiority would be crucial in any war in southwest Asia or the Middle
East.

The cutting edge of III Corps, stationed at Fort Hood, in central Texas,
includes the First Cavalry Division, the Second Armored Division (once commanded
by Gen. George S. Patton) and the Sixth Cavalry Brigade (Air Combat). The
brigade's power is concentrated in Cobra helicopter-attack planes armed with TOW
(for tube-launched, optically tracked, wire-command guided) antitank missiles,
which can also be fired from a tripod, a jeep, an aircraft or a light-armored
vehicle.

The tube-launched antitank missile has a range of 2.33 miles and is wire-guided.
This means, as in the case of similar Soviet weapons, that a wire is connected
to the missile throughout its 15-second flight to the target; the gunner must
keep aiming or guiding the missile by manual control as the ball of wire
unravels. NATO nations have similar European-made wire-guided missiles.

Tank officers believe their weapons can fight anywhere, but they also
acknowledge the problems. Tanks must first reach a war zone, which can require
hundreds of thousands of tons of shipping and many weeks. Tanks were used
sparingly in the jungles of Vietnam, and there are similar jungles in El
Salvador and Nicaragua. Armor requires certain terrain for maximum
effectiveness.

Day after day, III Corps troops take to the fort's training area of 240 square
miles in their M-1 Abrams tanks and their lightly armored M-2 Bradley personnel
carriers. They attack, they evade, they fire their weapons, they make smoke as
divisional artillery pounds the hills.

Officers and men interviewed were confident of their weapons and their training.
They reckon that one platoon of five Abrams tanks could destroy a full company
of 25 Soviet tanks. The emphasis was on guns: theirs and the enemy's. A visitor
seldom hears much about armor's new enemy, the antitank guided weapon.

T HE ALLIED ARMIES employed the bazooka - the first infantry-held weapon
specifically designed to combat tanks - and its British counterpart, the piat,
in the last years of World War II, and the Germans used a similar weapon, the
Panzerfaust. But it was not until the 1973 war, pitting Israel against Egypt and
Syria, that the potential of the antitank guided weapon was understood. The
Egyptians, using Soviet-made antitank missiles, inflicted serious losses on
Israeli armored forces once they had crossed the Suez Canal. These weapons,
which were given the NATO code name of Sagger, were more powerful versions of
the German Panzerfaust.

Since then, the accuracy and range of antitank guided weapons have been improved
both by the nations of the Warsaw Pact and NATO. Initially launched from the
ground, the weapons have now been introduced to fixed-wing aircraft and
helicopters, jeeps, armored personnel carriers and armored cars. The antitank
guided weapons now have a mobility far greater than that of the tank.

Some students of war predict that the present generation of antitank wire-guided
missiles will give way to new weapons that will have the same hitting power but,
without the cumbersome wire guidance, will be simpler to fire. These weapons are
now in the testing stage. Aggression in the form of massive tank attack will
then become less feasible. There could be a return to the static trench warfare
that marked World War I. Armored officers do not share this view. One hears
echoes in their arguments of those raised by the ''battleship admirals'' of the
pre-World War II period, who saw neither the bomber nor the submarine as a
menace to their beloved battlewagons.

Pentagon planners also point out that antitank missiles are themselves
vulnerable, especially to attack by artillery and from the air: Most antitank
guided weapons emit smoke when fired, thus attracting enemy fire.

Even if the mobility of tanks is reduced, one widely accepted theory holds, they
could still be used as artillery, dug in to meet enemy thrusts and moving only
at night or under the cover of fog and smoke.

Still another theory is that there will be a rapid reduction in the number of
tanks employed in any theater where the enemy possesses a superiority in
antitank guided weapons. Such weapons, it is argued, are relatively cheap
compared to the tanks and their use can be taught to soldiers with relatively
low technological education.

There is a possibility, then, that battles denuded of tanks will be fought by
infantry, artillery and air forces. The numbers of infantrymen may be lower than
in the two world wars. The number of guns and their mobility will be greater.
Air power in the form of fighter bombers and armed and armored helicopters will
be ubiquitous, although they, too, will have to face both improved
surface-to-air missiles and antiaircraft guns.

NATO intelligence, for example, believes that the most dangerous antitank weapon
in the Soviet armory is the AT-6, mounted on a large attack helicopter called
the Hind D; the weapon has a range estimated at 5,500 yards. And like all
weapons, it has its deficiencies: After firing, the helicopter must hover for
between 17 and 20 seconds until the missile reaches its target. Throughout this
period, the gunner must keep the missile in view to preserve electronic
guidance.

Other problems, invariably mentioned by tank officers, also plague antitank
weapons. Smoke, dust, rain, snow, fog and darkness could pervade a battlefield.
Missile guidance would then require electromagnetic sensors and high-performance
night-vision devices. Both are vulnerable to accidental or intentional
interference.

NATO's expanding fleet of armed helicopters and advanced fighter planes present
another problem for the AT-6 and its helicopters, already targets for ground
weapons. As one British armor expert put it, ''For what seems a painful period
of time, the gunner must hang in full view of surface-to-air missiles and other
ground-based air-defense weapons, making it somewhat difficult for him to
maintain concentration.''

In the view of some allied intelligence sources, the AT-2, which is smaller and
lighter than the AT-6 and is thought to have an infrared homing system, could be
more effective. It, too, can be carried in a helicopter. Its range is just under
4,000 yards, the missile guided by radio command. AT-2 is the Soviet antitank
missile most likely to be encountered on the ground. Reconnaissance and
troop-carrying vehicles have it in a variety of configurations. The missile's
time of flight at 3,500 meters, estimated at 23 seconds, presents problems,
however.

In the next five years, the Soviet Army is expected to receive a wire-guided
missile called the AT-5, which is mounted on lightly armored vehicles. Its range
is less than that of the AT-2, but so is its flight time: 11 seconds, to a range
of 1.5 miles.

The latest Soviet improvement on the German Panzerfaust, the man-portable
RPG-7V, is the most popular antitank weapon among the Warsaw Pact forces. It has
an effective range of 500 yards for a stationary target and was used to some
purpose by the Arab armies in the 1973 war.

S OVIET DOCTRINE always has emphasized the use of antitank guns on the
battlefield to deal with the most powerful enemy tanks. In addition to their
growing family of antitank guided weapons, the Russians have added large numbers
of antitank guns to their armored divisions.

Officers at Fort Hood and with armored units of the Seventh Army in Europe
concede that the Soviet Union's growing armory of antitank guided weapons is
impressive. But they emphasize that the weapons' battlefield effectiveness would
be reduced severely in combat in which the United States and its allies
implemented the ''all-arms'' concept.

This means that tanks, artillery, infantry, combat engineers, helicopters and
fixed-wing aircraft would all be employed in a single operation. In those
circumstances, they argue, guided weapons would need adequate protection from
the guns or artillery, from the tanks and from air attack. The officers conclude
that such protection would be difficult to find, even on an urban battlefield.

And what about American antitank weaponry? Infantry officers at Fort Hood
believe what the United States Army needs is a new antitank weapon that can be
carried by an infantryman.

A decade ago, tank officers said repeatedly, ''A tank is the best tank killer.''
Today's officers, like Colonel Covington, who was recently appointed president
of the Army Training Board at Fort Monroe, Va., do not accept that. The tank's
job, as they see it, is to destroy enemy infantry forces, leaving the
destruction of tanks to other systems, including antitank guided weapons.

Reviewing present developments in that field, officers believe that, as one
said, ''We've just touched the surface. Suppose they come up with an artillery
shell like the Copperhead that homes in on a tank? What tactics do we use
then?''

Although the Army and the Air Force stoutly defend the latter's A-10 tank-killer
ground-attack plane, foreign sources are not as sanguine. They point out that
the A-10's effectiveness in northwest Europe will depend on its ability to fly
at low altitudes in weather conditions that for 10 months of the year are
notoriously unreliable. One NATO officer pointed out that ''the A-10 will not
only have to fly low, it will have to find its target and hit it in a very
hostile atmosphere.''

T HE DEVELOPMENT of antitank weapons has been paralleled to a considerable
extent by improvements in armor and in the design of tank superstructures. A new
layered and stronger armor, derived from the Chobham armor first developed in
Britain, is being used on new American, British and West German tanks.

The effectiveness of an antitank round depends on a warhead striking the vehicle
at an angle insuring penetration. Tank designers have sloped armor plate on the
present generation of tanks to help deflect the warheads, and have improved the
strength of the armor itself.

The Russians have also discovered, largely through efficient intelligence, the
advantages of the new armor. Western sources say that many of the T-72's that
now form the core of the Soviet armored force are being re-armored and that
production of its successor, T-80, is being delayed so that it, too, can be
fitted with the new armor.

The United States Army, judging that its own current antitank missile, the TOW,
would not be able to penetrate the new armor, has put into production a more
powerful replacement - the TOW 2.

A BALANCED VIEW of the tank-antitank guided-weapon com-petition at the moment
would hold that improvements in armor, speed, agility and armament have kept the
tanks in front. Improvements, however, could meet the law of diminishing returns
as more powerful engines require frequent refueling. And present research and
development programs promise that the missiles of tomorrow are likely to be more
lethal, more accurate and more employable.

These considerations do not appear to affect the young troops who range over the
Fort Hood maneuver area. They believe that the Abrams, named for the late Gen.
Creighton W. Abrams, the former Army Chief of Staff, and the Bradley, for Gen.
Omar N. Bradley, have added new dimensions to armored warfare.

Each is an advanced and sophisticated fighting machine. Among the NATO tanks,
the Abrams is perhaps matched only by the Leopard II of West Germany. The
Abrams, compared with its predecessor, the M-60, is comparatively roomy and
-even under the baking Texas sun - relatively cool.

''You have to remember,'' said a tank commander, ''that exercises like these are
close to the real thing. So you forget how hot or how cold it is. All you think
about is getting that other fellow out there. It's cold and hot for him, too.''

Rumbling across the rough terrain, the tanks roused 14 head of cattle that had
been grazing nearby. As the cattle raced ahead, a major explained that ranchers
in the Fort Hood area were allowed to graze their animals on the exercise area
at their own risk - or rather that of the cattle.

Beyond the running cattle lay the ''enemy'' tank. Beyond the tank, the placid
town of Killeen. And beyond the town, Western Europe, the Middle East, Central
America - all the regions in which the Abrams and contemporary armored strategy
may have to prove themselves.

T HE DEPLOYMENT of the Abrams raised as many questions as it answered. Why, for
example, did the United States, with its technological and productive
superiority, take so long to produce a new tank? There was a gap of 21 years
between the first deployment of the Abrams and its predecessor. In the same
period, the Russians deployed a series of four progressively more sophisticated
tanks.

The answer lies in different national approaches to new weapons systems. The
Soviet approach in tanks and also in fighter aircraft is incremental. To a
considerable degree, the T-72 is a more sophisticated, better-armed version of
the T-62 first deployed 25 years ago. It is worth noting that thousands of these
older models remain in the inventories of Soviet and East European armies.

The American approach was to build an entirely new tank. In the 1970's, for
example, the Army embarked on a program called Main Battle Tank, spending
millions of dollars until Congress halted further development of a tank that
some thought would be too expensive to be risked in battle. The Army eventually
turned to the design and production of the Abrams.

Like all new weapons systems, the tank had teething troubles. The turbine engine
developed faults, since corrected. A brigade commander at Fort Hood said that in
three weeks of intensive operations at the National Training Center in
California, his tanks registered only two engine malfunctions. Similar reports
came from tank commanders, officers and noncommissioned officers.

The Abrams drinks fuel -diesel - at a higher rate than its predecessor, the
M-60. As a result, commanders will have to deploy tanker trucks close to Abrams'
formations. In combat, such tankers would be vulnerable targets for artillery or
aircraft.

Tank forces in the United States and in Europe have one important advantage not
enjoyed in World War II. The crews are products of a professional army. Many of
them have been in the same vehicle for two years or more. The minimum period of
service among four crews was four months in the same tank.

The NATO estimate is that its tank crews, especially the American, West German
and British, are more experienced than their Soviet counterparts.

''It's the crews that count,'' a senior officer said. ''We have computers,
thermal sights, every aid we can get. But everything depends on the men. How
long they've been together. How often they've exercised night and day.''

The Bradley armored personnel carrier, in the opinion of officers at Fort Hood,
will add a new dimension to war. Officers explain that a Bradley can carry 12
heavily armed men into the midst of a battle, drop them and move to engage an
enemy with its TOW missile and 25-millimeter gun.

''This means that in battle we'll be able to reinforce an area that walking
infantry couldn't reach in the past,'' said Colonel Covington. ''The timing and
pace of a battle can be accelerated. In that sense, the Bradley is a
revolutionary weapons system.''

''Killing an enemy tank is easy,'' another officer said. ''Target acquisition is
tough.''

He and the others were thinking of the forests of West Germany, which offer
abundant cover for tanks and other vehicles from scouting aircraft and armored
reconnaissance.

Pondering questions of war in a desert environment, most soldiers believe that
the speed and agility of the Abrams and Bradley would offer the best protection.

''Remember, we won't be there alone,'' one said, ''There'll be infantry,
artillery, planes and all the rest.

''The Germans lost the battle of Kursk,'' he said, referring to the greatest
tank battle of World War II, ''because they were short of infantry and didn't
have machine guns on their Tiger and King Tiger tanks. So the Russians took them
out with antitank weapons and explosive charges at close range. That's not the
way we would fight.''

Despite the confidence and the enthusiasm of these young men, a visitor leaves
Fort Hood with the feeling that the future of the tank as the dominant
battlefield weapon may be at risk. This risk lies in the continued development
of advanced technology in the field of antitank guided weapons.

Today, these represent a considerable but not insuperable threat to tank
operations. Tomorrow, who knows?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the new Abrams M-1 tank on maneuvers (David Burnett/Contact)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Andrea Barnet

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


FAMOUS PEOPLE I HAVE KNOWN. Ed McClanahan. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.)
Before Vietnam, Woodstock, Watergate or Charles Manson, ''we had the swellest
parties'' writes Ed McClanahan. Indeed, to judge from this extended, speedy,
autobiographical discourse about life as a hip Californian in the 1960's,
readers might well conclude that swell parties were all he and his cronies had.
Mr. McClanahan, who was born in 1932, demonstrates an amazing recall of period
details. He mentions LSD, light shows, be-ins, Eastern mysticism and body
painting, the paraphernalia people wore and the jargon they spouted. He also
manages to include all of the stock 60's characters - Black Panthers, gurus,
groupies, writers, revolutionaries and more than a drug user or two. And, to
complete the picture, he throws in an occasional self-mocking reference to the
''famous people'' he has known. The effect of all this is rather like going to a
large, anonymous party alone and not meeting or talking to anyone all night. Mr.
McClanahan leaves the reader with an amusing string of barely connected images,
a superficial portrait of the 60's that reinforces all the cliches of the
period. Even the cleverness of his prose fails to mask the dearth of new
material. Life in those days was one big party, says Mr. McClanahan and he, it
would seem, was one of the last to go home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


CANNIBALISM AND THE COMMON LAW: The Story of the Tragic Last Voyage of the
Mignonette and the Strange Legal Proceedings to Which It Gave Rise, by A. W.
Brian Simpson. (University of Chicago, $12.95.) In 1884 four shipwrecked English
sailors bounced about the Atlantic Ocean in a lifeboat for 24 days. When one
became ill the captain killed him, and the survivors drank his blood, butchered
his body and ate it. A famous trial ensued. At issue: did cannibalistic homicide
on which survival depended constitute murder? Last year our reviewer, Sally Falk
Moore, called the book ''a happy mixture of adventure story, colorful
description, moral parable and legal argument.'' JULIA AND THE BAZOOKA: And
Other Stories, by Anna Kavan. (Norton, $5.95.) The French-born, twice-divorced
author renovated houses, raised bulldogs and for 30 years used amphetamines and
heroin until her death in 1968. But Jill Robinson said in The Book Review in
1975 that Anna Kavan is interesting not for her life, but ''because her work
comes through with a powerful androgynous individuality and because the stories
are luminous and rich with a fresh kind of peril.'' ''Julia and the Bazooka''
contains 15 stories and an informative introduction by Rhys Davies. Miss
Robinson compared Kavan's novel ICE (Norton, $5.95) to Baudelaire. THE COGNITIVE
COMPUTER: On Language, Learning, and Artificial Intelligence, by Roger C. Schank
with Peter Childers. (Addison-Wesley, $12.95.) The authors provide an inside
view of research in artificial intelligence, the scientific discipline that
seeks to simulate the human thinking process in a computer. Susan Chace wrote
here in June that the book ''is clear, funny and smart about the central
problems involved in trying to get computers to mimic human reasoning.''
INFANTE'S INFERNO, by G. Cabrera Infante. (Avon, $4.95.) Alliteration, allusion,
parody and puns are at the core of G. Cabrera Infante's novel. Ostensibly a
recitation of the narrator's adolescent escapades and love life in pre-Castro
Cuba, the book in fact is ''mostly about language,'' Allen Josephs wrote in
these pages in 1984. ''If you like semiotics as semi-antics and puns for puns'
sake, you may re-Joyce.'' Translated from the Spanish by Suzanne Jill Levine
with the author. RED AND HOT: The Fate of Jazz in the Soviet Union, 1917-1980,
by S. Frederick Starr. (Limelight, $9.95.) ''Red and Hot'' recounts the arrival
of jazz in Russia following the Revolution, and chronicles the history of the
American art form in a country that for a time banned the saxophone. Our
reviewer, Andrea Lee, described the work in 1983 as a ''fine history'' and ''a
piece of careful scholarship that is also superbly entertaining.'' THE SUICIDE
ACADEMY, by Daniel Stern. (Arbor House, $5.95.) People come to this academy to
contemplate suicide. After daylong comforting and counseling, they decide. The
1968 novel, which depicts one day at the institution and the trials facing its
director, Wolf Walker, has been called ''a fantasia, an extravaganza, as full of
vigor and spirit as the subject allows.'' PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGNS, by Paul F.
Boller Jr. (Oxford University, $6.95.) Some of the 50 races for the American
Presidency were rather tame, but most, according to the author, were scurrilous.
Last year George E. Reedy commented here that the earlier campaigns were more
passionate, warlike, rowdy, rambunctious, anti-intellectual and entertaining.
Their stories are, Mr. Reedy said, ''fun to read and may even arouse some
nostalgic longing for a day when politics could make the blood sing and pulses
throb.'' PARACHUTES & KISSES, by Erica Jong. (Signet/ New American Library,
$4.95.) Erica Jong's fourth novel continues the series that began with ''Fear of
Flying.'' The writer and sexual adventurer Isadora Wing, ''flush . . . and
famous,'' is nearing 40. ''When she is not taking herself too seriously,'' one
reviewer said in 1984, Isadora is ''wonderfully humorous''; in those moments she
becomes ''the Wing the reader knows and loves - raunchy, funny, explicit,
outrageous.'' WHO SPOKE UP? American Protest Against the War in Vietnam,
1963-1975, by Nancy Zaroulis and Gerald Sullivan. (Holt, $10.95.) While some
Americans fought a war in Vietnam, other Americans fought at home to end the
war. Both conflicts were long and ugly; both produced casualties. ''Who Spoke
Up?'' is a comprehensive history of the antiwar movement, a compilation of who,
what, where and when. Last year Elinor Langer in The Book Review described the
work as ''an extraordinarily detailed record, a group portrait, of sorts, of a
whole generation and more.'' THE CHATEAU, by William Maxwell. (Nonpareil/ David
R. Godine, $10.95.) In a spirit of cautious adoration, an American married
couple go to Europe in 1948. They move into a French chateau as paying guests
and are befuddled by their landlady, her nephew and the chateau's wartime
history. David Boroff remarked here in 1961 that ''this is a beguilingly
old-fashioned novel, almost Jamesian in its restraint and in its delineation of
subtle shifts in consciousness.'' WITHOUT STOPPING, by Paul Bowles.
(Ecco/Norton, $9.50.) ''Without Stopping'' is an autobiography by the composer
and author of ''The Sheltering Sky'' and ''The Delicate Prey.'' In 1972 our
reviewer, Charles Thomas Samuels, wrote that the book ''recalls the source of
Bowles's literary achievement and, in so doing, also clarifies his limitation .
. . the uncontemplative, imperturbable, astral nature of the man.'' NOVEL WITH
COCAINE, by M. Ageyev. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $6.95.) A debauched youth in
Russia, before and after the revolution, narrates a novel our reviewer, Helen
Benedict, last year termed ''fascinating as a tale of addiction'' and ''even
more intriguing because of the mystery surrounding it.'' The book was published
pseudonymously in Paris in 1936. At that time the author lived in Istanbul,
Turkey, but disappeared shortly thereafter. (One scholar has made the claim that
Ageyev was really Vladimir Nabokov, but Nabokov's widow and sister denied it.)
Translated from the Russian by Michael Henry Heim.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEROIC, MOCK-HEROIC

BYLINE: By David Ray; David Ray teaches English at the University of Missouri,
Kansas City. His most recent books are ''The Touched Life: Poems, Selected and
New'' and ''On Wednesday I Cleaned Out My Wallet.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1536 words


COLLECTED POEMS #1957-1982. By Wendell Berry. 268 pp. San Francisco: North Point
Press. $16.50. CROSS TIES Selected Poems. By X. J. Kennedy. 168 pp. Athens: The
University of Georgia Press. Cloth, $16.95. Paper, $9.95. WENDELL BERRY'S poetry
is a validation of his decision nearly 20 years ago to give up the literary life
in New York and seek a deeper bond with his ancestral home, a hillside farm in
Henry County, Kentucky, on the Kentucky River. His straightforward search for a
life connected to the soil, for marriage as sacrament and family life, affirms a
style that is resonant with the authentic. The lyricism is not forced, but
clearly grows out of a deep bond with the earth and its generosity, with all of
nature. He mocks little except man's arrogance and destructiveness, and he can
be said to have returned American poetry to a Wordsworthian clarity of purpose.
Nor is Wordsworth's piety out of place in Mr. Berry's world; the rustic and the
rural are honored and celebrated with seldom if ever a touch of doubt for the
course undertaken, a deeply committed life.

Mr. Berry's poetry is, then, a manifestation of character, and the articulation
of that character's honest vision. A man is somehow blocked, Schopenhauer wrote,
until he ''has in some degree acquired real self-knowledge.'' There can be no
doubt Mr. Berry has labored for that knowledge, which he shares through his
poems. One can feel the effort to say rightly what must be said: His journey's
end is no place of ease, but the farm itself, the place day labor starts from,
journeys in, returns to: the fields whose past and potency are one. The pursuit
of virtue, Schopenhauer wrote, ''can only be followed with seriousness and
success when all claims that are foreign to it are given up, when everything
else is renounced . . . a man must know what he wills, and know what he can do;
only then will he show character, and only then can he accomplish something
right.'' Mr. Berry's poems speak of this search, and of the joys of doing
something right by farming and loving well.

But his celebration of the farm, and doing things right, is hardly a retreat
from the world. As strongly as any contemporary, he has spoken up against war
and madness. In ''Against the War in Vietnam'' he wrote: In the name of
ourselves we ride at the wheels of our engines, in the name of Plenty devouring
all, the exhaust of our progress falling deadly on villages and fields we do not
see. We are prepared for millions of little deaths.

It was Thomas Jefferson whose words Mr. Berry cited in another poem for saying
that ''small / landholders are the most precious part of a state,'' and it is
the vision of Jefferson he saw betrayed in Vietnam: We see the American freedom
defended with lies, and the lies defended with blood, the vision of Jefferson
served by the agony of children, women cowering in holes.

Just as eloquently, Mr. Berry has fought for ecology and sound conservation of
resources, and he has a way of voicing his indignation without being preachy;
yet the voice is strong and unambiguous. The ethical life is a necessity for
peace and happiness in his view. At times, a wizened humor breaks through,
particularly when he is speaking with his ''Mad Farmer'' persona: ''Don't own so
much clutter that you will be relieved to see your / house catch fire.''

Mr. Berry is doctrinal in recommending organic farming, the use of horses
instead of tractors, and even in being quite happy with the audience his poems
find when they are published in Organic Gardening magazine. There are times when
we might think he is returning us to the simplicities of John Clare or the
crustiness of Robert Frost: Vision must have severity at its edge: against
neglect, bushes grown over the pastures, vines riding down the fences, the
cistern broken; against the false vision of the farm dismembered. But, as with
every major poet, passages in which style threatens to become a voice of its own
suddenly give way, like the sound of chopping in a murmurous forest, to lines of
power and memorable resonance. Many of Mr. Berry's short poems are as fine as
any written in our time.

His ''Collected Poems: 1957-1982'' is important because it will inspire; there
is nothing naive about the straightforward course recommended by a poet who is
willing to be ''an unacknowledged legislator.'' Treasured for its nature and
love poems, reread for its insights and passionate advocacies, the book will
probably be valued most of all for its ''Elegy'' on the farmer Owen Flood. Mr.
Berry's el-egies are precise in their rendering of life's meanings, through
death's: Like graves, we heal over, and yet keep as part of ourselves the severe
gift. By grief, more inward than darkness, the dead become the intelligence of
life. X. J. Kennedy is as different from Mr. Berry as a poet could be while
sharing the same shelf. Whereas Mr. Berry accepts as a mandate from life the
duty to reverence and celebrate what is worth reverence and celebration, Mr.
Kennedy seems to adopt the duty to scorn. Juvenalian and Swiftian, he uses wit
and metrical precision - which he has made his doctrine (defending traditional
verse forms not only by his art but with his magazine, Counter/Measures) - with
a pugnacious bitterness rare to modern verse. (J. V. Cunningham, perhaps, and a
few others share this mode.) I have known Mr. Kennedy's work for years, and as
is often the case with literary pessimism - even when dished up with delicious
wit - there is a puzzling quality to it. One wonders why, particularly if
''Cross Ties'' contains ''every poem that the poet cares to save,'' as the
publisher claims, he cannot more frequently break out of the bondage of metrics
and cleverness. What is behind all this scorn, one wonders, and why is there not
more often delight and merriment and versatility? We can share his hates now and
then - but all the time?

For Mr. Kennedy the mock-heroic thrives. A villanelle, ''Drivers of Diaper
Service Trucks Are Sad,'' allows him his usual scatological play while painting
an enjoyable enough picture. ''Creation Morning'' is a fine poem, and its last
stanza catches something of modern man's reasons for doubt: Who would not start
growth rings Breaking on shores of bark At the toss of a seed like a stone,
Though not an eye look on In that time nor in any time, Though in the solid
dark?

Mr. Kennedy tells us what is wrong, but too rarely what is right, with life.
''Consumer's Report'' basically elaborates the proverb it holds as an epigraph:
''They don't make things like they used to.'' ''Reading Trip'' captures the
fellowship of poets as, all too often, a sparring of competitors: He's read me,
I've read him. Testing his strength, Each circles each, protecting his behind,
Not knowing, sniffing after his own kind. An I-thou relationship can always be
initiated at the local bar: Each makes out what the other has to bear. Close as
a brace of long-lost concubines, We drink up, and misquote each other's lines.

At last the visitor does his ''poet act, the house / A thin fourth filled and
looking put upon,'' and then fields interview questions with put-down wit. The
triumph has become a chance to defend endangered prosody, and the
self-destructive antics of poets past are chalked up to the poet's rage at being
misunderstood. (''I guess what drove one Welsh bard wild to squeeze / Buttock
and bottle. Miss Cone cuts blue cheese.'') The poet retreats to the ''dry cell
of my car,'' with the lies I stick out with all over, fumbling for A means to
shrivel back to some sort of core. He feels more at home with his slot In the
home-droning traffic, less and less The bard on fire, more one now with the blot
That hoods the stars above Los Angeles, Hard gunning, on the make for far-off
nights, Like any other pair of downcast brights.

That poem, virtuoso enough, illustrates Mr. Kennedy's way with words and
experience. He has created another poem that renders a search for love and
recognition, pursued with barbs, repaid with disillusionment. Indeed, he seems
to write from disillusionment only, disillusionment with the culture, and with
life. What is left is the architectonic cleverness of the poem itself, the
epigram or the acid-etched portrait rendered.

The portraits are among his best work, those of ''Schizophrenic Girl,'' ''Mining
Town,'' ''Old Men Pitching Horseshoes,'' ''Edgar's Story'' and, perhaps most
cleverly, of an Iowa woman who murdered her parents in ''What She Told the
Sheriff.'' In this last poem Mr. Kennedy vividly paints the tedium of farm life:
Worms, worms in leaf and ear, Kernel and tassel, Gnawing the Wurlitzer In Burger
Castle!

X. J. Kennedy invokes a muse of sorts in ''To an Angry God'': Lend me cruel
light That, tooling over syllables I write, I do not skim forgivingly. Not
spare, But smite. And yet it is not the recognition of the worst that determines
a poet's attitude, for it is Wendell Berry who began his poem ''A Discipline''
with the lines: Turn toward the holocaust, it approaches on every side, there is
no other place to turn. Dawning in your veins is the light of the blast that
will print your shadow on stone in a last antic of despair to survive you in the
dark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wendell Berry (Thomas Victor); Photo of X. J. Kennedy (Dorothy
M. Kennedy)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PUSH THE RUSSIANS, INTELLECTUALS SAY

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


The United States could achieve an ''ideological reformation'' of the Soviet
system with a series of regional victories, in the view of a group of writers
and political thinkers who have come to be characterized as neoconservatives.

They met here over the weekend at a conference sponsored by the Committee for
the Free World, a bipartisan group of writers, scholars and other intellectuals
formed five years ago to press for a more assertive foreign policy.

They generally agreed that the summit meeting in Geneva between President Reagan
and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, had not made any fundamental
changes in the nature of Soviet-American relations.

Irving Kristol, described by one of his colleagues as ''the godfather of the
neoconservative family,'' said, ''We are not going to achieve any stability in
this world or reach any level of satisfaction, or attainment, in American
foreign policy until the Soviet Union has been pushed into an ideological
reformation - that is to say, until the Soviet Union ceases being a political
regime with an established religion called Marxist Leninism imposed on the
Soviet people.''

'Shake the Soviet Regime'

''To achieve such a reformation,'' Mr. Kristol said, ''is the goal of American
foreign policy because this regime, this established religion, is legitimated at
the moment only by its successes in foreign policy.''

If the Russians suffered ''small defeats'' in Angola, Cuba, Nicaragua or
Afghanistan, he said, it could ''shake the Soviet regime'' and undermine the
legitimacy it enjoys at home.

Richard Pipes, a professor of history at Harvard who worked on the staff of the
National Security Council in 1981 and 1982, agreed. The legitimacy of the Soviet
regime, he said, rests, among other things on ''the notion of invincibility.''
If the Russians suffered some kind of defeat abroad, he said, ''they would
immediately suffer domestic consequences.''

Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, said
Washington was now much more willing to help those resisting Soviet intervention
in the third world than it was immediately after the Vietnam War.

'Big Change in Right Direction'

He cited Congressional action last week allowing the United States to supply
helicopters, trucks and other vehicles to the Nicaraguan rebels. This, he said,
was ''a big change in the right direction,'' and it would have been ''almost
inconceivable a year ago.''

The rebel forces have doubled, ''from roughly 10,000 to roughly 20,000 in 12
months,'' he said, and he warned that the Russians would ''raise the stakes'' in
Nicaragua, with ''a continuing flow of Soviet arms and Cuban military
advisers.''

In the United States, he said, ''there are going to be a lot of people who are
fairly fainthearted'' about responding to such developments. ''As they see, in
some of these cases, the amount of violence increase - and it will, because the
purpose of our aid is to permit people who are fighting on our side to use more
violence - a lot of people are going to get scared off,'' Mr. Abrams said.

When a person in the audience said that few other countries seemed to be
assisting the rebels in Nicaragua, Mr. Abrams said: ''They don't need a lot of
countries behind them. They need us behind them, and that's all they need.
Victory in Nicaragua will come from American support, or it will not come. It is
very nice to have Belgium on your side, but it doesn't do the trick.''

Many of the neoconservatives voiced strong support for President Reagan's
Strategic Defense Initiative, commonly known as ''Star Wars.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


Honor guard carrying coffin of Capt. Monte Larue Moorberg from plane at Andrews
Air Force Base, Md.

Those at ceremony included Judy de Bord, second from left, and her husband,
Robert; she was married to Captain Moorberg, an Air Force pilot, when his plane
was shot down over North Vietnam in December 1966.

Captain Moorberg, who received Air Force Cross when Government declared him
killed in action in 1968, was one of 26 Americans whose bodies were returned by
Hanoi in August.

He is to be buried today at Arlington National Cemetery. (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Back From Vietnam, After 19 Years

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY'S MESSAGE SYSTEM IS OVERLOADED, OFFICERS SAY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


The United States military communications system has become so overloaded that
it is nearly choking on the volume of messages it must handle, according to
senior officers here and operational officers in the field.

Officers who command Army and Marine Corps battalions, Navy ships and Air Force
squadrons have told of operational messages delayed for hours or days, vital
messages getting lost and floods of messages from higher commands demanding
reports.

Senior officers in the Pentagon said the problems were caused primarily by
demands for reports by Congress, the White House, the Pentagon and Government
agencies, and to a lesser extent by outmoded equipment and procedures.

Lieut. Gen. Clarence E. McKnight Jr., senior communications officer for the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, likened military problems to those of American society.
''We have an insatiable appetite,'' he said in an interview. ''We all want more
information.'' #56.7 Million Printed Messages General McKnight, who has been a
signal officer since he graduated from West Point in 1952, said the clogging of
the military channels of communication was ''like going to your post box every
day and finding it full of junk mail.''

The military communications system is a complex of telephone, radio and telex
networks carrying messages between Washington and American forces scattered
across the world, including ships at sea. It also carries messages among those
forces.

A Pentagon communications officer said that last year 56.7 million printed
messages were transmitted through the system. That, he said, did not include
voice transmissions by telephone or radio, or information in data processing
systems.

The volume has so slowed the system, said a retired general, that Washington got
its first news of the bombing of the Marine headquarters in Beirut two years ago
through news agencies, radio news and television long before it came through
official channels.

Field Commander's Problems

In the field, commanders have difficulty communicating with troops close by.
When Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. commanded American forces in Korea, he found that
in a war game it took four and a half hours for messages to reach him from the
front 40 miles away.

He said his message center got bogged down because messages announcing where the
troops could get water for their canteens were being transmitted to every unit
in his command.

''The more I dug into that pile of messages, the more I could see that 'water
point' messages typified our problem,'' said General Vessey, who recently
retired as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

In the five years since the Reagan Administration came to office the Defense
Department has spent $70 billion to improve communications. Spending for
communications has been growing at a rate of nearly 20 percent a year.

A Matter of Discipline

But General McKnight said the new apparatus being bought, while enlarging the
capacity of the networks and speeding transmissions, would not solve the
fundamental problem. That, he said, was more a matter of discipline than of
technology.

''People are the solution,'' he said. ''We need a new way of training our
people,'' including, he said, everyone in Washington who asked for reports from
the field or wanted to transmit information to the field.

''We're hosing our people with information,'' General McKnight said, waving his
hands as if he was holding a fire hose. ''We are still in our infancy in being
able to sift and sort critical bits of data for precise decision-making.''

Advanced technology has made it possible for senior officers in Washington to
communicate swiftly with forces all over the world. President Johnson, according
to historical records, took advantage of that to run the war in Vietnam from the
White House.

Managing Forces From Capital

Officers here and in the field suggested that the Vietnam era habit of managing
forces from Washington rather than leaving the managing to commanders on the
scene set a precedent with Pentagon staffs that accounted for the heavy flow of
messages today.

Field commanders said that inflating the precedence of messages, in which
senders put a higher priority on a message than it merits, had further clogged
the system.

In military communications ''routine'' precedence is assigned to administrative
messages while information essential to operations rates ''priority.''
''Immediate'' is reserved for warnings of attack, intelligence bearing on
national security and information on aircraft or missile operations. ''Flash''
is for operational commands in crisis or war and for critical intelligence.

The President, the Secretary of Defense, and a few senior military officers may
use ''flash override.'' #5 to 10 Hours for Messages In operations or times of
crisis the order ''minimize'' is supposed to clear personnel, financial and
other administrative messages out of the way. Even so, operational officers
said, urgent messages can still take 5 to 10 hours to be transmitted.

Despite the recent heavy expenditures, much communications gear is 20 to 30
years old and incapable of keeping up with demands. ''But we can't get rid of a
lot of things,'' General McKnight said, ''because they are so expensive.''

Moreover, he said, the system was built piecemeal, as new technology became
available. Making newer and older pieces of apparatus compatible has been
difficult. ''You have to look at the totality of what you want the system to
do,'' he said.

The demands for communications have grown so much, General McKnight said, that
in Europe the Army infantry, not including such other combat forces as armored
or artillery troops, are outnumbered by signal troops.

Services' Systems Incompatible

A big obstacle to swift communications, according to Pentagon and field
officers, has been a lack of cooperation among the four services. Much of their
communications equipment cannot be interconnected, nor are their procedures
compatible.

Poor communications among the forces invading Grenada two years ago hampered the
operation, officials have said. A report written at the Atlantic Command in
Norfolk, Va., on lessons learned in the invasion had 10 pages on communications,
all censored and not made public.

The breakup of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, over whose lines
most military messages in the United States move, has further complicated
military communications, officers said.

The lack of compatible equipment and procedures is compounded in Europe, where
each nation in NATO has its own communications system. Gen. Bernard W. Rogers,
commander of American and allied forces, said in Signal magazine last month that
there was only one command and control communication system that could connect
all the NATO forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

No American P.O.W.'s in Vietnamese Territory

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


To the Editor:

It is only too obvious, from John LeBoutillier's assertion that American
prisoners of war are still alive in Southeast Asia (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), that the
former Congressman has no on-the-ground sources in that area.

I made a four-month-long walk down the Mekong River in 1983 from Nong Khai to
Mukdahan, Thailand, with occasional forays across the river into Laos, and in
questioning hundreds of Laotian refugees in the Lao language, I found no
evidence of any Caucasian presence in Vietnamese-occupied territory, even though
it would have been in the self-interest of those refugees to tell me of such a
presence.

The Defense Intelligence Agency came to the same conclusion, calling off its own
search in late 1983, according to retired officers now living in Nong Khai.

It is not my own search that matters. I could easily have missed those with
information of real import. What matters, and what any party with down-in-the
dirt experience in the Mekong Valley can verify, is the sheer impossiblity of
keeping ''slave Americans'' a secret. The very idea is absurd.

It is no easier to keep secrets from a half-million anti-Communist Laotian
refugees than it is to keep secrets from a half-million reporters.

Illusions about live prisoners of war are near-pathological, born of American
optimism and the spirit of Rambo. Mr. LeBoutillier doesn't play to the families
of P.O.W.'s. He plays to all those Americans who can't accept the end and the
outcome of the Vietnam War. They are his real audience. ''Live'' P.O.W.'s keep
the war itself alive. The Vietnam War is over. Can't we accept that as final
fact? ROY N. COWHERD New York, Nov. 16, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

100 YEARS OF MAXIM'S 'KILLING MACHINE'

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2087 words


THE centennial year of a weapon that may have killed more people than any other
is passing unobserved.

Machine guns attract little notice from the makers of military budgets, because
they are relatively cheap. The best .50-caliber heavy machine gun money can buy
costs only about $5,000, and automatic assault rifles that can double as light
machine guns go for only a few hundred dollars each. ''Governments spend so
heavily on nuclear submarines and missiles,'' said an executive of a machine gun
factory, ''that the manufacture of trucks and guns gets the lowest priority.
That's the paradox of today's armament industry.''

Nevertheless, no army in the world can afford to do without machine guns, and
the models being manufactured today are likely to remain in service for many
years. George A. Strichman, retiring board chairman of Colt Industries Inc.,
said in an interview that he expects the M-16 assault rifle to remain the
primary United States infantry weapon until well into the 21st century. The
M-16, which is produced by Colt, fires a burst of bullets with a single pull of
the trigger, and is thus a form of machine gun.

Regardless of manufacturing priorities, moreover, there seems to be no shortage
of machine guns in the United States or elsewhere in the world.

The main supplier of machine guns to America's armed forces, Saco Defense Inc.
(a subsidiary of the Swiss-owned Alusuisse of America Inc.), is situated in a
tidily landscaped suburb of Portland, Me. The quiet of the community is
disturbed only slightly by the muffled thumping of machine gun and cannon fire
inside the plant's sound-proof test ranges.

Equipped with the latest in computer-controlled robot forges, lathes, reamers,
heat-treating and plating machinery, Saco's small but highly skilled work force
of 800 tops up and modernizes the machine gun inventories of armed forces around
the world, including those of the United States.

Two main objectives in all new designs, said a Saco spokesman, William K.
Gearan, are to increase the service lives of new guns while reducing their
weight. But underlying these goals are design principles with a venerable
heritage.

Saco's three main products are the M-60 7.62-millimeter machine gun (the
standard light machine gun of America's armed forces since 1960); the M-2
.50-caliber heavy machine gun (first made in 1933), and the M-19 40-millimeter
machine cannon (first tested at the close of the Vietnam War).

Each of these guns works on a different principle: gas, recoil and blow-back
operation. But the three principles have one thing in common - they were all
patented by Hiram Maxim between the years 1883 and 1885.

Maxim, who lived from 1840 to 1916, is rarely mentioned in the same breath with
Thomas A. Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, the Wright brothers, and the other
great American inventors of his day. But in ''The Social History of the Machine
Gun,'' the historian John Ellis points out, ''Without Hiram Maxim, much of
subsequent world history might have been different.''

The Maine-born inventor, moreover, was as prolific as his more famous
contemporaries. As Edison's chief rival in the design of electrical systems,
Maxim installed the first electric lights in a New York City building (the
Equitable Insurance Company, 120 Broadway) in the late 1870's. Maxim's method of
hardening the carbon filaments of incandescent bulbs actually paved the way for
the light bulb credited to Edison. Maxim's airplane might well have flown before
that of the Wright brothers, had it been powered by something lighter than a
steam engine.

In his autobiography ''My Life,'' Maxim described countless gadgets he invented,
some more successful than others. Among the products of his youth were an
automatic sprinkler system for a flour mill and an automatic mousetrap. The
latter was designed so that the struggling of each victim would reset the trap
for the next mouse.

Advice to Seek Profits

Maxim never reached the pinnacle of success in his native land, but a turning
point came for him during a business trip he made to Europe. He later wrote to
The Times of London:

''In 1882 I was in Vienna, where I met an American whom I had known in the
States. He said: 'Hang your chemistry and electricity! If you want to make a
pile of money, invent something that will enable these Europeans to cut each
others' throats with greater facility.' ''

Maxim took the advice seriously, set up a workshop in London, and within three
years, was building the world's first practical machine guns. (Most of the
earlier rapid-fire guns, notably the multibarreled gun invented by the American
Richard Jordan Gatling in 1861, had to be cranked by hand. Maxim's gun required
only steady pressure on the trigger to maintain a continuous firing cycle,
including reloading, cocking and the ejection of spent cases.) Military
historians have noted that virtually all the important designers or developers
of machine guns following Maxim were Americans, and that most of them had to go
to Europe to implement their ideas. Benjamin B. Hotchkiss set up his factory in
France, Col. Isaac N. Lewis went to England to make the Lewis gun, John M.
Browning built a plant in Belgium (where the guns bearing his name are still
manufactured) and Hugo Borchardt moved to Germany, where one of his designs
became the basis of the famous Luger pistol.

Idea Struck Him in Childhood

During his childhood in Maine, Maxim had been knocked over by the recoil of a
powerful rifle, and had speculated on the possibility of putting recoil forces
to work to operate guns automatically. In London, Maxim devised a spring-loaded
bolt action that could store up the recoil energy released by a shot and use
that energy for readying the weapon for the next shot.

Among the most difficult problems Maxim's machine gun action had to solve was
the handling of powerful rifle cartridges; a way had to be found to keep the
gun's breech tightly closed until each bullet left the barrel. Otherwise, he
knew, the empty cartridge case would start to leave the chamber too soon, and
the gas pressure in the barrel would burst the thin brass case, ruining the gun
and possibly maiming the shooter.

Maxim's solution, and the heart of his design, was a toggle mechanism patterned
on the human leg. At rest, the ''leg'' lay straight and horizontal, its
swiveling ''foot'' pressed against the rear of the bolt, holding it tightly
against the breech of the barrel. When a cartridge was fired, barrel, bolt and
''leg'' would recoil a short distance, remaining locked together until the
bullet had left the gun. Then, as the recoiling mechanism continued rearward,
the knee joint of the leg would pass under a tripping cam, forcing the knee to
bend downward and thus unlocking the bolt.

At that point, the barrel would halt its rearward motion but the bolt would fly
backward faster still, hastened by another Maxim invention, a small lever called
an accelerator. The movement of the bolt would eject the spent cartridge case
and withdraw a fresh cartridge from a moving fabric belt. Driven forward by a
compressed spring, the bolt would then cock the firing pin, load the new
cartridge and fire, repeating the cycle indefinitely until the trigger was
released or ammunition was exhausted.

Today's recoil-operated guns, including the M-2 heavy machine gun, work
essentially the same way, although the complicated knee-action toggle lock has
been replaced by a simpler lock, a steel bar that is cammed up and down in a
vertical slot.

Initial Demonstration Succeeds

Maxim's ''little daisy of a gun,'' as he called it, immediately attracted the
interest of the Duke of Cambridge and British royalty. In one of his machine-gun
demonstrations, Maxim impressed the royal family by blasting the letters VR (for
Victoria Regina) into a target. The inventor settled in England, became a
subject of the Queen, and was finally knighted for his achievements. He was
asked to stand for Parliament but declined because of deafness, a problem
possibly caused by the 200,000-odd shots he had fired while demonstrating his
gun.

At the outset of World War I, all the combatant armies were armed with Maxim's
gun.

Early admirers of the gun included Germany's Kaiser and the Tsar of Russia,
although Maxim encountered problems during the Russian sales tour he made at
about the turn of the century. At the time, Russian law barred atheists from the
country, and Maxim had fallen afoul of the secret police by describing himself
as an atheist.

Faced with arrest, he recanted and proclaimed himself a Christian Protestant.
''Like Edison,'' he later wrote, ''I never had any use for a religion,'' but it
seemed expedient at the time to undergo a temporary conversion. The ploy worked;
''Since that time,'' Maxim wrote, ''the Russians have purchased vast numbers of
Maxim guns, and it has been asserted by those who ought to know that more than
half of the Japanese killed in the late war (the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-05)
were killed with the little Maxim gun.''

Role in Building Colonial Empires

The advent of the machine gun meant that for the first time a handful of gunners
could subdue masses of enemy infantry, revolutionaries, strikers or hostile
crowds. Initially used to help build colonial empires, the Maxim gun did its
first large-scale slaughtering in 1893, a scant eight years after the gun's
invention. Fifty British security guards of the Rhodesian Charter Company in
Africa brought four Maxims to bear against Zulu tribesmen, and in less than 90
minutes the guns had killed 3,000 of an attacking Zulu force of 5,000.

On Sept. 2, 1898, the Maxim fought its first real battle when Sir Herbert
Kitchener (assisted by a young Winston Churchill) met an army of Muslem
fundamentalists at Omdurman on the Nile. The British killed or wounded more than
20,000 of the enemy while sustaining only light casualties of their own.

World War I, sometimes called ''the machine-gun war,'' saw carnage unequaled in
all previous history. In just one day along the Somme, July 1, 1916, the British
suffered 21,000 killed, the great majority by Spandau machine guns, the German
version of the Maxim.

Among the developments of World War I was the pistol-caliber submachine gun (or
''trench broom,'' as the Thompson submachine gun was initially called). After
the war, the submachine gun became a favorite weapon of police, strike-breaking
factory guards and gangsters. The enormous firepower of these weapons greatly
enhanced the capacity of their owners to control social events.

'Astronomical' Death Toll

According to Edward C. Ezell, curator of armed forces history at the Smithsonian
Institution, no one really knows how many people have been killed by all the
variants of Maxim's invention, nor even how many machine guns there are in the
world today. ''But the numbers must be astronomical,'' he said in an interview.

''Take the AK family of Soviet assault rifles,'' he said. ''Since the AK can be
fired in continuous bursts by keeping a finger on the trigger, it is a kind of
machine gun. To date, something between 30 million and 50 million AKs have been
manufactured, and that's just one of hundreds of different types.'' The United
States has never matched Soviet production of automatic (machine) weapons, but
this country has nevertheless manufactured more than 7 million M-16 assault
rifles since the M-16 was introduced in Vietnam.

Neither governments nor private organizations keep track of the number of
machine guns in existence, but the aggregate today may be somewhere in the
vicinity of 100 million. ''Moreover,'' Dr. Ezell said, ''most automatic weapons
(machine guns) don't go away, they're just recycled.''

Other Invention Slighted

Boastful though he sometimes was, Maxim might not have minded the absence of any
centennial observances this year for his gun. Toward the end of his life he
seemed somewhat chastened by its ghastly effects. ''Had it been anything else
but a killing machine,'' he wrote, ''very little would have been said about
it.''

A chronic sufferer of bronchitis, Maxim invented and manufactured a steam
inhaler a few years before his death, but his inhaler prompted a storm of
accusations that he was ''prostituting my talents on quack nostrums.''

The inventor wryly commented: ''From the foregoing it will be seen that it is a
very creditable thing to invent a killing machine, and nothing less than a
disgrace to invent an apparatus to prevent human suffering.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: diagram; photo of Hiram Maxim

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEEDIEST CASES FUND POISED FOR THE 74TH ANNUAL APPEAL

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


Mrs. V. can still remember the day her oldest daughter died, leaving a
3-month-old baby and a 5-year-old child.

She said that she and her daughter had gone to a dime store and that ''we bought
the baby a nightgown and booties.''

''My daughter,'' Mrs. V. said, ''she was really happy with those little things
for the baby and we had a good day.''

That night, Mrs. V. said, her daughter had an asthma attack. ''She woke up
suffocating and just like that she died,'' Mrs. V. recalled quietly. ''The
little girl saw it all,'' she added in a whisper, nodding at the bright, sturdy
grandchild sitting politely on the living room sofa.

Mrs. V. had worked since she was 14 years old - when she folded and boxed
women's underwear for $16 a week - and she had raised six children of her own.
As she approached her 50th birthday, she was suffering from asthma, from
phlebitis and from a chronic heart ailment.

A Place for Help

But when her daughter died, she was determined to take care of the grandchildren
and to keep them out of foster homes. She was joined in that resolve by Joseph,
her youngest son and the only one of her children still living at home.

It was because of her failing health and her determination to maintain her
family that Mrs. V. turned to the Children's Aid Society, one of the charities
served by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which begins its 74th annual
appeal this Sunday.

''Thank God we are in a country that will help children,'' the grandmother said
with a smile. ''These people were helping a friend of mine, and when she saw how
sick I was getting, she said they would help me.''

''Three days after,'' she recalled, ''they sent someone to our house who
listened to my story and wrote it all down.''

It was more than four years ago that her daughter's baby and young child came to
live in Mrs. V.'s East Harlem apartment.

''It was good to have them, especially because four months after my daughter
died, my oldest son was killed, too,'' Mrs. V. said. ''He was a Vietnam veteran.
He died on the street. They say it was drugs, but he never had drugs before he
was in the war.''

Day Care and Counseling

Her grandchildren delighted Mrs. V., but taking care of the small family became
increasingly hard as her asthma and heart ailment worsened. She was hospitalized
month after month, and even when she was home, she could barely walk across the
room on some days. Today she has a respirator in her bedroom, where a huge
cylinder of oxygen stands amid rows of colorful glass figurines and a windowsill
full of religious statues.

Judith M. Radwany, who supervises Mrs. V.'s case, said Children's Aid had helped
the family negotiate the Social Security and welfare bureaucracy, arranging for
a home attendant to help with the housekeeping and shopping and to accompany
Mrs. V. to her hospital and doctor's appointments. Children's Aid helped find a
day-care center for the youngest grandaughter and also arranged for a counselor
for the 10-year old, ''who was very disturbed by her mother's death,'' Miss
Radwany said.

This year alone, Mrs. V. has been in the hospital eight times, usually for a
week or more. When he can, Joseph helps with the children, but he is a full-time
college student, and when Mrs. V.'s attacks occur and he is in school,
Children's Aid arranges for a homemaker to take care of the girls.

Mrs. V. has great hopes that life will be better for Joseph and for her two
granddaughters. And in fact, Joseph is making a better life. He is studying
finance at Fordham University and works summers.

''I love these kids,'' the 20-year-old student said.

''I show them,'' he added, ''that you don't have to be tough and hard the way so
many people are out on the streets.''

Miss Radwany said helping to strengthen families and to keep them together was
an important part of the work at Children's Aid.

The two little girls, ages 5 and 10 are happy, healthy and bright, according to
their social workers. They have their loving grandmother, a stable home and an
affectionate uncle who constantly reminds them ''not to close any doors, to try
to improve themselves.''

''With all the help we are getting, we're doing just fine,'' said Mrs. V.
proudly. ''We're going to be all right.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 28, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Those Mysterious Cracks

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words


Dr. Edgar O. Seaquist, an investigative engineer, has been seen sleuthing around
the black granite walls of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial lately with a
magnifying glass, searching for clues about 14 cracks that have mysteriously
appeared on the 10-foot panels of the memorial.

Dr. Seaquist, employed by Universal Associates, has been working with the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund to find out the cause of the hairline cracks.

The cracks were discovered in the autumn of 1984. That was just after President
Reagan accepted the memorial on behalf of the United States and turned over
responsibility for its upkeep to the Park Service.

The memorial has 58,022 names of servicemen killed in the Vietnam war and was
designed by Maya Ying Lin, at the time a Yale University student.

Cooper-Lecky Partnership, a local architectural firm, supervised construction
and will also recommend solutions to an advisory committee, but so far the
experts are baffled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IN WARNING TO NEW ZEALAND ON SHIP VISITS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


The Reagan Administration has told New Zealand that if it enacts legislation
barring visits by ships capable of carrying nuclear weapons the United States
will almost certainly scrap a mutual defense treaty, according to senior
Administration officials.

In interviews this week, the officials said that a yearlong dispute between
Washington and Wellington over visits by United States Navy ships had reached a
decisive point.

All signs, the officials said, pointed to an end to the mutual defense
commitments of the 34-year-old Anzus pact under which Australia, New Zealand and
the United States pledge to ''act to meet the common danger'' in case of an
attack on any of them.

Earlier Proposal Modified

The Labor Government of Prime Minister David Lange has said it plans to seek
parliamentary approval by mid-December of a law empowering the Prime Minister to
bar entry to all ships he is not certain are free of nuclear weapons.

The proposed law, which would authorize the Prime Minister to make the decision
by himself, is a modification of an earlier draft that put responsibility for
the decision on a committee of experts from the national security agencies of
New Zealand and the Prime Minister.

But a high-level State Department official said there was no indication that Mr.
Lange had changed his opposition to visits by nuclear-armed ships or that he
would not try to bar ships if he was not certain they were not carrying nuclear
arms. The official said the Administration's opposition to the legislation was
therefore unchanged.

Destroyer's Visit Barred

''The important thing,'' a State Department official said today, ''is that there
be no law which would force the New Zealand Government to say that an American
ship did or did not carry nuclear weapons.''

The prposed law would make formal a policy that Mr. Lange has followed since
winning election in July 1984 and that has already provoked a crisis in
American-New Zealand relations. The rift began when Mr. Lange barred the visit
of the American Navy destroyer Buchanan last winter after Washington refused to
say whether it was nuclear-armed or not.

As a matter of policy, the United States declines to confirm or deny that a
particular ship is carrying nuclear weapons, asserting that it cannot signal to
the Soviet Union which vessels are so armed.

In retaliation for the ban on the Buchanan, the United States suspended naval
maneuvers with New Zealand, stopped sharing intelligence information with it and
canceled last summer's Anzus meeting.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz said publicly last summer that if Mr. Lange
enacted a nonnuclear law, the United States would be forced to ''review'' its
commitment to New Zealand's defense under Anzus.

But because of statements by Mr. Lange in the last two weeks indicating that he
intended to proceed with the law, the United States has told New Zealand
privately and publicly that the ''review'' would undoubtedly lead to the end of
Washington's longtime commitment to New Zealand.

What effect such a move would have on New Zealand is uncertain. There is no
imminent threat to the country. Australia, which is also led by a Labor
Government, has said it would retain its own military ties with New Zealand even
though it agrees with Washington's criticism of its policy.

A Psychological Impact

Some Administration officials believe the impact would be mostly psychological,
causing concern among the New Zealand population, which has always valued its
close ties to the United States.

Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, said in an interview with New Zealand television that is scheduled to
be broadcast in New Zealand on Dec. 12, ''I think fairness requires that I say
that I think the probable consequence of such a review would be that if New
Zealand enacts legislation that gives the force of law to that port ban, that we
are going to have to effectively terminate our alliance commitment to New
Zealand.''

''The U.S. alliance relationship with New Zealand would end,'' he said.

Mr. Wolfowitz said, however, that the United States would retain its defense
relationship with Australia under Anzus, if possible.

''We value very much our security relationship with Australia,'' he said. ''The
Australians have performed admirably. We don't have any of these problems with
them, and we are certainly going to continue our defense cooperation with
Australia under Anzus. Now how exactly we are going to handle that is something
we would need to look at.''

He said that New Zealand ''really has to realize it's facing a sort of turn in
the road.''

'A Lot of Unknowns'

''It can either face a future where we continue the kind of fruitful cooperation
we've had, where we contribute jointly to stability in a region I think has been
surprisingly stable,'' he said, ''or it can choose to go off on a brand new
course.

''And I think there are a lot of unknowns and uncertainties. But I think it's
going to be a less stable world in general and I think much less stable in the
area of New Zealand's own interest. That's something that New Zealanders will
have to judge.''

Last week Paul Cleveland, the Ambassador-designate to New Zealand, told the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee that his first order of business in New
Zealand ''will be to do all I can to convey to the New Zealanders the
essentiality of restoring normal port access for types of ships received by New
Zealand in the past in accord with our policy of neither confirming nor
denying.''

''On the other hand,'' he said, ''regrettable as it would be, I shall make clear
that legislation reinforcing the port ban could effectively terminate our
alliance commitments to New Zealand.''

The Administration denies it is interfering in New Zealand's internal affairs,
but officials acknowledge that the United States is hoping that Mr. Lange will
decide not to go ahead with the legislation when he recognizes he cannot have
both an antinuclear policy and an American defense commitment.

Close Allies in Wars

The United States and New Zealand were close allies in both World Wars and in
Korea and Vietnam. The nuclear dispute has been taken very seriously in
Washington for fear that if the United States does not respond forcefully, the
antinuclear policy of New Zealand could spread to allied countries that allow
visits by American ships without questioning whether they carry nuclear weapons
or not.

The types of ships that have visited New Zealand in the past have generally been
destroyers, attack submarines and frigates, none of which is clearly a
nuclear-armed vessel. As a rule, aircraft carriers and missile-firing
submarines, which carry nuclear arms, have not visited New Zealand.

Under the Anzus pact, signed in 1951, ''each party recognizes that an armed
attack in the Pacific area on any of the parties would be dangerous to its own
peace and safety and declares that it would act to meet the common danger in
accordance with its constitutional processes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister David Lange (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
No Easy Way Out

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: PARIS


American leaders came home from Geneva with the impression that Moscow now would
like to find a way out of Afghanistan. This was conveyed in public by Soviet
spokesmen, who repeatedly spoke of the need for a ''political solution,'' as
well as officially in private. They emphasized the role that United Nations
mediation should play.

There are many reasons to take this seriously, but also reasons that it won't be
as easy as a simple ukase from Moscow.

The war has dragged on for six years without any ''light at the end of the
tunnel,'' to dispense with the Vietnam comparison. The cost and casualties have
become a serious nuisance for the Kremlin, though not intolerable. They could go
on indefinitely.

In fact, NATO intelligence shows an increase in Soviet military action in
Afghanistan recently, but that is not considered a contradictory sign to
Moscow's message about a settlement. It could well be a last effort to achieve
as favorable a military situation as possible before an attempted truce.

The war in Afghanistan has become a serious irritant in Moscow's relations with
the third world, as the last United Nations condemnation showed. It is also an
obstacle in Moscow's search for better relations with China, and President
Reagan has made clear that the United States considers it a major test of Soviet
intentions.

So there are internal and external reasons to support the assessment that Moscow
is prepared to seek a compromise. They may not be the most important, however.
The spread of militant Iranian-type fundamentalism has become a frightening new
factor in the situation, worrisome throughout the region and possibly a threat
to the stability of the Soviet Moslem population.

In addition to the three million Afghan refugees in Pakistan, there are a
million in Iran. The United Nations High Commission for Refugees found that they
are well received, established in towns and cities as well as in special
settlements, and becoming thoroughly indoctrinated with the Ayatollah Khomeini's
ideas. Fundamentalism is also gaining in the Afghan camps in Pakistan, already
an Islamic state but trying to hold Iranian extremism at bay.

The evidence is that this trend can only grow as the conflict drags on.
Everybody involved except Iran has to see it as a danger for the whole area. It
is one point in this brutal war, which America first saw as a Soviet drive
toward the Persian Gulf, where United States and Soviet interests have come to
coincide. The radical religious menace is proving greater than the Soviet menace
in a way that American arms to the dauntless Afghan rebels cannot confront.

Moscow has to realize that no possible agreement could leave the puppet regime
of Babrak Karmal in place. It is much too hated and discredited. Nor is it
conceivable that any kind of international guarantees could prop him up, even if
the U.S. agreed to try, which it will not and should not do.

At most, America could agree to stop providing arms to the rebels and give some
economic aid to a new, acceptable regime, which would have to be independent and
nonaligned. Even so, it would be extravagant to expect Pakistan to seal the
border. It has always been an open border, which Afghans well know how to cross,
and estimates are that it would take an army double the size of Pakistan's to
close it effectively.

The greatest problem, then, is to create a government that could hold its own
and install peace by majority consent. The sad fact is that no such alternative
regime is visible. There is no government in exile. The rebels are divided and
hostile among themselves. The Russians have created a monster that they cannot
dump and replace.

In a way, their situation is worse than America's in Vietnam because there is no
Hanoi to move in, impose order and let them off the hook, even in ignominy. An
unprepared pullout would leave chaos, not a new non-Soviet order. This is
certainly Moscow's fault and it helps explain why the Russians are willing to
talk to the United States about Afghanistan.

It is also why America should repress the temptation to gloat about the
Kremlin's trouble, and try to help fashion a competent substitute that could be
installed with international support in Kabul. This will take time, and it is
probably beyond the capacity of U.N. mediators. America should support political
talks among the rebels now looking to the day when a new regime can be
organized. Even if Moscow has good new intentions, it won't be enough to end the
war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP/JAZZ;
'BEEHIVE A REMINDER THAT THE 60's WERE FUN

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


THE 1960's may have been the decade of Vietnam, assassinations and social
revolution, but as the exuberant cabaret revue ''Beehive'' reminds us, the
decade also produced its share of transcendentally silly fun. The show, which is
enjoying an open-ended run at Sweetwater's, features six of the most promising
young female singers in the New York area glossing the songs and voices of an
array of singers from Lesley Gore to Janis Joplin.

According to Larry Gallagher, who conceived and wrote the show, ''Beehive''
originated as a theatrical revue about the relationship between the women's
movement and the pop music of the day. ''It was too talky to work in a
cabaret,'' Mr. Gallagher said recently, ''so I narrowed the characters down to
just a narrator and divided the show's 30 songs into five musical segments -
girl groups, teen-age advice, British singers, soul singers and Janis Joplin.''

In the revue's funniest sequence, cast members become wiggling cartoon
caricatures of Brenda Lee, Connie Francis and Annette Funicello, dispensing
musical advice to a troubled Lesley Gore in her living room on the night before
Christmas. The show hits an emotional peak with a medley of soul standards sung
by Peggi Blu and Pattie Darcy. Then it turns into a rock show, with Laura
Theodore's expert impersonation of Janis Joplin.

Powerful Vocal Performances

The powerful vocal performances by the revue's leading ladies -Miss Darcy, Miss
Blu, Alison Fraser, Jasmine Guy, Adriane Lenox and Laura Theodore - make
''Beehive'' something more than a nostalgic gloss. While the show has nothing
deep to say about women in the 60's, its abundance of vocal talent makes it one
of the liveliest nightclub entertainments in town.

The six stars come from several corners of the New York pop scene.

Miss Fraser, who does amusing parodies of Brenda Lee and Petula Clark, has
appeared in two William Finn musicals at Playwright's Horizons.

Miss Lenox, the narrator of ''Beehive,'' appeared in the Broadway and national
companies of ''Ain't Misbehavin'.'' Miss Guy, who plays Tina Turner and Annette
Funicello, was seen on Broadway in ''Leader of the Pack.''

The three performers who get the best exposure in ''Beehive'' - Miss Darcy, Miss
Blu and Miss Theodore - have collectively paid their dues for many years,
toiling on the fringes of the city's pop scene waiting for the big break. Miss
Darcy, who plays Lesley Gore, Dusty Springfield and Mary Weiss of the
Shangri-Las, grew up in West Orange, N.J., and has been a studio singer since
the age of 16. Recently, she won attention for her cameo performance of ''The
Look of Love,' in the Broadway musical ''Leader of the Pack.'' And in
''Beehive,'' she sings with the ferocity of the dipped-in-vinyl rock-and-roll
fanatic she professes to be. Her all-stops-pulled-out medley of two Shangri-Las
teen melodramas, is one of the show's early high points. Later on, she and Miss
Blu bring down the house with a duet that intertwines ''A Natural Woman'' and
''Do Right Woman.''

Admires Cyndi Lauper

''My philosophy of show business is that if you're not going to have a good
time, you might as well do something else,'' Miss Darcy said last week. ''I
really admire singers like Cyndi Lau per, Pat Benatar and Stevie Nicks and would
like to make that kind of rock record, but I haven't yet been given the chance.
I figure if I just keep knocking on the door, I'll have to be let in sooner or
later.''

Miss Blu, like Miss Darcy, is also knocking on the door of big-time success.
She, too, has a taste for music that is raw and charged. Miss Blu grew up in
North Carolina and has been working in the record business since she was 15. For
the last five years, she has headed her own band.

A much-sought-after studio backup singer, Miss Blu appears on Bob Dylan's recent
album 'Empire Burlesque,'' and she recently completed work on albums by Culture
Club and Brian Setzer.

''The one record that made me decide to become a singer was Ruth Brown's 'Mama
(He Treats Your Daughter Mean),' '' Miss Blu recalled recently. ''I was never a
fan of the girl-group sound, because it was too pretty. I've always liked hard
rock-and-roll, screamers like Patti LaBelle and Little Richard who made you want
to peel off your skin and throw it.''

Miss Theodore, who wraps up the evening singing four of Janis Joplin's signature
songs, also has a big voice and a taste for rock. ''When I was a youngster in
Ohio, I loved Mick Jagger, Jim Morrison and Eric Burdon and used to try to
impersonate them,'' she said last week. ''In order to play Janis Joplin, I
videotaped a documentary movie of her life and meticulously studied everything
about her. I've sung jazz, and rhythm and blues, but my biggest love is still
rock.''

The Stars Interact

The excitement of ''Beehive'' has as much to do with the interaction of its six
stars as with any individual performances. Their communal anticipation stirs up
sparks.

''There is so much electricity happening - it's in the dressing room, in
rehearsal and on the stage,'' Miss Theodore said.

''Though it could have been a hornet's nest,'' Miss Fraser observed, ''it really
is like a beehive, with a nice supportive atmosphere and a strong sense of
women's togetherness.'' Miss Blu enthusiastically agreed. ''There's nothing more
exciting than singing for people and making them feel really good,'' she said.

''Beehive'' plays Tuesday through

Saturday at Sweetwater's, 170 Amsterdam Avenue, near 67th Street.

Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9 P.M. and midnight. There is a $15 music
charge and a $10 minimum. Information and reservations: 873-4100.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Singers in the revue ''Beehive'' (NYT/Barton Silverman)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: JENNIFER BARLETT, 15 YEAR RETROSPECTIVE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1653 words


FEW contemporary artists are more controversial than Jennifer Bartlett. To her
many defenders, her work is immensely ambitious and endlessly rich and
inventive, and her serial, cinematic and novelistic approach has pioneered new
ground for painting. Her detractors believe that she has flaws as a painter,
that her work is weakened rather than strengthened by its eclecticism and that
no matter how how large and ambitious it is, her painting is only skin deep.

Bartlett is such a prominent and controversial figure because her work is filled
with challenging paradoxes and contradictions. She has used a deliberate, almost
manically controlled method identified with the art of the 1960's to release an
energy and irrationality that may have more in common with the art of the 80's.
She has tried to be both impressionistic and systematic, both true to the moment
and true to the unfolding of time. She wants her pictorial performances and
celebrations of process to have the weight of masterpieces.

The collisions do not stop here. Bartlett wants to plunge into the world around
her while remaining afloat in the modernist world of surfaces and reflections.
Her work is defiantly resistant to being tamed and confined to any category and
place, yet it is filled with references to furnishings, interior design and
home.

The best opportunity so far to come to terms with Jennifer Bartlett is the
retrospective at the Brooklyn Museum through Jan. 6. With 40 large-scale
paintings, 50 drawings and a section devoted to Bartlett's commissions, it is
larger than the exhibition at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis last spring.
It is accompanied by a book-length catalogue with contributions by Calvin
Tomkins, Marge Goldwater, who organized the show for the Walker, and Roberta
Smith, whose essay is particularly helpful. After leaving Brooklyn, the
retrospective - which, in fact, covers only the last 15 years - will travel to
Kansas City, Mo., La Jolla, Calif., and Pittsburgh.

The exhibition begins with the serial works in which Bartlett used dots painted
on 12-inch-square steel plates to explore ideas about art and the workings of
the mind. In her 1970 ''House Piece,'' the dot patterns not only focus our
attention, as Minimalism did, on the visual field, but they also make us aware
of conflicting emotional responses to the idea of a house.

Bartlett's development of a systematic method to make us focus on perception, on
process, on the effect of shifting perspectives - and on the leaps that take
place in our minds no matter how rational we may think we are - culminate in her
1975-76 ''Rhapsody.'' In this, her most celebrated serial piece, 988 painted
tiles installed on all of the gallery walls create an environment. There is more
color in this work, a greater range of imagery and a clear sense of the artist's
concern both with the instant and with the passage of time.

Since then, the pictorial gestures have become broader and Bartlett's approach
has become increasingly more painterly. But even with her ''In the Garden,''
''Creek'' and ''Sea Wall'' paintings, there remains a horror of a vacuum -
something that feels like a terror of silence and empty space. Bartlett also
continues to maintain her particular dialogue between looseness and control,
sloppiness and rigor. Since her 1984 Volvo commission, she has been placing on
the floor three-dimensional mirror versions of objects that appear in her
paintings. The recent paintings and objects in the museum rotunda seem one step
from the landscapes of Monet and one step from the urban art playpens of Keith
Haring.

Work this ambitious is going to raise questions. While there is curiosity and
immense patience in Bartlett's works, they also seem to be airless. Partly as a
result of the artist's commitment to surfaces, there is no sense of space in
these paintings and no sense that anything in them actually exists. In other
words, with all the lush textures and passion for houses, water and trees, in
the end the world seems to exist only in the artist's imagination.

When something outside the artist actually appears to erupt within the
paintings, there is a sense of power and release. In the 1977 ''Graceland
Mansion,'' for example, a five-part painting in which a house changes identity
according to the style and perspective with which it is presented, the gallery
wall seems to burst through the interstices between the painted steel plates and
all but shatter the images.

In the 1983 ''Shadow,'' there are intimations of at least a dozen faces within
the inflamed cypress trees behind the swimming pool. They are wild and
irrational images, bringing to mind heads by artists like Holbein and Picasso.
Here there is a sense of being allowed to enter the work, of being able to
understand what lies behind the dread of silence and space, of being able to
hear a voice that seems consistently to be trying to speak.

With the apparent resistance to space, it is not suprising that another question
has to do with the artist's drawing. Good drawing not only situates an object in
space, but it also situates a work within an existing artistic category. Even if
we are sympathetic with Bartlett's determination not to make painting or
sculpture in a traditional way, is it possible to give ourselves consistently to
work if it is not spatially convincing and if it is clear that the artist did
not want to dwell on detail?

Can we continue to believe that ideas are worth pursuing if the works in which
they are presented lack the sense of scale that is invariably a clue that an
idea is in some way finished? Certainly the strength of Bartlett's work has a
great deal to do with its need to be everywhere and race in many directions at
the same time. But is that not also part of its weakness? Also of interest this
week: Sherrie Levine (Baskerville & Watson Gallery, 578 Broadway, between
Houston and Prince Streets): In her new works, Sherrie Levine is no longer
working with specific appropriated images. One of the two series in the show
consists of 12 abstract paintings on mahogany, each one 24 by 20 inches. The
other series is made up of five framed pieces of plywood -the dimensions smaller
but still suggesting icons - in which some of the knotholes are painted over
with metallic gold paint.

Levine continues to make art that can exist in some kind of negative space. The
abstract paintings consist of four vertical stripes; the stripe on the left is
about one-third the width of each of the other three. Although they bring to
mind paintings by artists like Brice Marden, Ellsworth Kelly and Robert
Motherwell, Levine's works remain independent. They establish their identity not
by what they are are but by what they are not. The paintings are both a
celebration of key modernist figures and an attempt to focus our attention on
their difference from them.

In the other series, Levine allows the evocative lines and shapes of the wood to
speak for themselves; they suggest diptychs, triptychs and landscapes. But the
paint then functions as a strange and ambivalent laugh. By placing the gilt over
places through which the wood breathes, the paint - which in the other series is
a sign of pleasure - becomes just as much a sign of glitz and betrayal. Here,
too, there is an admiration for a tradition - which probably goes back to German
Expressionist wood blocks - combined with a sense that this tradition has become
impossible. Here, too, Levine asks us to consider what art would be like that is
not identified with a tradition - neither with painting, nor with respect for
materials and craft, nor with commercialization. (Through Dec. 21.) Chuck
Connelly (Annina Nosei Gallery, 100 Prince Street): Chuck Connelly is one of a
number of promising artists intent on making ambitious paintings that are not
identified with Abstract Expressionism. In Connelly's case, this means bridging
the 1980's with early American modernists and American painting of the 19th
century. His landscapes and figures suggest Marsden Hartley, Albert Pinkham
Ryder, George Inness and the artists of the Hudson River School.

One of the ways in which the past is brought up to date is through Connelly's
concern with what was in the background of the earlier work. Before World War
II, industry was still developing, and artists either idealized it or tended to
mute their apprehension. In Connelly's work, the factories are far more
prevalent, and they are producing a plague of smoke.

Connelly also bridges pre-World War II American art with the contemporary world
by giving some of his paintings a fairy-tale quality. There is effective tension
between seriousness and play, art and entertainment. Some of the figures in the
largest painting, ''Battle,'' look like toy soldiers and graffiti figures. The
use of thick, creamy paint in works like ''Little Man'' and ''The Drain'' can
seem abstract or like an end in itself, but, as in earlier art, it remains
powerfully linked to the content. (Through Dec. 12.) Linda Cunningham - ''War
Memorial'' (SoHo 20 Gallery, 469 Broome Street): The climate that has generated
Vietnam War memorials is also producing a new kind of war memorial - one that
has nothing to do with patriotism and glorification of war. Linda Cunningham's
war memorial consists of five 12-foot bronzes. Three are upright. Two are on the
ground. All suggest human figures.

The bronze is cast in such a way that what we see are shells. The surfaces are
varied and rich. Each bronze is open and closed, intact and torn, self-contained
and dependent upon the others. They suggest classical sculpture, natural history
skeletons and the pleurants, the sculptural procession of grave and dignified
mourners made for Burgundian tombs at the end of the Middle Ages. This work
expresses in a very unsentimental way the equally stunning human abilities to
blow itself to bits and to endure. (Through Dec. 14.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of ''27 Howard Streed Day and Night'' by Jennifer Rablett

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA REPORTED TO HAVE GOTTEN TOP U.S. SECRETS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


A former Central Intelligence Agency analyst is thought to have given China many
of the C.I.A.'s top-secret reports on the Far East over the last 20 years, an
Administration official said today.

According to the official, the Government believes that the analyst, Larry
Wu-Tai Chin, 63 years old, had access to nearly all these documents. The
official, who is knowledgeable about the case, said Mr. Chin was one of the
agency's most experienced Chinese-language translators and was involved in
distributing C.I.A. reports to the White House and Federal agencies.

Another Administration official said Mr. Chin might have provided China with
detailed information about American policymaking in the Vietnam War. According
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr. Chin has confessed spying for the
Chinese since at least 1952.

'A Mole for a Long Time'

Intelligence officials have been unable to explain how a C.I.A. employee might
be able to spy for so long without detection. It was also unclear when Mr. Chin
was first permitted access to top-secret documents.

''He's been a mole for a long time, and he had access to all levels of
classified information, secret and up,'' a law-enforcement official said.
Federal officials said today that Mr. Chin might have received as much as $1
million from the Chinese in exchange for American secrets.

Despite reports that Mr. Chin was a relatively low-ranking analyst, officials
said today that he probably had done more damage to the United States than three
other Americans who were arrested on spying charges over the last two weeks.

''He was no small fish,'' an F.B.I. official said.

Arrest Came in Roundup

Mr. Chin was arrested last Friday night as part of a four-day roundup of
Americans accused of spying. The others were Jonathan Jay Pollard, a Naval
counterintelligence analyst, and his wife, Anne Henderson-Pollard, who were
charged with spying for Israel, and Ronald W. Pelton, a former communications
specialist for the National Security Agency, accused of selling secrets to the
Soviet Union.

The Justice Department had no comment on a report in today's editions of The Los
Angeles Times that Mr. Pelton gave information to Soviet agents that compromised
a multibillion-dollar espionage project in the Soviet Union.

In yet another expionage case, this one involving Ghana, the United States State
Department today ordered the explusion of four Ghanaian diplomats in retaliation
for a demand by Ghana Thursday that four American officials leave that West
African country. Ghana charged that two of the American officials were C.I.A.
employees.

The State Department said it would have no comment on the allegations.

Exchange With Ghana

The expulsions came four days after the United States and Ghana exchanged a
Ghanaian accused of spying on C.I.A. agents in Ghana for a group of Ghanaians
linked to American intelligence.

Mr. Chin's lawyer, Peter Meyers, did not return phone calls today from a
reporter seeking comment on the allegations against his client.

Mr. Chin, a resident of Alexandria, Va., is being held without bail until trial.
His lawyer said earlier this week that Mr. Chin would plead not guilty to the
espionage charges, which carry a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.

The F.B.I. said it began its investigation of Mr. Chin in December 1983.

May Have Started 30 Years Ago

Prosecutors have charged that Mr. Chin began supplying China with confidential
information more than 30 years ago. His purported espionage activities continued
after his retirement from the agency in 1981, when he began doing part-time
translation work for the agency, officials have said.

''Chin was one of the senior guys when it came to China projects'' at the
C.I.A., a law-enforcement official said today. ''People went to him when they
had problems with something. He was highly respected.''

Officials said Mr. Chin, who has already been charged with accepting $140,000
from the Chinese Government, may have received as much as $1 million, some of it
invested in real estate in the Washington area. ''He's told us $140,000,'' a
law-enforcement official said. ''We think that's a very, very, very low
estimate.''

Fluent in Chinese

Mr. Chin had spent most of his career at the Foreign Broadcast Information
Service, an arm of the intelligence agency that is involved with monitoring and
analyzing foreign broadcasts. Shortly after his arrest, intelligence sources
described Mr. Chin as a low-level translator who had little access to sensitive
information.

Law-enforcement agents quickly disputed that, saying Mr. Chin was one of only a
handful of senior C.I.A. employees fluent in Chinese. Consequently, they said,
he was allowed access to what one described as ''an incredible array'' of
top-secret information about the Far East.

An official said Mr. Chin's work probably permitted him access to sensitive
information about American policymaking in the Vietnam War. Prosecutors had
previously said Mr. Chin gave the Chinese highly confidential information in the
Korean War about the status of Chinese prisoners in American camps.

''If something important needed translating from Chinese or into Chinese, Chin
would help,'' said one law-enforcement official. According to court records, Mr.
Chin had top-secret clearance at the intelligence agency.

The official said Mr. Chin would often be involved in analyzing sensitive
intelligence material gathered from China. By learning where the material had
come from, the official said, Mr. Chin could help Chinese agents identify the
source of the information.

At a court hearing earlier this week, an F.B.I. agent testified that Chinese
officials needed two months to translate each shipment of material supplied by
Mr. Chin. His information was considered so valuable, the agent said, that Mr.
Chin's identity was revealed to a few people within China's intelligence
services.

A Reported Peking Banquet

The agent, Mark R. Johnson, said Mr. Chin was the guest of honor at a banquet in
Peking in 1982 that was attended by some of China's leading intelligence
officers. ''He was treated royally,'' Mr. Johnson said.

In Washington meanwhile, the State Department announced that the United States
would expel the Ghanaian diplomats and review its assistance programs to Ghana,
which receives about $15 million in United States aid each year.

The Ghanaian Government has given the four American officials 48 hours to leave
Ghana, and Charles Redman, a State Department spokesman, said the same deadline
would apply for the Ghanaian diplomats here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

55 COURTS-MARTIAL ARE CHALLENGED

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Soldiers are appealing 55 court-martial cases to the military's highest court,
asserting that Army commanders illegally took action to discourage testimony by
defense witnesses.

A lower court, the Army Court of Military Review, has already determined that
another commander, Maj. Gen. Thurman Anderson, may have tainted 125 other court
cases. The lower court ordered reviews of those cases, some of which resulted in
long prison sentences for soldiers convicted of murder, rape and robbery.

The review court found no illegal command influence in the 55 cases now being
appealed to the top military court, the Court of Military Appeals. The lower
court held that the commanders' actions in those cases had caused no witnesses
to withhold testimony.

Soldiers facing criminal charges asserted that the commanders took large-scale
actions or made policy statements that discouraged some troops from appearing as
defense witnesses, mostly in drug cases.

In the case of General Anderson, the lower court held that he delivered 10
speeches that might have discouraged his soldiers from serving as character
witnesses for suspects. General Anderson was commander of the Third Armored
Division in Frankfurt, West Germany, from 1982 to 1984, The findings of possible
influence in 125 cases represent the most involving any American military
commander in recent memory, according to Brig. Gen. Donald Hansen, who
supervises the Army's judicial system.

Formation Watches Suspects

The actions against four other commanders - a brigadier general, two colonels
and a lieutenant colonel - all affect drug cases. Allegations of illegal
influence against three of these commanders, from the First Armored Division in
Germany, were lodged after they apprehended drug suspects before separate
formations of more than a thousand soldiers in 1983.

Commanders are forbidden by military law to influence any phase of a
court-martial. The law was passed by Congress in 1950 to try to protect the
integrity of the military judicial process after it found that some commanders
tampered with court cases in World War II.

Mark Waple, a lawyer from Fayetteville, N.C., who has defended or advised 300
military drug suspects, criticized Army headquarters as conducting ''a
heavy-handed campaign'' against drug use that has ''signaled'' commanders they
can ''bend the rules.''

A spokesman said the Army had sought to end drug abuse without abridging
soldiers' legal rights.

Drug Campaign by Army

General Hansen said the unusually large number of accusations of illegal command
influence might reflect soldiers' concerns about ''strong'' actions taken
recently by the Army to instill discipline.

''It's probably a post-Vietnam syndrome,'' said General Hansen, who served as a
judge on the Army's highest court from 1981 to 1984.

''The Army's strong attempts to restore high standards and a drug-free
environment after Vietnam may lead soldiers to perceive illegal command
influence,'' he said.

One first sergeant said in an affidavit that General Anderson told a meeting of
senior noncommissioned officers ''that soldiers being sent to a court-martial
were not the kind of soldiers that need to be kept in the Army and that we
needed to get these soldiers out of the Army.''

However, a captain who attended an officers' meeting addressed by General
Anderson said that the general had merely argued for consistency.

''Charging a soldier,'' the captain quoted General Anderson as saying, ''and
then turning around and testifying as to what a wonderful soldier he or she was
is not consistent.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT 50 THE DC-3 'GOONEY BIRD' IS STILL FLYING HIGH

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


When the National Aeronautic Association holds its annual Wright Brothers dinner
Friday in Washington, gracing the head table will be a chunky, snub-nosed,
50-year-old guest of honor: a Douglas DC-3.

Somehow, inviting one of the legendary workhorses of the sky to a 50th birthday
dinner in a hangar at Dulles International Airport is not too extravagant a
gesture for admirers of the ''Gooney Bird'' that launched the era of commercial
aviation and helped to carry Allied forces to victory in World War II.

In its military configuration as the C-47, according to the McDonnell Douglas
Corporation, the twin-engine propeller plane has flown more miles, hauled more
freight and carried more passengers than any other aircraft in history. Admirers
of the plane have also been known to boast that it thrived on neglect, never
wore out and practically flew itself.

''It was the right size airplane at the right time and the first plane able to
make money just carrying passengers,'' said Harry Gann, president of the
American Aviation Historical Society of Santa Ana, Calif.

Gleaming Silver and Proud Looks

''It's the looks,'' said Robert Parmerter, a 43-year-old social studies teacher
in Schenevus, N.Y., struggling to explain just what it was that made him such a
fan of the DC-3 that he travels everywhere to air shows to photograph the plane.
''It's a proud look,'' he said, ''its nose in the air and all gleaming silver.''

Over the years, few machines and certainly no other airplanes have been the
object of such adulation as the DC-3, the Douglas company's third model,
introduced on Dec. 17, 1935 as a ''sleeper-transport'' for American Airlines. By
1946, when production ceased, 10,629 DC-3's had been produced. Of these,
according to McDonnell Douglas, 1,500 to 2,000 are still flying for third world
countries, charter operators, corporate and private owners and collectors.

The DC-3 remains a favorite of many armies and security forces. In the Vietnam
War, a gunship version dubbed ''Puff the Magic Dragon'' was fitted with three
rapid-firing miniguns that could blanket and pulverize a wide target. And the
plane is also a favorite of drug smugglers.

One record-holding DC-3, owned and still flown by Provincetown-Boston Airways
through countless engine changes, has logged more than 87,000 flight hours, the
equivalent of 10 unbroken years in the air.

Another of similar vintage is operated by Sentimental Journeys, a charter
company in Bluefield, W. Va., that provided the plane to the sports flying
enthusiasts of the National Aeronautic Association for their hangar dinner on
Friday. Still others are owned by DC-3 clubs the world over.

DC-3 Pins, Patches and Mugs

In addition, DC-3 cultists collect pins, patches, ties and coffee mugs as well
as books and periodicals. A DC-3 bibliography compiled by Mr. Gann of McDonnell
Douglas lists 171 magazine articles, 20 books and 4 government and scientific
reports. Devotees even play an informal version of DC-3 trivia.

The object of such enduring worldwide affection was the brainchild of Donald W.
Douglas, a Brooklyn-born aviation pioneer and engineer commissioned by a
predecessor of Trans World Airlines in 1932 to build a plane that would
''out-everything'' all rivals.

His first effort, the prototype DC-1 (''D'' for ''Douglas'' and ''C'' for
''commercial''), was bought by Howard R. Hughes. After modifications, the
Douglas company called the plane the DC-2 and sold 25 to T.W.A. at $65,000 each.
The subsequent variation, the DC-3, which had its maiden flight on Dec. 17,
1935, evolved into a 160-mile-an-hour, two-engine plane with a wingspan of 95
feet, a length of 64 feet and a capacity of 24 passengers. A version made for
American Airlines had luxury sleeper berths for 14 passengers and a
fully-enclosed honeymoon compartment.

From 1936 to 1939 passenger air traffic increased fivefold and carriers clamored
almost exclusively for DC-3's. The passenger load freed the airlines for the
first time from dependency on Government mail contracts and provided the
economic incentive to expand and develop route systems. By the end of its decade
in production, the DC-3 was carrying more than 90 percent of all domestic air
passengers.

Wartime Exploits Shape Mystique

It was the plane's wartime exploits that created much of its mystique.

In one famous episode, a parked Chinese DC-3 lost a wing to a Japanese air
attack in 1941. There were no replacement parts but a DC-2 wing was found in
Hong Kong. The wing, five feet shorter, was attached and somehow the plane flew
home safely 900 miles to Hong Kong. Inevitably it became forever known as the
DC-2 1/2.

A C-47 is also credited with downing one of two Japanese ''Zero'' fighters over
the Himalayan ''Hump.'' The Zero, seeking to ram the lumbering Yank transport,
sheared off part of the C-47's tail before crashing into a mountain. The
crippled C-47, however, succeeded in flying safely back to base.

When the Soviet Union cut off access to West Berlin in 1948, the plane was used
in the airlift to bring food to that city.

More recently, in April, 1957, a Frontier Airlines DC-3 flying north of Phoenix
hit a sudden downdraft that brushed the left wing against a mountaintop,
shearing off about 10 feet of the wing. Still, the pilot managed to maneuver the
plane back to a safe landing in Phoenix.

The plane has even been reported on occasion to have safely landed itself after
the pilot bailed out. But there have been notable crashes as well, including one
that killed Carole Lombard in 1942 and a midair collision of an Eastern DC-3
with a Navy fighter plane near Fort Dix, N.J., in July 1949, killing 16 people.

''They thrived on a steady diet of neglect and overwork,'' the writer Robert C.
Ruark once reminisced in a newspaper column. ''They flew with sand in the
carburetor and were maintained by cannibals and aborigines. They rattled,
banged, jumbed and bounced but by and large they flew.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Chinese DC-3; Diagram of a DC-3 against modern DC-10

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM MEMORIAL TAKES TO THE ROAD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: VENTURA, Calif.


As an afternoon drizzle misted faces already streaked with tears, dozens of
visitors knelt before the 250-foot-long wall of black of plexiglass and wood,
touching the cold surface as they found familiar names.

Clutching red roses, medals and pictures, they had come to view a traveling
reproduction of the Vietnam Memorial in Washington. The reproduction was erected
hours before on a grassy knoll in front of the County Government Center here.

For most s family members, soldiers and passers-by, it was the first chance to
pay respects, exchange memories and see for themselves the 58,022 names of
people killed or missing in action in the Vietnam War.

'Sons Have Finally Come Home'

''For the families of the guys that lived here, their sons have finally come
home,'' said Mario Aguilar, a 40-year-old Vietnam veteran from Santa Barbara.

In the last year the portable memorial, half the size of the wall in Washington,
has appeared in dozens of cities and towns from Tyler, Tex., to the Alaskan
panhandle. At each stop local veterans volunteer to assemble it and guard it
overnight.

''The guys that really hurt come in the wee hours of the morning, when no one's
here, but someone needs to be here for them,'' said Mr. Aguilar.

John Devitt, a 37-year-old Vietnam veteran from San Jose, conceived the idea for
the portable memorial after friends gave him the money for his trip to
Washington to see the original.

''I wanted everyone to see those names on the wall,'' he said, ''because when I
saw them, I recognized that they were sacrificed forever.''

Wall Took 2 Years to Build

What started as a weekend project took 30 volunteer members of San Jose's
Vietnam Combat Veterans, Ltd., two years and $28,000 to complete. Using original
blueprints and negatives borrowed from the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund in
Washington, the crew assembled the 140 panels in a silk-screening shop. White
epoxy paint created the slightly raised letters that loved ones now trace again
and again.

Mr. Devitt, who before beginning the wall project ''had all kinds of jobs, but
none that seemed to last,'' says the effort has turned his life around. He
transports the panels to towns that have paid $2,500 to reserve the memorial for
a week. The fee is just enough to cover expenses, he said.

Wherever it is set up, it becomes a place where thousands of mourners come to
leave their mementos. ''The things people leave - medals, pictures, letters from
kids who never knew their dad - are just as important as the wall,'' Mr. Devitt
said. He is collecting the items in hopes of creating a museum some day.

Wrenching Experience

At the Ventura site, which was sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans of Ventura
County, dozens of local volunteers consulting an alphabetized directory, helped
visitors find names they were seeking, often lending a sturdy shoulder for a
person suddenly overcome at the sight of a familiar name.

Ruby Haskins came to see the name of her son, Michael Wayne, who was 19 in 1968,
when he became the first soldier from Ventura County to die in combat. She
buried her face in her hands as a veteran wearing fatigues put his arm around
her.

''This is really sobering,'' said Salvador Casteneda, a 46-year-old veteran who
served in a helicopter unit. ''I saw a lot of these men killed.''

As he walked away, Mr. Casteneda shook his head and said, ''I was looking for
one name in particular, but there are just too many. I can only wonder how many
mothers, how many parents, are agonizing over this.''

Veteran Larry Wilkins volunteered to spend his Thanksiving morning at the
memorial. ''A friend of mine was shot in 'Nam on Thanksgiving, so it's my
special day,'' he said.

''This thing does a lot of healing,'' said Mr. Aguilar. ''But the bad thing
about it is when you take it down and watch it go away. It's like putting one of
your friends in a body bag, and knowing part of you walked away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of visitors in Ventura, Calif., kneeling at panel of Vietnam
Memorial replica (NYT/Michael Tweed)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FAMINE WORKERS

BYLINE: By Clifford D. May; Clifford D. May, a reporter on The Times's
metropolitan staff, recently completed a 27-month assignment as a correspondent
in Africa, including 10 months in Ethiopia and the Sudan.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3975 words


WHEN I LAST saw Hamid Bahamid, he was 4 years old and weighed 40 pounds. He was
born in the Eritrean mountains across the border in Ethiopia; he will probably
die in a hot tent in a refugee camp in the featureless desert of eastern Sudan.

His skin was taut across the sharp bones of his skull, his lips pulled back
against his teeth, his eyes bulging. The rigid expression of his face, both
frightened and frightening, suggested a ritual mask.

Lying on his back, each curved rib, each fragile bone standing out, he seemed
impervious to the swarm of black flies that settled on him.

''When it gets to this point, you can bet your money they won't last,'' said
Shirley Cantrel, a registered nurse from Texas. She paused for a moment, perhaps
considering how that sounds. ''Sometimes they do come out of it.''

She looked down at Hamid and stroked his face with her fingers. Her eyes grew
damp. ''They always say you get used to it,'' she said angrily. ''But uh-uh. You
don't get used to it. No.'' ABOUT A YEAR AGO, THE WESTERN world became abruptly
aware of the hunger that had closed in on Ethiopia, the Sudan, Chad, Mozambique
and other parts of Africa. Since then an unprecedented outpouring of food,
money, sympathy and publicity has been directed toward the victims. Yet little
attention has been paid to the thousands of men and women who distribute the
food, administer the medicines, devise and implement the projects aimed at
helping much of Africa lift itself from the quicksand of poverty, illness and
starvation into which it has been rapidly sinking.

I had been in contact with such people ever since I was first assigned to Africa
in 1983. They were often good sources: more knowledgeable about what was going
on at the grass-roots level than most diplomats, more honest than many African
government officials and less afraid to speak their minds than the ordinary
people in most countries on the continent. Over the last year, they also became
for me guides through the nightmarish labyrinth of what some of them have called
Africa's holocaust.

They are a diverse group -from soft-core Marxists to evangelical Christians to
hard-nosed neo-conservatives to opportunistic bureaucrats. They include
adminis-trators, economists, doctors, nutritionists, nurses, accountants,
logisticians, warehouse and port managers, agronomists, foresters, mechanics and
secretaries. Collectively, they go by various nicknames: ''soldiers of
misfortune,'' ''masters of disasters,'' ''relief chiefs,'' ''mercy-naries,''
''famine legionnaires'' and, simply, ''the faminists.''

Their spokesmen and fund-raisers generally project an attitude of determined
optimism, intended to suggest that if only they can collect enough money and
good will, Africa's most serious problems will be solved. Privately, an
overwhelming number of relief and development workers now share two convictions:
First, despite all the publicity -and to an extent because of it - the public
still does not understand the causes of the famine. Second, the current rescue
efforts are not likely to succeed in stopping the spread of hunger and poverty
anytime soon.

''I'm afraid we have to assume that from now on we'll need to intervene
massively in Africa every few years to fight disasters,'' says Andrew Timpson,
regional director for East Africa of Britain's Save the Children Fund. ''And we
also have to assume that many of these countries will become wards of the donor
community, international welfare cases, if you like, for a long, long time to
come.''

Many relief and development workers have also begun to express an ambivalence
about their role. Although they are bringing life and hope to many, on a
historical level their growing presence represents the first time since the
colonial era that foreigners are taking responsibility for millions of African
lives.

''We bring our tools, our values, our ways of doing things,'' says Egil Hagen,
an emergency coordinator for UNICEF. ''We are the new colonialists. But what's
the alternative?''

The alternative has become unthinkable. Years ago, mothers would tell their
children to finish dinner because ''people are starv-ing'' in China and India
and think little more about it. The starving infants of Ethiopia and the Sudan,
however, can be seen dying on the evening news. As Vietnam, the first fully
televised international conflict, brought the war home to the United States, so
the current famine may have brought home to the nations of the West the stark
reality of contemporary African deprivation. ONE RELIEF WORKER I MET, A NUN, has
been witness to that deprivation in southern Ethiopia for the last dozen years.
She recalls the events that precipitated mass starvation.

''Rainfall was part of it, of course,'' she says. ''Either there wasn't enough,
or it came at the wrong time. But that wasn't all. Long before that, the
Government was putting so many taxes on the farmers. It just made them poorer
and poorer.

''And then, a few years ago, some people from the Ministry of Agriculture showed
up and ordered that all the false banana trees be cut down,'' she says,
referring to a common tropical African plant that resembles a banana tree but
gives no fruit. ''They said there were other, better crops that could be planted
on the land instead.

''Well, what these people didn't realize is that the root of the false banana is
what peasants had always lived on in times of famine. It's sort of their own
emergency relief food. Without it, thousands just starved to death.''

Poverty and hunger are not unique to Africa, but nowhere else in the world are
farmers producing less food per person than they did 20 years ago. Periodic
droughts have contributed to the hunger, but to a lesser extent than most people
in the West have been led to believe. At least as important and far less
frequently depicted on Western television screens are the internal wars in
Ethiopia, the Sudan, Chad, Mozambique, Angola - all countries suffering serious,
widespread famine. Ethiopia, where starvation has been most severe, has been
drained of human, financial and agricultural resources by a quarter-century-long
civil war with separatist rebels in the Red Sea region of Eritrea. Ethiopia,
classified as the poorest country in the world, has the largest army in
sub-Saharan Africa.

Africa's birthrate, the highest of any continent's, is also accelerating the
spread of poverty and hunger. The point is not that Africa hasn't room for more
people; rather, its economic growth has not been able to keep pace. Rapid
population expansion has also meant that ancient African farming methods, which
were ecologically sound when habitation was sparse, have now overburdened the
land, exhausting nutrients, stripping away protective vegetation and encouraging
soil erosion.

Although many in the West strongly advocate birth control as the solution, most
relief workers say that the logistics of disseminating contraceptive information
and devices in rural Africa are dizzying. And few African governments cooperate
with family-planning programs.

As damaging as any of this are the policies of most African governments toward
their rural majorities -roughly three-quarters of their popu-lations. This group
has been squeezed in the vise of state marketing boards, which purchase farm
products at low, fixed prices. The difference between the government's purchase
price and its selling price often represents its main source of income, along
with foreign aid. In many cases, that money is used to equip armies, construct
office buildings, conference centers and all manner of prestigious projects and
pay the salaries of civil servants and employees of inefficient government-owned
industries.

''The irony is that the people who produce the food are the ones who are
starving while those in the cities still have food to eat,'' says Richard
Copeland of the British relief agency Oxfam.

During the famine, many farmers in some areas displayed an ability to take care
of themselves that belies their popular image as helpless, passive victims of
nature. When delivery of American grain was delayed in the remote and arid
reaches of western Sudan last summer, thousands of farmers and herders
confounded foreign experts' predictions, surviving on such traditional ''famine
foods'' as leaves, grasses, roots, insects and wild berries soaked and boiled to
leach out the poisons.

''In the village where I grew up,'' says Tswenopele Moreni, Botswana's deputy
coordinator of rural development, ''each year every peasant would turn a portion
of his harvest over to the chief. He'd put that in a big silo and, when bad
times came, distribute it to those in need. It was sort of like an insurance
policy.''

Elsewhere in Africa, farmers would keep their own caches of dried grain, enough
to carry them through years of crop failures. ''The peasants have centuries of
experience coping with hardship,'' says Abdul Mohammed, an Ethiopian expatriate
doing relief work for the Sudan Council of Churches in Khartoum. ''People
underestimate the peasants.''

But even the most resourceful African farmer can be thwarted by governments that
prosecute as criminals those who ''hoard'' grain. Some farmers battle back in
subtle ways that have sometimes added to the hunger. Earlier this year, I was
traveling with a relief worker, an agronomist, through the steep misty mountains
north of Addis Ababa, an area not particularly hard hit by drought. As we passed
some fields of ripe teff, the coarse grain that is Ethiopia's staple food, he
became agitated.

''This all should have been harvested by now,'' he explained. ''If heavy rains
come, it will rot.'' The farmers had refrained from cutting the teff because the
official price was too low, he said. Instead, they were going into the fields at
night to cut only as much as they could use themselves or sell on the black
market.

B EFORE THE FAMINE THIS year, the world did not look upon relief and development
as a particularly romantic business. Attitudes changed quite suddenly after
Mohamed Amin, a Kenyan-based photographer with more than 20 years' experience
covering Africa, shot film of the starving men, women and children of Korem,
Makale and other now-famous camps in Ethiopia. His footage showed more than
gaunt farmers in dusty villages, the Africa that has long existed outside the
pages of National Geographic maga-zine. Here were tens of thousands of living
skeletons gathered, eerily reminiscent of Nazi concentration camps. How could
the world remain indifferent?

The situation had become so severe because Ethiopia's present rulers had largely
chosen to ignore the existence of the crisis, much as Emperor Haile Selassie,
the ruler they deposed, had not acknowledged the last great famine, a decade
ago. Indeed, that was one of the things that led to his overthrow.

This time around, there were many well-intentioned officials working for the
Government's Relief and Rehabilitation Commission who did what they could.
Undoubtedly, they would have wanted to do more, but the Marxist military regime
gave them few resources and no real independence or authority.

Western journalists were routinely denied permission to travel in the
countryside. Approvals were granted only after last autumn's elaborate and
expensive celebration of the 10th anniversary of the revolution. Soviet, East
German and other Communist-bloc journalists, some based in Addis Ababa, made no
visible attempt to report on the famine.

When news coverage finally did begin to focus Western concern on Ethiopia's
suffering, the number of relief and development workers in that and other
African nations swelled rapidly. Motivations vary, but most of the workers say
that saving lives brings extraordinary satisfaction and that their life style is
indeed exciting and exotic. ''It's the best job there is,'' says Copeland of
Oxfam. ''Going to an office in London seems gray in comparison.'' A now-famous
relief-worker T-shirt lists four basic categories - missionary, mercenary,
masochist, misfit -with a box next to each for the appropriate check.

They come mainly, though not exclusively, from the middle class of the developed
countries of the West. Although a small, influential coterie has seen action in
Biafra, Bangladesh, Cambodia and other troubled areas, the majority of relief
workers are young and working in disaster areas for the first time.

For many, the life is harsh and incredibly demanding. They bunk down in
grass-and-mud huts, work 16-hour days seven days a week, suffer from an array of
insect bites, abdominal disorders and other illnesses. A perverse pride often
accompanies such pains, an attitude that con-veys the accusation that those who
are not sick are not serious.

Relief workers who live in relative comfort often seem embarrassed about it.
''My friends write to me saying how wonderful and amazing it is that I'm out
here,'' says Helen McNaught, a New Zealander with the World Food Program in
Addis Ababa. ''They say, 'This must be really changing your life.' But here I am
in the Hilton, going to work in an air-conditioned office.''

In the camps and countryside, diversions are few. ''Fun,'' says Ken Curtin, a
Brooklyn-born disaster specialist for Catholic Relief Services, ''is a cold
Tang.'' Social life is restricted to whatever romantic intrigues develop during
long evenings around the campfires and latrines discussing dried skim milk and
diarrhea.

Most do not earn much money. A volunteer with a private voluntary organization,
Irish Concern, for example, may receive only a monthly subsistence allowance of
a few hundred dollars. A high-ranking United Nations agency representative, by
contrast, can earn close to $100,000 a year, including such perquisites as a
large house, servants and a Mercedes Benz with a driver.

In the cities, relief workers always find hangouts: Ndjamena, the capital of
Chad, has the Pasha Club, with its black walls and ceiling fans, as well as the
more upscale Booby Bar with its revolving mirrored ball. In Khartoum, where
Islamic law forbids alcohol, people meet over juice at the Acropole Hotel.
Locally known as the ''Emergency Palace,'' the hotel provides its clientele with
a room and three hearty meals for $20 a day. In Addis Ababa on Sunday nights,
nearly everyone shows up at the Buffet de la Gare, a little nightspot by the
Djibouti-Addis Ababa depot. The beer is warm, the spaghetti is cold, but a
multiracial oompah band plays loud brassy music that inspires manic jocularity.

Yet, at times the life seems cloistered. Relief people mainly know only other
relief people. ''And we always talk shop: food, fuel, medicine,'' complains
Timpson of Save the Children. ''We're like bloody businessmen.''

Many relief workers acknowledge another shortcoming - they rarely get to know or
understand well the people they come to help. I asked a nurse in Korem working
for the French-Belgian agency Doctors Without Frontiers which Ethiopian had made
the deepest impression on her. She stuttered and stumbled and finally said that
none stood out. Although she treats scores of people every day, the translated
conversations seldom went beyond basic facts and symptoms.

''The language barrier is huge,'' explains Tim McDonald, an American relief
worker who is involved in sending food ''cross border'' into rebel areas of
Ethiopia. ''The cultural barrier is also pretty wide sometimes.''

On one occasion, Gerry Salole, director of the American Save the Children field
office in Addis Ababa, asked an Afar nomad elder to tell the two of us what he
and his people knew about these aliens who had come to their land to weigh
babies, give shots and hand out free grain.

''We don't know who you are or even if you are of woman born,'' said the elder.
''But we had long heard that if we walked far enough down the road, we would
find some very strange people indeed.''

T O SHOW OFF SOME of its African development projects last summer, the United
Nations Office for Emergency Operations in Africa flew five journalists of
different nations to a rural area in southern Mozambique. We visited a village
where we saw children whose feet and hands were infected by tiny worms. Their
disfigurement was grotesque and shocking, but more significant from a
developmental perspective was that the discomfort the children endured made it
virtually impossible for them to work or study. They sat on the ground, many
using small sharp sticks in a vain attempt to dig out the annoying creatures
from beneath their swollen, blackened skin.

The development project had nothing to do with these sad children. It concerned
maize grinding, and the key component was an automatic diesel-powered grinder
mounted in a shed with a concrete floor and a thatched roof. The machine had
lain idle three months, waiting for diesel fuel, which must be imported.

Today, Mozambique requires up to $568 million a year in hard currency to import
fuel, spare parts and other essential products. It earns only about $110 million
a year from its exports. The difference between those sums amounts to a
burgeon-ing national debt. So, because the United Nations maize project, like
other schemes we saw, depends on imports but produces no exports, its effect can
only be to add to Mozambique's poverty and dependence on foreign aid.

Had someone shipped in medicine along with a few hand grinders, the children
might have been able to prepare the maize. Instead,they sat in the dirt outside,
while the machine stood motionless on its concrete pedestal, an unintended but
appropriate monument to an all-too-common approach to development.

A senior United Nations development official later privately conceded that this
and similar projects had been ill-advised. He explained that the Government
officials in Mozambique, as in so many other African countries, ''wanted to
replicate the technological approaches of the developed world.'' They felt
shortchanged by projects relying on human or animal labor. He said he hoped such
attitudes were changing, but stressed that the United Nations could not dictate
programs. ''After all, these are sovereign nations,'' he said.

Everyone in the aid business these days agrees that relief - filling bellies -
is not enough. To avoid mass famines in the future, Africa must have
development, which in simplest terms means that people must learn to feed
themselves. There is less agreement on how one goes about setting development in
motion.

Though many people speak of the ''developing'' countries of Africa, only a few
nations are actually developing. Many more are deteriorating economically,
unravelling politically and collapsing socially. Not only are farmers growing
less food, factories are breaking down or closing, roads and railways are
falling into disrepair, civil services are disintegrating. Standards of living,
never high, are measurably declining. Since most African countries have fallen
under the rule of dictatorial military regimes, the average African has no
freedom to alter his situation or even to complain openly.

The track record of the foreign development effort in Africa has been
unimpressive to date. Dams have been built, only to fill up with silt. Highways
have been constructed, only to crumble because local governments could not
afford to maintain them. Deep wells dug in arid landscapes have lowered the
water table or allowed livestock herds to grow so large they strip the
surrounding landscape of vegetation, transforming it into desert. Trees planted
during the day have been chopped down at night by farmers or nomads who have no
other source of fuel. Poorly devised ''food for work'' projects have attracted
farmers who leave their land during planting season. Imported food aid has
driven down the market price of home-grown grain, impoverishing farmers and
discouraging them from trying to produce a surplus the following season.

The most recent conference of the International Council for Voluntary Agencies,
in Senegal, concluded, in effect, that most development efforts so far have
failed. ''Much of the money spent on agricultural development in Africa has
simply not paid off,'' agrees Peter Brumby, the New Zealander who serves as
director of the International Livestock Center for Africa in Addis Ababa.

A large part of the explanation may be that aid organizations must work with
governments that helped create the problems in the first place. And the granting
of any aid, relief or development, to regimes fighting civil wars frees
resources that can be used to intensify and prolong those wars. Because war is a
cause of famine, aid can in that way indirectly contribute to the spread of
hunger. To deny aid on that basis, however, punishes the innocent far more than
the guilty.

T HE ANSWER IS NOT to give up on aid entirely, and certainly not to give up on
Africa. The continent has moved too close to our consciousness to ignore. Beyond
that, Africa still has vast potential.

About half the unused farmland in the world is in Africa. Many agricultural
experts say that, if properly harnessed, the arable lands of Ethiopia or the
Sudan alone could feed most of the continent. Africa has an abundance of natural
resources. Given opportunity and a little bit of freedom, its people have shown
that they can be as capable as those anywhere else, and they already seem to be
hardier than most.

The extent to which Africa's peasants might be able to improve their own lot,
given the chance, is evident in many ways. In the Ivory Coast, for example,
small farmers have been getting a reasonable return for their crops since
independence. The result: the Ivory Coast has become the world's largest
producer of cocoa and the continent's largest producer of coffee.

At present, the trends look discouraging. Sixty percent of all Africans live
below the poverty line, according to the World Bank. A decade from now, that
figure is projected to rise to 80 percent. Such statistics should galvanize the
public as much as any photograph of an emaciated baby. But, of course, they do
not. As the disaster slips from the acute to the chronic - as famine temporarily
retreats while poverty and hunger continue to advance - public interest is
already moving on to other, fresher issues, from American farm aid to South
African apartheid.

''I intend to stay in this line of work,'' says Christopher Eldridge of the Save
the Children Fund. ''If I can ease the pain of even one child, I think I've done
some good. But I'm not hopeful about the larger picture. You can't look at the
situation realistically and still be very hopeful.''

If there were a simple solution to all this, it would be in place by now. At
least the dialogue does seem to have taken a more realistic turn. Few continue
to argue that foreign exploitation and bad luck with the weather are all that is
wrong in Africa or that the breaking of the colonial shackles guarantees ascent
toward prosperity and liberty. ''The challenge in Africa today isn't even really
to develop,'' says Abdul Mohammed of the Sudan Council of Churches. ''It's just
to hold on to what we have, not to slide back.''

However dismal the situation may appear, it is worth recalling that not so many
years ago when mothers told their children about the starving of India and
China, no one expected those countries to soon recover. Today, China's farmers
are making unexpected advances, and India, the beneficiary of a ''green
revolution,'' was one of the nations that this year donated grain to Ethiopia.
The credit for these achievements belongs to the Indians and Chinese themselves.
Foreigners performed at most a supporting role. Similarly, if Africa is to be
saved, Africans will have to do it.

Trends and projections are not destinies. It's just possible that a generation
or so from now, Africa could surprise us all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of UNICEF famine workers Egil Hagen and Petrus Smulders
(Stephnie Hollyman); Photo of Red Cross nurse Claus Dissler (Page 61); Photo of
water engineer Mike Youde inspecting well (Page 62)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Richard Nalley

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


WORD OF HONOR. By Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $17.50.) This methodically paced
novel - the genre is military courtroom drama - concerns a Vietnam War atrocity.
A 1968 massacre by American soldiers in a hospital outside Hue comes to light 16
years later, disrupting the charmed suburban circle of the former platoon leader
Benjamin Tyson. He now has an office with a view, entree to the charity ball
circuit, and a home ''on a pleasant street lined with stately elms.'' The itchy
question of the novel is whether Tyson's part in the massacre will cost him
these pleasures, but most of the suspense follows from his own tough-guy refusal
to invoke the legal technicalities that would free him. The square-jawed Tyson
determines to see this thing through on his own, which means impeding his lawyer
and denying himself consolation from his wife, who remains devoted to him
despite being ''violently antiwar, antimilitary, and anti-anything that didn't
fit neatly into her own left-of-center view of the world.'' Antagonists abound -
the chief prosecution witness, a brooding rapist from Tyson's platoon; the
sinister spook Chet Brown, whose organization is ''so shadowy, even the CIA
doesn't quite believe we exist.'' When Tyson, in one crowd-pleasing scene, lures
a despised tabloid reporter into a darkened room and beats him up, Brown the
wirepuller forestalls any messy consequences. ''Word of Honor'' entertains
without reaching for moral revelation or subtle psychological effects. It is
about a nail-biting career complication in the life of a man whom, otherwise,
you would like in your golfing foursome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT DO THEY WANT?

BYLINE: By James Fallows; James Fallows is the Washington editor of The
Atlantic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1562 words


SOME AMERICAN MEN By Gloria Emerson. 315 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

GLORIA EMERSON is best known for her dispatches from Vietnam for The New York
Times and for her book, ''Winners and Losers,'' about the war and its aftermath.
Reporters often embarrass themselves when they turn to fiction, but after
reading this new work of reportage I wished Miss Emerson had changed her
subjects' names and presented a collection of short stories. In the guise of
fiction, the book's merits would be more apparent and the principal objections
to it would be moot.

Miss Emerson's announced purpose is to consider men's emotions and identities at
a time when all the certainties seem to have disappeared. ''When women, with
good reason, are asking men to make known their most guarded feelings, when we
want them to love and raise babies and remember our birthdays, it is also
required that they be the ones to rescue people in a burning building.'' In
these unsettled circumstances, what does it mean to have a job, to be loving, to
be ''strong''? The book's technique for answering such questions is highly
indirect - or, to be more polite about it, pointillist. ''Some American Men''
consists of more than a dozen essay-profiles of men of different races and
classes and stages of life. Included are veterans of World War II still brooding
over the brutalities they endured and inflicted during the ''good'' war; an
ambitious young salesman in his 20's, buoyant and ready to succeed in whatever
market he chooses to enter; an auto worker, who has been laid off, trying to
cope with his loss of purpose and his sudden economic reliance on his wife; and
a reporter for The New York Times who, hating the loneliness of his assignment
to Africa, resigns from the newspaper and becomes the editor of a food magazine.

Not one of the portraits is dull or unstylish and several are hard to forget. To
me, the most moving is the story of a gentle young doctor who forsakes a
comfortable life to provide succor to the refugees of the war in Indochina - and
then, having survived adversity in the refugee camps, meets a freakish,
accidental end. In a quieter way, the story of a civil servant in his 50's,
married nearly 30 years but still so thoroughly in love with his wife that he
hides cards all over their apartment on her birthday, is as powerful and moving.
The only portrait that rings false is of a Princeton student who establishes a
campus cult for himself as the new James Dean. Many readers will recall similar
figures from their college days; few who have such memories will take this
student's outlaw pose as seriously as Miss Emerson seems to. (He gestures toward
a mounted moose skull in the office of the campus newspaper and says, ''It died
a horrible death, that animal, it died of boredom.'') From beginning to end the
book sustains a high note of passion. Miss Emerson's characters are all living
on the edge. Their emotions are rarely mild; they are ''deeply'' proud or
troubled or brave. When the young salesman, working temporarily as a restaurant
cook, is complimented on a dinner, he is ''deeply touched. . . . such praise
pierced his heart.'' When the auto worker prefers to let someone else shingle a
roof, it is because he is ''deeply suspicious of heights.'' When a football
player's mother cries out, fearing that her son has been injured, the father is
''deeply embarrassed.'' As her way of explaining that an expert in preventing
shoplifting, now working for a supermarket chain, had enjoyed his tenure as a
small-town policeman, Miss Emerson tells us ''he was never to have such fun
again.''

The particular emotion that jolts through the book is the passion of war.
Certain male writers contend that combat is the defining masculine experience
and that only through its lens can the fundamental truths of male life be
perceived. Although she doesn't say so, Miss Emerson seems to believe the same
thing. She says that in Vietnam, ''I saw huge numbers of American men as few
women do: in unimaginable misery and peril.'' That perspective remains. Many of
her subjects are combat veterans, and even the civilians seem in constant
figurative risk of being ambushed or stepping on a poisoned stake.

As a means of creating and populating a literary landscape, Miss Emerson's taut,
foredoomed tone is powerfully evocative. Her underlying focus on combat is like
Norman Mailer's conceit that the essence of femininity is contained in the
sexual act. Both concepts can make for interesting reading; it is only when they
are judged as reasonable approximations of reality that the trouble begins. Few
women have read Mr. Mailer's meditations on Marilyn Monroe and come away feeling
they understood their own situation better. On a less rarefied literary plane,
the same is true of ''Some American Men.'' To travel with Miss Emerson is
intriguing, but the journey reveals more about the guide than the terrain.

When visiting camps full of Cambodian refugees, Miss Emerson contracted
meningitis and grew seriously ill. She recounts an argument with the gentle
doctor, who tried to convince her that her disease had been caused by the poor
hygiene and superabundant germs of the camps. She was not to be persuaded,
telling him, ''It was I who, after all, must have chosen that disease . . . I
must have wanted some burning out of the brain.'' The view of politics,
economics and society she presents in this book is like her explanation of her
disease - emotionally powerful, imaginatively provocative, but not unduly
constrained by fact.

Miss Emerson retains one habit from her years as a a reporter for The Times - an
insistence on referring to every male as ''Mr.'' even in contexts that make such
formality ludicrously inappropriate - but she has thrown off the reporter's
discipline about details, explanations, logical chains of reasoning and
causation. Political arguments enter the book in a staccato, atmospheric way, as
in a Joan Didion novel. ''Americans are never short of statistics whose meanings
are not always clear,'' Miss Emerson says. I thought of that when reading one of
the many sentences such as, ''There was huge excitement when, for the first time
in fifteen years, the Princeton Tigers defeated Yale in a game seen by 20,303
fans in Palmer Stadium.''

Her incidental apercus about men are sometimes sharp and poignant, sometimes
cliched (men are taciturn and at ease only when talking about sports) and often
overstated or flat wrong. ''The sight of a man's bleeding or battered face
upsets no one unless an eyeball hangs loose or the skull splits.'' On the
battlefield, maybe, but is this true elsewhere? At Marquette University High
School, a football star's playing ''was so exceptional that his father, a
professor of neuroanatomy, began coming to every game.'' This is remarkable
behavior? ''Sex is no longer a serious act, no more intimate than a game of
tennis.'' Really? ''It is not commonplace to hear a man sounding happy.'' Miss
Emerson, let me introduce you to a different set of friends.

The book ends on what Miss Emerson sees as an uplifting note, with a portrayal
of a young widowed father starting life over as a college teacher. He introduces
Jesse Jackson at a campus rally opposing investment in South Africa - and then
explains to a female student why he is not afraid to take this daring step, even
though he still has not yet been granted tenure. After enduring his wife's
death, he tells the student, what more need he fear? Such openness startles the
young woman. Miss Emerson concludes, ''That day the student, who speaks so often
of how the lives of women were changing . . . was reminded that some men were
changing too. Although she refused to count on such hope, she saw the
possibility that many more men were capable of change and that someone her age
might just live to see it.''

If it rested on insights such as this, the book's appeal would be modest indeed.
But if it is read as one artist's gallery of troubled figures, it has a
distorted but intriguing allure - like a small-scale version of one of Theodore
Dreiser's works. NOTHING IA AS MASCULINE AS MONEY Somewhere is the male parent
with a workhorse of a wife who could not be trusted to see what is only a small
and decent duty: one day every week buya chicken, cook it for dinner, and then
clean up. Their sin was they knew no shame. To a generation of women it was as
if all these stunted and ungenerous men came from a different country, so that,
needing only swagger and superior upper-body strengths, they had only to go
forth to have their way in the world, as easy as kicking tin cans on a country
road. Every twelve-year-old boy knows what must be done to make it as a man,
what it will cost him to be an American: the lessons seep through the skin
forever. Money must be made, nothing is as masculine as this. Men whose wives
make more money that they do praise the women while making sure it is known that
the work they themselves are doing is exceptional, requiring a gift or a loyalty
to an ideal or iron will. What cannot be permitted is more intricate: timidity,
squeamishness, kindness toward too many people . . . an excessive concern for
mercy and justice except when confined in church . . . and the habit of asking
for help, even if it is only for a few directions when driving. - From ''Some
American Men.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gloria Emerson; Drawings

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH-TECH TURKEYS

BYLINE: By Michael Kilian; Michael Kilian is the co-author of ''Heavy Losses:
The Dangerous Decline of American Defense.'' His forthcoming novel is ''By Order
of the President.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


THE PENTAGON UNDERGROUND By Dina Rasor. 310 pp. New York: Times Books. $16.95.

WHILE slashing Federal income tax rates by approximately 25 percent, the Reagan
Administration lavished more than $1 trillion on American defense - a figure
that is not so coincidentally just about the amount by which Mr. Reagan also
increased the national debt.

In ''The Pentagon Underground,'' Dina Rasor, the director of Washington's
whistle-blowing Project on Military Procurement, argues forcefully that this
extraordinary sum has been largely squandered on a military system that produces
weakness rather than strength. It is a system that directs ever larger amounts
of the nation's finite resources into high-technology weapons projects that too
often fail the test of combat and put the lives of American servicemen and women
to great risk. Despite the vast treasure it consumes, the Pentagon, Miss Rasor
points out, still has not got the wherewithal to wage conventional war for as
much as a month and must increasingly rely on the nuclear weaponry so useless in
most of the military situations that confront the United States.

This appalling conclusion has been put forth in a large number of newspaper and
magazine articles and in many recent books. But Miss Rasor's case is especially
compelling and convincing because she herself is chiefly responsible for much of
this material coming into public view in the first place. She and her
organization served as the principal conduit to Congress and the news media for
those brave few in the defense establishment who wished to sound the alarm on
military spending.

The Pentagon more often than not responds to its critics by questioning first
their patriotism and then their expertise. In forming her organization, Miss
Rasor took pains to keep the capital's traditional liberal lobbies as well as
the Libertarian Party at arms' length and to restrict the enterprise to
evaluations of military efficiency.

Her cause is most frequently championed by the likes of such conservative
Republicans as Representative Denny Smith of Oregon, a much-decorated Vietnam
veteran, and Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa. As Miss Rasor's book was going to
press, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, and the ranking Democrat, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, took to the
Senate floor to fire at many of the same targets.

In her book, Miss Rasor has successfully managed to cut through the obfuscatory
acronyms and nomenclature of Pentagonese and put the military's contentions to
the tests of elementary common sense. For example, the columnist William F.
Buckley, who is frequently sympathetic to the Pentagon, derided critics of the
Air Force's $7,622 coffeepot by noting it was designed for the C-5 transport,
which carries troops by the hundreds. Miss Rasor, who personally examined said
coffeepot, notes that it has a capacity of 10 cups and is designed for air
crews, not passengers. H ER book is also at its best when she is in the field,
inspecting high-technology coffee-makers or at the controls of a new M-1 main
battle tank, revealing it to be, like the M-2 Bradley infantry fighting vehicle,
a potential deathtrap. Unfortunately, too much of her book is devoted to the
less interesting processes of her organization and the Congress, which is such a
large part of the weapons procurement problem. Perhaps too much space is given
to her own career at the expense of the actual members of the Pentagon
underground, who receive the relatively short shrift of a single, 34-page
chapter.

Yet Miss Rasor's is a unique perspective, exposing the innards of the entire
system that, more than any individual, is the chief villain here. It is a system
less in keeping with capitalism and democracy than with a centralized and
powerful bureaucracy - indeed, it might have been devised by Soviet moles as an
insidious means of neutering American defense. If taken to heart, Miss Rasor's
words could save lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dina Rasor

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW PRESCRIPTIONS FOR OLD AILMENTS

BYLINE: By David P. Calleo; David P. Calleo, a professor of European studies at
the Johns Hopkins School for Advanced International Studies, is the author of
''The Imperious Economy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1380 words


A GRAND STRATEGY FOR THE WEST The Anachronism of National Strategy in an
Interdependent World. By Helmut Schmidt. With an introduction by William P.
Bundy. 159 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press. $12.95.

TEN years ago Helmut Schmidt was often rated the West's leading statesman. His
close working relationship with President Valery Giscard d'Estaing of France had
finally made the West German-French special relationship the motor for European
cooperation that Konrad Adenauer and Charles de Gaulle had envisioned. On the
surface, at least, trans-Atlantic diplomatic and even economic relations seemed
unusually smooth.

The Chancellor's didactic and uncompromising political style made his popularity
all the more impressive. Few subordinates or colleagues were spared the sting of
his sarcastic wit. His authority came not from warm charisma but from the
rational integrity of his arguments and policies. More than any other leader, he
had made himself the embodiment of and spokesman for what had come to be taken
as the enlightened postwar consensus. He was for the welfare state, but within a
market economy disciplined by competition and fiscal balance. Loyal, if not
uncritical, support of the alliance with America was coupled with a clear
dedication to greater European cooperation and autonomy.

Just because Mr. Schmidt was so central a figure, his fall from power seems as
if it ought to have much more than personal significance. By the end of 1982, a
revolt of the Free Democratic Party within his governing coalition had cast him
from power. Although Mr. Schmidt was still extremely popular with the
electorate, his own Social Democratic Party soon repudiated many of his
policies. Politically, Mr. Schmidt has now come perilously close to being a
voice crying in the wilderness. The wilderness, in this instance, has included
New Haven; Yale University's Stimson Lectures last spring provided Mr. Schmidt
with a forum for his political views. He treated Yale not to the historical
reminiscences of a retired statesman but to an activist's blueprint for the
future.

''A Grand Strategy for the West'' is vintage Schmidt. Utterly unrepentant, Mr.
Schmidt treats the period dominated by defectors from his consensus -Jimmy
Carter, Margaret Thatcher, Ronald Reagan and the early Francois Mitterrand - as
an incompetent interregnum, a sort of carnival of wrongheadedness. But since the
world has changed a great deal since Mr. Schmidt held office and he remains too
acute and knowledgeable an observer to ignore these changes, what he proposes is
not a restoration but a transformation. His plan requires not only radical
alterations in current Western policies but significant changes in longstanding
Western relationships, in particular a major step toward Western European
political consolidation. In short, his lectures are not only a vigorous
counterattack from the consensus of the mid-1970's but also an imaginative
updating of that consensus for the conditions of the 1980's.

He begins with a rather muddled, if familiar, point. National strategies, he
says, have become obsolescent. What he means is that national policies cannot
succeed if they fly in the face of political and economic reality or if they
cannot engage the support of other powers. The principal object of this homily,
needless to say, is Reaganite America. Mr. Schmidt proceeds to lay out a grand
strategy for the West that, he believes, would be reasonable, win broad support
and therefore succeed. Always equally at home in economics, defense and
diplomacy, he provides a prescription for each sphere that interlocks closely
with those for the others.

Mr. Schmidt's analysis of world economic problems is as unequivocal a critique
of American economic policy as politeness permits. As he sees it, most of the
world has been in a depression since the 1970's - a profound structural crisis.
Since the Vietnam War, attempts to cope with these mounting world economic
problems have been bedeviled by incompetent American fiscal and monetary
policies. President Reagan's policies are merely the most recent.

The analysis is compelling. Profligate American fiscal policy, caused by
inadequate taxes and a grossly inflated military budget, combines with a low
savings rate to result in massive borrowing, much of which comes from the rest
of the world's taking advantage of preposterously high American interest rates.
These rates produce an overvalued dollar that feeds protectionism and crushes
debtors in the third world and at home. Everywhere, the high dollar destabilizes
financial institutions and discourages serious investment -the latter
desperately needed in Europe to transform the old industrial base. The whole
situation grows politically and economically intolerable. The world's richest
country cannot go on sustaining its prosperity by borrowing from the rest of the
world.

Mr. Schmidt's prescription for Mr. Reagan resembles the prescription he had for
Mr. Carter: balance the budget. Puncturing America's inflated demand would
permit Europe to compensate for the loss of American demand by expanding its own
stagnant economy with investment in industries that create employment. In
addition, what he calls a General Agreement to Lend could provide a long-range
solution to Latin America's terrible debt crisis. At the same time, Japan,
instead of undertaking an unneeded and destabilizing military buildup, should
take a generous role in third world development.

In general, he argues, the United States should curb its obsessive militarism.
To derange the world economy in order to build an outsize military capability
represents a profoundly mistaken policy for holding the third world in the
Western camp. Equally mistaken is the effort to break the Soviet Union through
competitive arms spending. The Russians are great sufferers - less likely to be
undone by adversity than by prosperity. They are, to be sure, a profound danger,
above all for Western Europe. But Europeans have lived with the danger for five
centuries, he says. Defense is essential, but so are policies to engage Soviet
interest in peaceful coexistence.

Mr. Schmidt's most radical proposals deal with Europe itself. Nuclear deterrence
remains vital, and hence so does the Atlantic alliance. But defending Western
Europe's territory primarily by relying on the use of nuclear weapons is
increasingly unacceptable to Western Europe's own public. Geography dictates
that only the Western Europeans themselves can provide the alternative, a
serious conventional defense. To do so, France must take the lead by
reconstituting its army for European defense. NATO should then have a French
rather than an American supreme commander of forces in Europe. At least a token
American presence would remain essential, but the main American military role
would be global and strategic. M ORE is at stake in reforming the alliance than
abstract military efficiency, Mr. Schmidt argues. In the long run, the German
Federal Republic can only be kept in the West not by the United States but by
the rest of Western Europe. While the French have understood this, they have
tried to bind West Germany to France without binding France to West Germany.
Reforming NATO is the natural occasion for Western Europe's overdue political
consolidation. Without it, neither the postwar Atlantic relationship nor the
East-West balance seems durable.

Mr. Schmidt's strong emphasis on Western European self-reliance comes as a
welcome relief - most West European critics of American policy remain ardent
defenders of Western Europe's postwar military free ride. They say Americans are
to balance their budget but without, of course, diminishing their highly costly
military role on the continent. Mr. Schmidt's prescriptions call for Western
Europe as well as America to live up to its responsibilities. Unfortunately,
there are no Schmidts now in power in Bonn, Paris, London or Washington. Under
these circumstances, if his analysis is correct and the present system is
growing less workable, change seems more likely to proceed from crisis rather
than rational leadership.

Anyone looking for an alternative to a deteriorating status quo should pay close
attention to this ancestral voice that speaks of the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan and Helmut schmidt of West Germany (AP)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEMISE OF THE SGT. YORK: MODEL TURNS TO DUD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2949 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


If a weapon can be said to have died of embarrassment, the antiaircraft gun
called the Sergeant York did.

By the time Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger canceled the program in
August, writing off $1.8 billion already spent on it and ordering the 65
delivered weapons dismantled for scrap, the program had acquired a special place
in the lore of military ineptitude.

The gun had become the butt of stories, some accurate, some apocryphal, of
mishaps on the firing range, inflated costs, rigged tests and conflicts of
interest.

'People Want It to Go Away'

So rare is the death of a major weapon project that Howard H. Cooksey, a retired
Army lieutenant general involved in the early stages of the weapon, said he had
urged the Army to assemble an independent panel for a formal report on lessons
to be learned from the gun. He found no interest. ''People just want it to go
away,'' he said.

But in interviews over the last two months, dozens of military officers,
Pentagon civilians, contractors and critics involved in the eight-year history
of the weapon, also known as the Divad, for division air-defense, said its
demise contains important lessons about how the military develops and buys its
weapons.

Battle Conditions Ignored

There is still bitter disagreement about whether the weapon, manufactured by the
Ford Aerospace Corporation, should have been scrapped sooner or given another
chance. But there is considerable agreement about how the world's most
technologically proficient weapon industry produced such a trouble-prone weapon,
and how it could easily do so again.

Many critics and defenders of the weapon would agree on these points:

* While battles involve a confusing array of weapons and people, individual
weapons are often designed, built and judged as if they will be fighting battles
by themselves. As a result, each program becomes an expensive quest for a wonder
weapon. Pushed to do too many things, the Sergeant York ended up doing none of
them well.

* Weapon designers are under constant pressure to meet the gravest estimates of
the Soviet threat. These estimates, which critics say tend to be inflated in the
first place, often change as new reports roll in from intelligence agencies, so
that weapon designers find themselves trying to meet a changing set of
objectives. The Divad team started out to design a weapon against dive-bombing
airplanes and ended up worrying primarily about helicopters hovering behind
distant trees.

* The military has not figured out how to test complex weapons in a way that
resembles actual combat. The antiaircraft gun was ultimately killed on the basis
of simulated combat that, both the Army and its critics agree, bore little
similarity to actual combat conditions. More often, today's intricate weapons
are sent to the field without any assurance of how they will perform in battle.

* In the military, the customer often becomes a cheerleader for the product
under development. The Army says this is not necessarily bad; after all, the
Army has a stake in making a program successful. But critics say the Army's
unwillingness to admit problems with the Divad had a high price. At best, they
say, it undermined the Army's credibility; at worst, it could have sent an
unreliable weapon to the troops.

Pressure to Kill Weapon

Experts on both sides agreed that the gun would still be in production except
for an extraordinary drumbeat of political pressure, stemming from lawmakers
looking for ways to cut military spending and from factions within the Pentagon
that opposed the weapon and were willing to publicize its shortcomings.

''There are systems in the Pentagon today that are in far worse shape, or in
equally bad shape as Divad,'' said Anthony R. Battista, a longtime member of the
research and development staff of the House Armed Services Committee. ''A lot of
other losers are surviving while Divad went down the tubes.''

On Dec. 9, the Army is scheduled to brief Mr. Weinberger on initial
recommendations for a weapon to replace the Sergeant York. Officials involved in
the study say they are determined not to repeat their mistakes.

Even in the Pentagon, however, officials made no promises.

''Could it happen today? In today's environment?'' mused James P. Wade, the
Assistant Secretary of Defense in charge of weapons acquisition. ''Yes, human
nature being what it is.'' Army Dilemma: Gun vs. Missile In the early 1970's,
there was agreement that the Army needed a new weapon to defend its tank
divisions against enemy aircraft.

The Vulcan Air Defense System, a World War II vintage Gatling gun, was
considered badly outdated, too short in range, difficult to move around, useless
in bad weather, and it left its crew exposed to enemy attackers.

The Army was faced with the choice of a gun or a self-propelled missile.
Missiles have longer range and can be designed to home in on elusive targets.

Some experts, primarily civilian analysts in the Pentagon, were set on the
virtues of missiles.

Guns, on the other hand, can spray a formidable cloud of ammunition quickly, and
can also be used against targets on the ground.

''All our friends who fly airplanes tell us they are scared to death of guns,''
said Vernon Lewis, a retired major general who headed the Army team that drew up
the original requirements for the weapon. ''The vast majority of our aircraft
shot down in Vietnam were shot down by guns. We were the only army in the world
that didn't have a decent gun.''

To win its bureaucratic battle against the missile advocates, the Army promised
an extraordinary gun.

It would have a range of four kilometers - or two and a half miles - four times
the range of the Vulcan. It would also be designed to use radar, laser
range-finders and computers to track targets in darkness and bad weather.

Demands Drive Up Cost

To this day, there is intense debate about whether these capabilities were
necessary for defending tanks. Knocking out a tank requires precision, and an
attacking plane, armed with homing missiles, must first get close enough for the
pilot to see the target and identify it as an enemy.

The demands for long range and all-weather capability assured that the Divad,
intended to be relatively cheap and simple, would be neither.

The range, for example, meant the gun would require high-caliber ammunition. The
bigger shells in turn meant fewer rounds could be fed through the gun each
minute. The 40-millimeter ammunition that was selected fired about 600 rounds a
minute, as against up to 3,000 rounds for the 20-millimeter Vulcan.

To compensate for having fewer rounds to fire at a target, the designers decided
they would use a proximity round, triggered to detonate several feet from a
target and spray a cloud of shrapnel and tungsten pellets.

There is disagreement about how effective proximity ammunition is against
well-armored aircraft, but on one point there is little debate - it is extremely
expensive, costing more than $200 a round. Moreover, proximity rounds have
little effect on a tank, so if the gunner wanted to join in the ground fighting,
the ammunition would have to be changed.

Complex Equipment Added

The demand for an all-weather gun meant the weapon would have to be heavily
automated. Lasers would be needed to gauge the distance to the target. Radar
would have to track both the enemy aircraft and the rounds fired from the
antiaircraft gun. A computer would be required to calculate the likely course of
the attacker and correct the aim of the gun.

Such an automated control system, according to several estimates, added as much
as $2 million apiece to the weapon's ultimate $6.5 million cost, and was a prime
source of trouble on the testing range.

Officials familiar with the gun's test results said the computer software was
never able to sort out low-flying targets, and especially hovering helicopters,
from the clutter of trees, rocks and hills.

Even before the Army had settled on a contractor in 1981, the Pentagon's vision
of what the weapon would do had already begun to change.

Intelligence reports from the war in Afghanistan had talked of a menacing Soviet
helicopter with the ability to hover at great distance from a target -six
kilometers - and fire guided missiles.

In an interview, the Under Secretary of the Army, James R. Ambrose, said, ''We,
the Army, did our very best to point out to the world, not all of which wanted
to listen, that a gun that could fire four kilometers couldn't hit anything at
six, no matter what.''

Theoretical Threat Debated

Indeed, Mr. Ambrose said the Army had argued that the ''maximum imaginable
threat'' of the long-range helicopter was largely theoretical; Soviet pilots
would not be able to hit targets from six kilometers in an actual battle,
especially in the frequently overcast and rolling hills of Europe. But the Army
was overruled.

The prevailing view of Pentagon officials was that six kilometers, three and
three-auarter miles, represented the current threat, and it became the standard
against which the gun would be measured. In the gun's final test last May,
pilots playing Russians were allowed to hover at up to six kilometers from their
targets, where quite predictably they demolished the forces the Sergeant York
was supposed to protect.

Mr. Weinberger, announcing the cancellation of the program in August, said the
failure of the gun to hit distant helicopters was one of the major reasons for
his decision.

Mr. Lewis, who led the original Divad team, said if he were making the decision
today, he would probably choose a simpler gun.

'Nobody Will Fund It'

''We might have saved $2 million a copy by not trying to get that last 5 percent
of capability,'' Mr. Lewis said. He said he doubted the military or Congress
would buy his idea, however. ''We can't build a weapon system today to do just
70 percent of the job,'' he said. ''Nobody will fund it. You've got to do 95
percent of the job, or better.''

Jay R. Scully, Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research, Development and
Acquisition, said the Army is now looking with fresh interest at such a
coordinated system of guns and missiles as one option for replacing Sergeant
York. But he conceded that the bureaucratic obstacles were formidable. The gun
and missile advocates have already resumed their internal battle, and numerous
contractors have rushed in to push their own gun or missile systems.

Moreover, he said, there is usually great resistance to designing weapons that
cross jurisdictional lines. The military conceives, designs, builds and deploys
weapons as ''a bunch of cells,'' Mr. Scully said. A missile command builds
battlefield missiles, an armaments command builds guns, a tank command builds
tanks. How to Build A Model Weapon One of the ironies of the Sergeant York is
that it was conceived as a model program - an experiment in developing new
weapons quickly and cheaply.

Some of the brightest engineers in the arms industry were to be set up in
competing shops, free of the usual encumbrances of military red tape. They would
use trusty, off-the-shelf components - a pair of guns, a tank chassis, a radar -
to produce a rolling antiaircraft gun to accompany Army tank divisions as they
raced into battle.

The arrangement had many of the qualities now sought by military critics in arms
contracts: competition, a fixed price, stiff warranties. There would be no
razzle-dazzle, no cost overruns, no long delays while the troops made do with
out-of-date equipment.

Five teams of contractors submitted proposals. Ford Aerospace and General
Dynamics were selected as finalists, and given two years to produce prototypes
while the Army kept its hands off.

John R. Guthrie, a retired Army general who picked the finalists, said, ''My
instruction to the program manager was, keep all those cotton-pickin' people out
of there.''

This hands-off approach has produced some of the military's most highly regarded
weapons, like the Army's Multiple Launch Rocket System. But some participants
say that in this case it meant no one was firmly in charge at a critical stage.

Evaluations Were Impeded

Charles W. Bernard, the Pentagon's director of land warfare programs, who had
advocated a missile system, recalled arriving at Picatinny Arsenal in Dover,
N.J., in 1978 and asking the Army program manager, ''How's that program doing?''
The answer, he recalled, was, ''Damned if I know.''

''Had the hands-off approach not been so maniacal,'' Mr. Bernard said, we could
have learned a lot earlier'' about problems.

The Pentagon Inspector General, in an evaluation of the program, charged that if
the Army had been paying closer attention, it would also have seen that Ford was
passing along bills for millions of dollars in subcontractor charges that were
not ''fair or reasonable.'' The Army disputed the inspector general's findings.
Ford officials have refused to comment on the Sergeant York program.

Another consequence of the accelerated schedule, Army officials say, was that
Ford was not given time to work out the bugs in the weapon before it went into
production. The first prototypes were immediately dispatched to different Army
testing and training centers, where they regularly broke down.

Unlike most weapons, the Sergeant York did much of its failing in public.

Beginning with an influential article in The Atlantic magazine in 1982,
reporters pointed to the gun as an emblem of military incompetence and a test of
Mr. Weinberger's willingness to discipline a profligate military.

Test Results Disclosed

Missile advocates inside the Pentagon and some unsuccessful suitors for the
antiaircraft contract fed the fire by disclosing test results and intimating
that there had been wrongdoing in the competition for the contract. Members of
Congress, hungry for ways to cut military spending, seized on the Sergeant York
as evidence it could be done without harming military preparedness.

Pentagon officials say the military inadvertently contributed to the weapon's
poor reputation by seeming overly eager to disguise its failings.

In one case, Army testers strapped radar reflectors to the mast of a target
helicopter being used in a Sergeant York test. The Army said they were trying to
make the target resemble a hovering helicopter. Critics said it was a crude
attempt to devise a test the weapon could pass. One observer likened it to
testing bloodhounds by strapping a steak to the quarry's leg.

''It was innocent,'' an Army official said. ''But it was stupid.'' Weapon Fails
In Last Chance After the gun performed poorly in a 1984 test, Mr. Weinberger
ordered that a full-scale operational test be held in April 1985, a full year
ahead of schedule. The chorus of criticism and the concern over military
spending made this test the gun's last chance.

According to Army and Pentagon officials involved in the testing, the Sergeant
York was not ''substantially'' better than the Vulcan against attacking
airplanes at short range, in part because the new gun fired fewer rounds per
minute. Neither gun was much good against pilots flying high-speed manuevers.
But the officials said the new gun, because of its longer range, kept pilots at
a distance where they could not do much damage to tanks. Unfortunately for the
Sergeant York, keeping the enemy at bay did not count in a game where the score
was based on the number of kills.

The officials admitted the weapon broke down frequently, but contended it could
have been made more reliable.

Tested against helicopters, the gun performed badly. The radars showed a
multitude of targets - many of them generated by electronic static given off by
the device that was to adjust the gun when it fired on the move.

Most devastating, the pilots of the enemy helicopters were able to hover well
out of the gun's range and fire in missiles. In the bright, clear weather of the
California test range, the missiles fired by the helicopter pilots scored
repeated hits.

''A few were within range,'' said Walter W. Hollis, the Army's Deputy Under
Secretary for Operations Research. ''The majority of them were beyond what I
would consider the practical range of this gun, or any gun of this caliber.''

Test Unlike a Real Battle

Both those who were eager to see the weapon abandoned and those who supported it
agree on one point: the final test, a series of neat 30-minute engagements
conducted in clear daylight in a short valley, with the pilots' maneuvers
restricted for safety purposes, hardly resembled the conditions of a real
battle.

''I think the biggest lesson to be learned out of the test business is that it
is not at all clear that we know how to conduct what amounts to a little war,''
Mr. Ambrose said.  Critics like Representative Denny Smith, Republican of
Oregon, who became the leading Congressional voice against the Sergeant York,
said the lesson is that the military should not allow production of complex
weapons unless they can figure out in advance how to conduct realistic testing.
If that means fewer high-technology weapons, he said, so be it.

Mr. Ambrose disagrees. Technology, he said, is America's military edge. He said
the military should test weapons performance continually while it is developing
the weapons, then send them to the troops for maneuvers, making adjustments
later if necessary.

''If I had the call, I would have probably never undertaken such a test'' as the
one that killed the Divad, he said.

''Most of the investment in military apparatus goes without such a test,'' Mr.
Ambrose said. ''You do it with some use of analytical models, play computer
games. A lot of it is military judgment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sergeant York antiaircraft gun (AP) (page B10)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Joint Effort Completed At Vietnam Crash Site

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: YEN THUONG, Vietnam, Dec. 1


The United States and Vietnam completed their first joint excavation of an
American warplane crash site today, but they said there were only slim hopes of
identifying missing American servicemen from the unearthed bone fragments.

Capt. Virginia Pribyla, spokesman for the American search team, said that the
digging ended today and that the search team was sifting through the soil a
second time as it refilled the 36-foot-deep excavation pit.

The Americans are scheduled to leave Hanoi on Wednesday after 13 days of
excavation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RIDE ON A B-%: NEW ROLE FOR WORKHORSE OF BATTLE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1370 words

DATELINE: GRAND FORKS AIR FORCE BASE, N.D.


To train for a nuclear air strike against the Soviet Union, the B-52 bomber
thundered down the icy runway and lifted off over the North Dakota prairie just
as dawn broke.

The pilot, Capt. Randall W. Spetman, leveled off at 29,000 feet and began
looking for the aerial tanker that was to complete filling his bomber with fuel
for the long flight.

As the KC-135 tanker appeared a thousand feet overhead, Captain Spetman flew up
slowly until the fueling boom under the tanker's tail loomed a few feet above
his head. Signal lights on the underside of the tanker told him to move forward,
or right or left; with his peripheral vision, he watched the engines and wings
of the tanker.

''The biggest thing,'' Captain Spetman said as the two huge aircraft flew less
than 40 feet apart, ''is to sense movement as you get close.''

Gently, the pilot inched the bomber up until he could read the lips of the
crewman lying on his stomach to look out the tanker's bottom window and guide
the boom toward the bomber. Finally, the boom locked with a light thump into a
receptacle in the bomber's shoulders. Locked Together at 320 m.p.h. After 20
minutes of taut flying at 280 knots, 320 miles per hour, Captain Spetman broke
off and headed for the bombing runs. The bomber carried no weapons; all strikes
would be simulated and scored by radar.

The role of the Air Force's 250 B-52's, the workhorses of the long-range bombing
force, has been changing as the Soviet Union has vastly expanded air defenses,
the United States has armed the B-52's with cruise missiles, and deliveries of
the new B-1 bombers have begun.

The new mission of the B-52, designed in the 1950's as a high-level nuclear
bomber and used to drop conventional bombs in the Vietnam War, is to penetrate
hostile territory only a few hundred feet above the ground in an attempt to
escape detection by radar and to evade surface-to-air missiles and
fighter-interceptors.

In wartime, the bomber, with a crew of six, could carry three kinds of nuclear
weapons: Hung under the wings would be 12 cruise missiles, which are flying
torpedoes with a range of 1,500 miles; inside the bomb bays would be eight
short-range missiles intended to attack heavily defended targets up to 70 miles
away, and four bombs to be dropped in the conventional manner.

With the advent of the B-1 to penetrate the most heavily defended areas, as this
plane is harder for enemy radar to detect, the B-52 would assume more of a
standoff role in war, in which it would fire its missiles at less well-defended
targets from a distance.

Tankers Would Be Necessity

The B-52's heavy load of weapons, the low-level flying and the long distances to
targets would consume huge amounts of fuel. Thus it would have to rely on
tankers to get to the targets and back home. Col. John T. Jaeckle, commander of
the 319th Bombardment Wing here, said, ''Refueling is the name of the game
anymore.''

On a wartime mission, a bomber would load as much fuel as possible, take off,
have its tanks filled in an aerial refueling, then fly across Canada and the
Arctic to its targets. It would refuel again on the way back.

Colonel Jaeckle's wing of 17 bombers and 20 tankers, which also refuel transport
and fighter planes from other bases, is among the most northern in the United
States and therefore could be among the first ordered to strike the Soviet Union
if deterrence failed.

Like other bomb wings in the Strategic Air Command, the 319th has five bombers
and the same number of tankers on alert 24 hours a day, loaded with weapons and
fuel. If an alarm goes off, the planes take off in the order they are ready,
with takeoff by a well drilled alert force being 12 seconds apart.

Each month, crews like the one led by Captain Spetman, spend at least one week
on alert in addition to flying three or more sorties, practicing in a simulator
and taking refresher training in weapons, navigation and other military
specialties.

Mission Plane Cost: $80,000

On this eight-hour training sortie, Captain Spetman flew a twisting course over
North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Wyoming, Montana, and North Dakota again.
It costs an average of $10,000 an hour for fuel, spare parts and maintenance to
fly a B-52; this training mission thus cost $80,000.

The electronic warfare officer, First Lieut. James M. Tinnesz, and the tail
gunner, Staff Sgt. William J. Pangborn, both seated facing aft behind the
pilot's cockpit, tested electronic jamming gear and guns as the plane glided
down to 7,000 feet.

The bomber skimmed over a bank of clouds, then dropped down to fly through the
Big Horn Mountains at 600 feet above ground. From the pilot's seat, a meandering
valley seemed to scroll under the airplane as snow-covered ridges rose to within
400 feet of the plane and canyons dropped off 1,000 feet.

There were a few scattered houses and an occasional automobile, whose driver,
wending along a lonely road through the forests of fir, may have been startled
to see the flying behemoth roaring overhead. In the distance, a peak rose to
13,000 feet.

Captain Spetman guided the plane over the rapidly changing contours of the earth
by watching not only the ground but the television screen immediately in front
of him where a radar trace of the terrain three miles away warned him when to
pull up.

Small Operating Space

Keeping the plane within a training corridor eight miles wide, and getting to
the target, was the job of the navigator, Maj. Joseph L. Olenoski Jr., seated
with the bombardier below the pilot and the co-pilot. Their operating space,
like that of the pilots, was no bigger than the inside of a Volkswagen.

Navigation was difficult because the loss of inertial navigation was simulated
to give Major Olenoski refresher training under the eye of an instructor, Capt.
Roger D. Gustafson. The navigator had to rely on headings and radar readouts of
the terrain to determine where the plane was. After giving a new bearing to the
pilot, the navigator's crisp cadence was: ''Coming up on left turn - ready -
ready - now.''

Close to the target, the bombardier, Maj. Frank A. Greenwood Jr., took control
of the plane, which was guided then by computer, and sought to keep the
crosshairs on his radar screen on a series of targets - a prominent piece of
terrain, a grain silo and a water tower.

As the aircraft approached the targets, Major Greenwood opened the bomb bay
doors, switched on a radar tone that signaled the scoring team on the ground
that the bomber was nearing the target, and simulated releasing the bomb by
stopping the tone.

When he said ''bomb away,'' the pilot pushed the throttles forward to get the
plane away from what in real circumstances would be the detonation. In one
instance, Major Greenwood was particularly busy controlling the crosshairs,
adjusting guidance devices, and flipping switches as two simulated bombs were
dropped within 31 seconds of each other.

Simulated Bombing of Bismarck

After two hours of flying through the mountains at close to 400 knots, 450 miles
an hour, Captain Spetman climbed again to high altitude where the crew made a
simulated bombing run on Bismarck, the capital of North Dakota, that was unseen
through the clouds far below.

Finally, the B-52 practiced evasive maneuvers against real F-15 fighters. In the
''corkscrew,'' the co-pilot, First Lieut. Michael E. Walker, flipped the 400,000
pound B-52 around the sky as if it were a drunken butterfly.

In a sharp left turn, he pointed the left wing toward the ground, then twisted
into a sharp right turn. As the wings tilted one way, the horizon tilted the
other. He pulled the plane up in a surge that put a knot in the stomach, then
dived so swiftly that it left the head light. Flares and chaff were dropped from
the B-52 in an attempt to deceive the F-15's radar.

But, as Captain Spetman pointed out, the B-52, inhibited by safety rules and its
1950's technology, was no match for the agile, swift F-15's. The bomber was shot
down three times in the simulated aerial combat.

But on the fourth run, the B-52 frustrated an F-15 pilot and escaped. ''He's
gone away,'' said Sergeant Pangborn, the tail gunner, chuckling. ''He's no
threat this time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a B-52 bomber (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: PIELMEIER'S 'BOYS OF WINTER'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


IN ''The Boys of Winter,'' the new John Pielmeier play at the Biltmore, the
audience is asked to empathize with seven marines who are spending Christmas
week 1968 on a near-suicide mission in South Vietnam. Such are the play's
inadequacies, however, that when the time comes for some of the men to die, we
don't mourn for the characters but instead envy the capable actors impersonating
them. The actors, after all, have the good fortune to be carried off stage,
where they are free to ignore the rest of the play in favor of more stimulating
cultural pursuits, like crossword puzzles or poker.

''The Boys of Winter,'' whose 95 minutes capture the war's interminability with
surprising effectiveness, makes Mr. Pielmeier's ''Agnes of God,'' a variation on
''Equus'' inflated into theological kitsch, seem like a model of metaphysical
and theatrical invention. Ostensibly an investigation of why a virtuous Marine
lieutenant named Bonney (D. W. Moffett) would kill ''seven friendly gooks
without cause,'' the play is a haphazard compilation of pulp war-literature
bromides, slung together like dishrags on a limp clothesline. Whatever else is
to be said about the Vietnam War, it has produced an avalanche of shattering
authentic testimony, whether in fictional, journalistic, theatrical or cinematic
form. Who needs hand-me-down goods after plays ranging from David Rabe's ''Basic
Training of Pavlo Hummel'' to last season's ''Tracers''? The most credible lines
in this effort are those quoted from Michael Herr's ''Dispatches'' in the
Playbill.

The setting is a hilltop in Quang Tri province. While we wait for the author to
get to the bloodletting (which is presented with the same pornographic relish of
''Agnes''), we're treated to an exhaustive anthology of barracks talk, mainly
consisting of the rapid alternation of two four-letter words. Comic relief takes
the form of masturbation jokes, only some of which involve a soldier who has the
Marine Corps insignia tattooed below his belt. Now and then the lights go down,
so that a character can step forward and give his theory as to why Lieutenant
Bonney committed his subsequent atrocities against Vietnamese civilians.
Although these monologues appear to be flash-forwards to a court-martial, the
speakers all die before such an inquest could take place. Given the playwright's
constant metaphorical invocation of holy and secular ''ghosts,'' perhaps we are
meant to believe that Marine jurisprudence allows witnesses to testify from the
grave.

If so, that might explain the moral rigor mortis infecting the men's arguments.
In one typical lecture rationalizing Bonney's crimes, the audience is told that
''we all did it'' - that ''we all have little My Lais in the corners of our
souls.'' To say that everyone is guilty for a Lieutenant Calley's acts, of
course, is to say that no one is guilty. Were this logic applied to World War
II, we might end up with a play titled ''Acquittal at Nuremberg.''

The evening's other historical insights, which often rely on strained analogies
prompted by Lieutenant Bonney's American Indian heritage, may leave one longing
for the wit and wisdom of Sylvester Stallone. At one point, it's argued that the
Americans' real motive for going to Vietnam was to rape the local women
(especially 12-year-old girls and grandmothers); at another, the debatable
statement that war ''shows us how to love'' is illustrated by a series of
crypto-religious, if not crypto-erotic, tableaux formed by buddies dying in each
other's arms.

The equally dubious pronouncement that battlefields are ''the only 100 percent
pure democracy'' is borne out by the friendship between a Ku Klux Klan cracker
(Matt Dillon) and a black (Wesley Snipes). But Mr. Pielmeier saves his biggest
revelation for last: With the aid of clumsy flashbacks showing two characters as
young Elvis Presley fans back home, he breaks the news that war brings a loss of
innocence. ''Love Me Tender'' is sung with dripping irony at the play's opening
and close.

The cast, whom the director Michael Lindsay-Hogg sporadically sends into the
auditorium on search-and-awaken missions, struggles manfully with roles that are
either ethnic stereotypes (Tony Plana's Hispanic junkie) or fixtures from World
War II B-movies (Andrew McCarthy's overeager green recruit) or simply ludicrous
(Thomas Ikeda as a Vietnamese scout equally well versed in American history and
''The Honeymooners''). Mr. Moffett, Brian Tarantina and Ving Rhames, all seen in
far better assignments this year, show the most dignity under duress. Mr.
Dillon, the screen heartthrob, has a thin voice but is otherwise able in a stage
debut that requires him to do a gratuitous striptease to ''Jingle Bell Rock''
shortly before he's literally ''peeled'' by the Vietcong.

The production's only truly impassioned response to the war is its set. Asked to
put a familiar landscape on stage, David Mitchell smartly eschews a realistic
design that would compete with ''Apocalypse Now.'' Instead, a gnarled tree rises
from a smashed stage floor whose scattered, twisted planks stretch into ramps
reaching into the mezzanine; the horrific abyss beyond is abstractly suggested
by enormous spider webs of military netting. Pat Collins's lighting completes
the hellish diorama, although the only light we care about in ''The Boys of
Winter,'' the one at the end of the tunnel, often seems as far away at the
Biltmore as it did in Vietnam in 1968. Vietnam Mission THE BOYS OF WINTER, by
John Pielmeier; directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg; scenic design, David Mitchell;
costume design and effects, Carrie Robbins; lighting design, Pat Collins; fight
director, B. H. Barry; sound design, Jan Nebozenko; production stage manager,
Herb Vogler. Presented by Ivan Bloch, Alan Levin and Bernie Sofronski, in
association with Elle Shushan. At the Biltmore Theater, 261 West 47th Street.
BonneyD. W. Moffett HoThomas Ikeda SargeTony Plana PrickBrian Tarantina
FlemAndrew McCarthy L. B.Wesley Snipes MonsoonMatt Dillon DocVing Rhames
BillyGrant Rader HenryDoug Hara

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of D. W. Moffett

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NBC'S 'JOHN AND YOKO: A LOVE STORY'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 679 words


THE three-hour presentation of ''John and Yoko: A Love Story'' on NBC tonight at
8 could just as easily be called ''Yoko's Revenge.'' The influence of Yoko Ono
on John Lennon and the Beatles, the most popular music group of the century, has
long been a subject of debate. Some of the more unflattering interpretations can
be found in such recent books as the best-selling ''The Love You Make'' by Peter
Brown and Steven Gaines.

This time around, though, for the ''official'' television biography, Miss Ono is
in a position of control as the producers required her cooperation for extensive
song rights. The result, needless to say, leaves Miss Ono looking positively
angelic in a scenario that accentuates the positive. ''John and Yoko'' is
carefully guarded and, unfortunately, ploddingly dull. In fact, the songs in
question, heard in their original recordings, are the best part of the show.

John J. McMahon, executive producer for Carson Productions, settled on Sandor
Stern as writer and director after an initial script by Edward Hume (''The Day
After'') reportedly failed to please Miss Ono because it contained too much
material about drug habits. Mr. Stern's version of the John and Yoko years is
much more diplomatic, only touching on bits of the public and private drug
incidents, not to mention some of Mr. Lennon's widely publicized infidelities,
and never for a moment questioning the basic wisdom and integrity of the
relationship.

The story begins in 1966 when the Beatles were already beginning to show signs
of strain. Their records were being burned in Alabama after Mr. Lennon's crack
that the group was more popular than Jesus Christ. They were tired from nearly
three years of international touring. John is heard referring to his fanatical
fans as ''screaming banshees - I'm bloody sick of it, we all need a long rest.''
So Yoko Ono, an avant-garde artist with a talent for publicity-attracting
conceptions (one of her films consisted entirely of shots of bare buttocks),
came upon a scene that was already strained. John, the brash son of
working-class parents from Liverpool, was immediately attracted to the
soft-spoken daughter of a Tokyo banking family. Within months, John was getting
a divorce from his wife, Cynthia, and rumors were circulating about the breakup
of the Beatles.

From that point, the film flits from one significant development to another,
rarely stopping to peek beneath the surface of any of them. There are references
to business deals going sour but it is never quite clear who is responsible.
Obviously, though, John and Yoko are not to blame, their thoughts having turned
to more elevated subjects such as peace movements and the oppressed of the
world. One of the more revealing, albeit unintentionally, scenes in the film
finds the couple pontificating about making their work more ''relevant'' as they
watch television news reports about Vietnam from the backseat of their
chauffeured limosine.

The production moves along efficiently, stopping every once in a while to
re-create a public concert but never capturing the special excitement that
permeated the real events. Yoko Ono is played by Kim Miyori, whose past credits
include television's ''St. Elsewhere'' and both the stage and screen versions of
''Zoot Suit.'' Miss Miyori does wonders with a role that too often settles for
leaving the character and her motivations incomprehensible. But Mark McGann, a
24-year-old Liverpudlian, does even better as John, almost single-handedly
salvaging the production from banality. Apart from his uncanny resemblance to
Mr. Lennon, reinforced with assorted wigs and eyeglasses, Mr. McGann captures
the distinctive charm and sincerity of the man, even when he is being impossibly
silly. The actor's evident labor of love results in a singularly compelling
performance.

With next Sunday marking the fifth anniversary of Mr. Lennon's tragic murder
outside his New York apartment, ''John and Yoko'' offers a harmless review of
his final years. I suspect he would have appreciated something with more candor
and bite.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kim Miyori and Mark McGann

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS WIFE IN SPY CASE HAD DATA FOR CHINA

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 2


When Anne Henderson-Pollard was arrested last month, she was planning to offer
the Chinese a secret document that describes in detail what American
intelligence knows about Peking's spying activities in this country, prosecutors
asserted today.

In a 23-page document filed in Federal District Court here, prosecutors
contended that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard, who has been charged with obtaining
classified documents, was more deeply involved in the alleged espionage
activities of her husband, Jonathan Jay Pollard, than previously indicated.

Neither Has Been Indicted

The document is the Government's first assertion that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had
been intending to deliver secret documents to the Chinese. Her husband has been
accused of selling secret intelligence documents to Israel. They have not been
formally indicted and they have not indicated how they would plead.

In Jerusalem, Israeli Government sources said today their nation would permit
Americans to interview the senior Israeli counterterrorism official who is said
to have obtained secret documents from Mr. Pollard beginning in the spring of
1984. [Page A6.] Mr. Pollard, a Navy counterintelligence analyst, gave Israel
information about Arab military forces, Soviet weaponry used in Arab lands and
sensitive Israeli defense matters, a high Israeli official has reported.

The promised interview was said to be part of a wider understanding worked out
in an effort to resolve the spy affair before it caused further damage to
American-Israeli relations. The understanding was reached in a telephone call
placed early Sunday morning by Secretary of State George P. Shultz to Prime
Minister Shimon Peres.

Second Chinese Case

The statements by Federal prosecutors marked the second time in two weeks that
officials have charged Americans with spying for the Chinese. Last month, Larry
Wu-Tai Chin, an analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency, was charged with
conducting espionage on behalf of China for 30 years. He pleaded not guilty
today. Reagan Administration officials have said they believe he gave China many
of the C.I.A.'s reports on the Far East, including detailed information about
the Vietnam War.

Officials familiar with all the papers seized from the Pollards last week,
including those mentioned in the document filed in court today, say there is no
evidence of any connection between the Mr. Chin and the Pollards.

According to the document filed in court today, Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had been
preparing to make a ''presentation'' to the Chinese Embassy. Among the documents
found by Federal agents in a search, the prosecutors said, were ''detailed
analyses of intelligence-gathering capabilities and activities of the People's
Republic of China within the United States.''

Such a document would be invaluable to any espionage service because it would
confirm its success or failure in concealing covert efforts to gather
information.

Officials said it was not clear whether the Pollards had provided any
information to the Chinese.

James F. Hibey, the attorney for Mrs. Henderson-Pollard, said he would have no
comment on the document. In the first hearing on his client's bond, held last
week, Mr. Hibey argued that the ''presentation'' to the Chinese involved Mrs.
Henderson-Pollard's attempts to begin a public relations company. Mr. Hibey said
that the authorities had interviewed one of Mrs. Henderson-Pollard's business
associates, and knew that the session did not involve classified documents.

The document quoted an unnamed witness as recounting a conversation with Mrs.
Henderson-Pollard. According to the witness, Mrs. Henderson-Pollard wanted to
meet at a hotel where they would burn classified documents hidden in a suitcase.

She told this witness that ''something had happened to her husband.'' The
suitcase, which which was seized by Federal agents and opened after they
received a search warrant, contained papers Mr. Pollard had obtained for her,
the court document said.

In the document, prosecutors also explained for the first time why the Israeli
Embassy refused to accept the couple's plea for asylum.

'Shake the Surveillance'

Last month, according to the testimony of an agent of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Mr. Pollard's contact at the embassy offered to help him escape
if he was able to ''shake the surveillance.''

On the day of his arrest, Mr. Pollard and his wife entered the embassy. Mr.
Pollard later told the authorities that he had been turned away ''because of the
presence of the agents outside the embassy grounds,'' the papers said.

The prosecution filed the papers to support their request that Mrs.
Henderson-Pollard be held without bond, At an earlier hearing, a Federal
magistrate delayed ruling on her bond, and a hearing is scheduled for Tuesday.

''We are suggesting at this point that the level of her involvement is much more
significant than has been heretofore been made public,'' said Joseph DiGenova,
the United States Attorney here.

The motion said that in a phone call to Mrs. Henderson-Pollard that was
overheard by Federal agents, her husband asked her remove the cactus from her
apartment. Days later, after poring over documents that she had removed from the
apartment, agents discovered a reference to a weapon system known by the acronym
cactus, the prosecutors alleged.

The prosecutors said that this showed she was thoroughly familiar with the
documents that her husband has been accused of stealing from the Naval
Intelligence Service, where he was a civilian employee.

The court papers said that the Federal agents intially had no idea that the term
''cactus'' was a codeword and did not learn until they had reviewed the contents
of the suitcase.

Papers Relating to China

At a bail hearing last week, an F.B.I. agent disclosed the existence of the
documents related to China. The agent said that the documents had been found in
a suitcase belong to the couple, and that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had attempted
to destroy the suitcase shortly after her husband's arrest.

Mr. Pollard, 31 years old, was arrested outside the Israeli Embassy in
Washington two weeks ago. According to prosecutors, Mr. Pollard has acknowledged
that he had sold secret documents to the Israeli Government for a year and a
half.

Mr. Pollard was charged with transmitting classified Government documents to a
foreign government. His wife, 25, was taken into custody the day after her
husband's arest and charged with the lesser offense of obtaining classified
documents.

Mr. DiGenova said tonight, however, that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard may face other
charges, including espionage or conspiracy to commit espionage, both of which
carry potential life sentences.

According to Navy officials, Mr. Pollard worked in a special counterterrorism
unit and had access to a wide range of top secret information involving the
capabilities of foreign military forces.

His suitcase, which is now in F.B.I. custody, was found to contain a stack, more
than 15 inches high, of top secret documents, officials said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
STATES' BIDS TO LEAVE SOCIAL SECURITY TO BE HEARD

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 2


The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Congress violated the
Constitution in 1983 when it barred state and local governments from withdrawing
their employees from the Social Security system.

The Court accepted for review a Justice Department appeal of a lower court
decision striking down one provision of a broad 1983 law designed to keep the
system from going bankrupt.

The department said the lower court ruling would have an ''immense'' financial
impact, costing the Social Security trust funds $500 million to $1 billion
annually in tax revenues.

It would also affect 227,000 state and local employees whose employers tried to
withdraw from the system as of 1984. Many would be left with ''inadequate
pension and insurance guarantees,'' the department said, while more senior
employees with vested pension rights would ''obtain windfall payments.''

Federal District Judge Lawrence K. Karlton of Sacramento found the provision
unconstitutional in a suit by the State of California and others. The state had
sought to withdraw from the system on behalf of 70 local governments with 34,000
employees.

Judge Opposes Amendment

The judge said Congress violated the contract and property rights of state and
local governments in amending a 1950 law under which all 50 states signed
contracts to enroll their employees or those of political subdivisions, or both,
in the Social Security system.

The 1950 law said that states and localities would be free to withdraw from the
system, after giving two years' notice.

Judge Karlton said the amendment was an invalid violation of the contracts even
though Congress could constitutionally get much the same result by requiring all
state and local units to participate in the system.

The Justice Department's petition for Supreme Court review in the case, Heckler
v. Public Agencies (No. 85-521), said ''it seems absurd'' to strike down an Act
of Congress designed to achieve an objective that Congress could have achieved
in a different way.

California did not seek to withdraw its 100,000 employees, nor did any other
large state. But from 1977 and 1981 nearly 100,000 state and local employees
were withdrawn and by 1983, 634 state and local units representating 227,000
more employees had given notice to do the same.

These governments either thought they could get a better deal on pensions for
their employees elsewhere, feared the system would go broke or hoped to reduce
costs.

The 1983 provision, spurred by concern in Congress that these accelerating
withdrawals threatened the system, barred withdrawal by any state or local
government that had not already completed the two-year process. It did not
affect those that had never joined the system or had already withdrawn.

About 9.4 million of the 13.2 million state and local employees are enrolled in
the system now.

Libel Defense

Also today, the Court agreed to decide whether a supervising physician may be
forced to defend a libel suit outside his home state for criticizing a former
student in a letter of reference.

The case could clarify the law on how much contact a nonresident must have with
a state to be subject to suit there for libel or anything else.

A Federal appeals court ruled in the case that any person accused by another of
intentionally libeling him can be taken to court ''in any state where the libel
causes harm to the victim.''

Dr. John F. Connolly, the defendant, said in his appeal that this violated due
process of law and would have ''a chilling effect on the flow of information
required for the protection of those who require competent professional medical
treatment.''

He heads the orthopedics department at the University of Nebraska College of
Medicine. Dr. Andrew K. Burt, the plaintiff, completed the residency program in
orthopedic surgery there in 1977. Several years later he applied for staff
privileges at hospitals in Colorado.

In response to requests for references, Dr. Connolly, who says he was obliged to
respond, wrote that Dr. Burt's ''performance was well below average'' and that
he would not be a good orthopedic surgeon.

Dr. Burt, asserting this was a deliberate and damaging falsehood that had
blocked him from practicing medicine in Colorado, sued Dr. Connolly and the
university.

The Supreme Court said in 1984 that libel defendants have no special First
Amendment protection from being sued outside their home states. Dr. Connolly's
appeal is based not on the First Amendment but on the Court's long-standing
doctrine that defendants in all kinds of cases may be sued only in states with
which they have certain ''minimum contacts.'' (Connolly v. Burt, No. 85-298.)
Education Requirements Another case the Court agreed to review today raises the
possibility the Court may decide whether the Constitution requires states to
provide children some bare mimimum of education.

The case is an appeal by local school officials and children in northern
Mississippi, including some of the poorest counties in the nation, from a lower
Federal court decision that dismissed their suit seeking more state money for
education.

The suit says the state has discriminated arbitrarily against children in
northern Mississippi in allocating the proceeds of lands the Federal Government
gave the state more than 100 years ago in trust to provide for public education.

While this issue is of fairly limited national significance, the appeal also
raises a separate allegation that Mississippi violated the 14th Amendment by
''discriminatory denial of a mimimally adequate free public education'' to
northern Mississippi children.

The Court has previously ruled that inequality in money between different school
districts is not unconstitutional, but that when a state provides free public
education to some children, as all do, it may not deny it absolutely to others,
such as illegal alien children.

The Court has not said whether states are obliged to spend enough to meet some
minimum standard of educational qualaity. The pending case may shed light on
that. (Papasan v. Allain, No. 85-499.) Garwood Appeal Today marked the end of
the road for Pfc. Robert Garwood's appeal of his conviction by a court-martial
for collaborating with the enemy in 14 years as a prisoner in North Vietnam.

The Court refused to hear the appeal of Mr. Garwood, the only American prisoner
prosecuted for collaborating with the North Vietnamese. He said the military
judge at his trial had made improper comments to the press. His sentence was a
dishonorable discharge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Kent State Plans Memorial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 79 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, Dec. 2


More than 1,600 people have entered a competition, submitting designs for a
memorial to the four students killed at a peace demonstration at Kent State
University on May 4, 1970. The memorial is to be erected at a wooded site near
where the students were killed by gunfire from Ohio National Guard troops. The
project is to be financed by the university and a grant from the National
Endowment for the Arts. The winner, to receive $20.000, will be announced April
14.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Shameless Verdict in Manila

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


To nobody's surprise, a court in Manila has absolved 26 Filipinos accused of
murdering Benigno Aquino, including the key defendant, Gen. Fabian Ver, now
renamed to his former post as chief of staff. Worthless as law, the acquittal is
a political act. It suggests, unmistakably, that those who risk their necks for
President Ferdinand Marcos are legally untouchable.

Worse, the verdict implies that Mr. Marcos and his wife, Imelda, have reason for
maneuvering: to assure the loyalty, and silence, of the accused.

Hard facts justify these hard inferences. President Marcos vowed that an
impartial commission would uncover the truth about the August 1983 killing of
Mr. Aquino while in military custody at the Manila airport. First he named a
family friend to head the inquiry. Only when forced to back down did he appoint
a civilian fact-finding board headed by a former judge, Corazon Agrava.

A majority of the five-member Agrava panel rejected the Government's contention
that a lone gunman killed Mr. Aquino and concluded that ''the evidence proves
the complicity of General Ver.'' But the charges were submitted to a lower-level
court, witnesses vanished and eventually the Marcos-appointed Supreme Court
agreed that crucial evidence against General Ver was inadmissible. For its part,
the prosecution even refused to accept the testimony of six U.S. airmen against
the general. This tainted record is the basis for the tainted acquittal from
another Marcos-appointed court.

The timing is as shameless as the result. Only weeks ago President Reagan's
personal emissary, Senator Laxalt, warned Mr. Marcos of a ''firestorm'' in the
United States Congress if General Ver were renamed chief of staff. In response
Mr. Marcos affirmed his support for the general, and to deflect American
pressure abruptly announced elections. Facing a divided opposition and with the
leverage of incumbency, the House of Marcos is almost sure to prevail in the
Feb. 6 vote.

The Communist guerrillas in the rapidly growing and increasingly brutal New
People's Army are banking on that. Yet as the country slides deeper into
turmoil, as outsiders talk of another Vietnam or another Iran, a cheerful voice
is heard. It is that of Mrs. Marcos, and she has her own historical parallel.
She compares her husband and his 20-year rule to John Kennedy's Camelot. This
Marcos moment, alas, is neither brief nor shining.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LAOTIANS CLOSE THE DOORS AND HAVE A CELEBRATION

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 3


Laos, a country given to secrecy, celebrated its 10th anniversary of Communist
rule this week.

Monday, the day of the anniversary, began with the closing of all of the
country's borders, according to the Laotian Government press, monitored in
Bangkok. Then came a military parade along spruced-up streets lined with
revolutionary banners and a series of speeches praising the Soviet Union, but
also calling for better relations with China and neighboring non-Communist
Southeast Asian countries, the official Laotian radio reported.

The Laotian People's Democratic Republic, as it is now called, has maintained
diplomatic ties with the United States. It was the first Indochinese Communist
nation to allow a joint search for the remains of Americans at a crash site from
the Vietnam War.

Westerners Kept Out

But this week, Laos barred all American and most other Western news
organizations from attending the celebrations a decade after the Communist
Pathet Lao pushed aside its coalition partners and seized power. No Americans
are permitted to travel to Laos on their own as tourists.

Information about the closed country comes mainly from diplomats, international
organizations and Laotian refugees, who continue to flee across the Mekong
River. These reports suggest that the small, poor, landlocked agricultural
nation - similar ethnically and culturally to neighboring Thailand - is under
the pervasive domination of Hanoi and Moscow.

A force of 7,000 to 8,000 rebels is battling this trend, a Western European said
in Bangkok. He added that it was considered too dangerous for non-Asians to
leave the capital, Vientiane, except in armed convoys because of assassination
squads looking for Soviet and East bloc advisers. International agencies have
reported several attacks over the last year on East Europeans.

Strong Vietnamese Presence

The Vietnamese, with at least 50,000 troops in Laos along with thousands of
Government advisers, appear intent on bringing the country into a tightly knit
economic and political Indochinese federation that also includes Cambodia,
according to experts. A Bangkok-based diplomat said that, according to his
colleagues in Laos, there was a strong Vietnamese presence in every Government
ministry.

But diplomats and Laotian exiles sugest that there may be competition between
Vietnam and the Soviet Union for influence in Laos, which borders China. The
Laotian press is often more fulsome than Hanoi's in voicing support for Soviet
initiatives, even when -as in criticism of American space-based weapons research
- the issue has no local relevance.

Official reports of the celebrations Monday featured prominently the Laotian
leaders' praise for Soviet economic and cultural support.

Laos, a nation of 3.8 million people, according to the country's first census,
made in March with United Nations help, has been following Hanoi's lead in
controlling private-sector economic activity. Under Prime Minister Kaysone
Phomvihan, who is reported to have close ties to Moscow, the former French
colony has also been building up a large standing army through conscription.

Diplomats and refugee officials say these two policies are responsible for many
recent Laotian defections.

'Re-education' Camps Remain

According to Amnesty International and other human-rights groups, the country
still has a system of political ''re-education'' camps on the Vietnamese model
10 years after Hanoi helped the Pathet Lao gain control over the Buddhist
kingdom.

By far the largest numbers of foreigners in Laos are Soviet bloc nationals,
several thousand of whom work on developmental and other projects in Vientiane
or in the countryside. Non-Communist diplomats are severely restricted in their
movements and cannot travel more than a few miles from their residences.

Some of the most detailed information on life in various parts of the country is
provided by Laotian refugees, more than 36,000 of whom are now confined to a
holding center at Nakhom Phanom in northeast Thailand. Nearly 60,000 other
Laotian refugees are in other Thai camps along the border. Since 1975, more than
300,000 Laotians - about a tenth of the population -have fled the country.

Thailand of Two Minds

Thailand's official attitude toward Laos is ambivalent. Recently, the head of
the Thai National Security Council, Prasong Soonsiri, chastised foreign
correspondents here for ''not writing about the killing fields of Laos.''

But at the same time, Mr. Prasong has not allowed journalists to visit the
Nakhom Phanom center to gather the refugee's first-hand stories.

Thai officials say they want to keep a line open between Vientiane and the
non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia. For this reason, criticism of Laos is
often kept to a minimum.

The Laotian Government has followed suit. There has been a hiatus in the angry
exchanges that took place a year ago over three disputed village along the land
border in northern Thailand.

'Brother' and a Danger

For Thailand, officials say, Laos is not only a ''brother'' nation, speaking
more or less the same language, but also the source of potential danger should
Vietnam, annoyed at the existence of Thai sanctuaries for anti-Vietnamese rebels
on the Cambodian border, decide to rekindle a now-dormant leftist insurrection
in the Thai north and northeast.

For its part, diplomats say, Hanoi also sees Laos as strategically important, a
buffer against both China and Thailand, two nations that have drawn closer in
their opposition to Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and their support for the
Cambodian resistance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Laotian troops marching in parade (Rueters); map of Laos
highlighting Vientiane

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JOSEPH KENNEDY TO DECLARE FOR SEAT O'NEILL IS LEAVING

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 3


Joseph P. Kennedy 2d told other candidates today that he would announce his
candidacy Wednesday for the Congressional seat to be vacated next year by Thomas
P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House.

Mr. Kennedy, a 33-year-old Democrat, is the eldest son of Robert F. Kennedy.
Over almost half a century, only three men have represented the Eighth
Congressional District: Mr. O'Neill, John F. Kennedy, who won his first public
office there in 1946, and James Michael Curley.

''There's no question that Kennedy will now be the front-runner,'' said Thomas
J. Vallely, a State Representative from Boston's Back Bay section who is another
of at least eight Democratic candidates.

''His entry will make it more difficult for everyone and will draw even more
attention to the race,'' said Mr. Vallely, a 35-year-old of Irish descent who
won a Silver Star as a Marine infantryman in Vietnam and later earned a master's
degree from Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government.

Defining a Generation

''But Kennedy hasn't won yet,'' Mr. Vallely added. ''What makes this race
important is that with so many good candidates, we will really be debating the
issues and will define what the next generation of Democrats will be.''

There has long been speculation that Mr. Kennedy, who runs a small nonprofit
company that provides low-cost heating oil to the poor, would run for political
office here. This operation has generated large amounts of favorable publicity
for him.

But in an interview with The Boston Globe earlier this year, he said ''it just
is not in me'' to become a politician. ''It's such a crummy system - it just
seems like a bog,'' he said at the time.

A spokesman for Mr. Kennedy said today that he would hold a news conference
Wednesday and would have no comment until then.

Another Famous Name

Mr. Kennedy will be running against a member of another nationally known family:
James Roosevelt Jr., a 39-year-old Boston lawyer who is a state Democratic Party
official. His grandfather was Franklin D. Roosevelt and his father was a
six-term Congressman from California.

Another entrant in the September primary is State Senator George Bachrach, a
maverick liberal considered a strong candidate because his constituents make up
30 percent of the Congressional district. Mr. Bachrach said Mr. Kennedy had
called him today.

''I told him one of the reasons I'm in this business was that I was inspired by
his father in the late 60's,'' Mr. Bachrach related. ''I wished him well, but
the voters in this district are going to be tough on all of us and listen to
what is really being said.''

Other members of the field include Thomas M. Gallagher, a State Representative
known for his support of tenants' rights and tax legislation to help the poor,
and Melvin H. King, a former State Representative who ran unsuccessfully for
Mayor in 1983 and is the most prominent black politician in the city.

Another Kennedy Declined

Last spring, Edward M. Kennedy Jr., a 23-year-old cousin of Joseph Kennedy,
briefly flirted with the idea of running before deciding against it.

Some politicians have suggested that because almost all the probable Democratic
candidates are from the liberal wing of the party, they might split the vote,
allowing State Representative William F. Galvin, who is regarded as more
moderate, to win. But Thomas Kiley, a political consultant who is working with
Mr. Vallely, disagreed.

''This whole ball game is likely to be played on the left side of the field,''
he said. ''That's where the energy is, as in other Massachusetts Democratic
primaries.''

One possible obstacle to Joseph Kennedy's candidacy is that he lives in the
South Shore town of Marshfield, well outside the district. By law he is not
required to live in the district, but his residence could raise a charge of
carpetbagging, an accusation his father overcame when he was elected a Senator
in New York.

A Democratic District

The Eighth District, which includes parts of Boston and Cambridge as well as the
suburbs of Belmont, Arlington, Watertown and Waltham, is one of the most
Democratic in the country.

About 62 percent of its 522,000 registered voters are Democrats, with only 9
percent Republicans. In 1984 the district gave President Reagan only 36 percent
of its vote, one of the lowest figures he received outside some predominantly
black areas in Chicago and Philadelphia.

The district contains a diverse mixture of working-class Irish- and
Italian-Americans along with affluent professionals and a large number of
college students from Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston
University and Brandeis University. Mr. Kiley said all these groups tended to be
liberal in the Eighth District.

Mr. Kennedy will have an immediate edge because of his name and the money he can
raise, Mr. Kiley suggested. ''But the Kennedy vote has been diminishing in size,
with most of it being older and ethnic,'' he asserted.

A key factor, Mr. Kiley said, will be the initial impression Mr. Kennedy gives
through his early appearances and how he is pictured in the press, particularly
The Globe.

''More of the voters are now younger, better educated and more sophisticated,''
Mr. Kiley said. ''They demand more of a candidate, and for them the Kennedy name
is a two-edged sword.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joseph Kennedy 2d (UPI)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME GROUP'S ACTIVITIES DETAILED BY KEY WITNESS IN GAMBINO TRIAL

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 583 words


Dominick Montiglio, a key government witness in the trial of 10 reputed members
of the Gambino crime ring on charges of stealing hundreds of cars, has painted a
picture in court papers of his dealings in the upper ranks of organized crime.

Mr. Montiglio, a 37-year-old Vietnam War veteran, admitted to being a collector
for the crime group's loan-sharking and extortion activities and a go-between in
big narcotics transactions. He also said he could rig a grenade to explode when
a car was started.

But, according to recently unsealed court papers that were made available
yesterday, he could not bring himself to gun down a man.

''I was supposed to shoot,'' he said, according to transcripts of a court
appearance last June. ''I had a pistol on me. I was supposed to shoot with
everybody else, but I didn't.''

He made the remarks in describing an unsuccesful attempt by him and Gambino
''family'' associates to kill Vincent Governara by exploding a grenade in his
car in 1975, and the fatal shooting of Mr. Governara the following year in
Brooklyn.

Mr. Montiglio, who is to take the stand in Federal District Court in Manhattan
today, has been billed by the chief prosecutor, Walter S. Mack Jr., an assistant
United States attorney, as the man who can place the Gambino group's reputed
boss, Paul Castellano, 70, at the head of the car-theft ring and another
defendant, Anthony F. Gaggi, 57, as his second in command.

Bribery Attempts

In the court papers, Mr. Montiglio does not mention Mr. Castellano or car
thefts. But he does implicate Mr. Gaggi, his uncle, as well as Joseph C. Testa
Jr., 30; Anthony Senter, 30, and Henry Borelli, 37, in extortion, loan sharking
and attempts to bribe witnesses in a trial. Those charges are to be the subject
of a future trial of many of the 10 now on trial and 13 others.

The bribery attempt took place, Mr. Montiglio said, in late 1979, when Mr. Gaggi
was in jail on Rikers Island awaiting trial on murder charges.

Patrick Penny was a sceduled witness against Mr. Gaggi. Mr. Montiglio said his
uncle sent him, Mr. Testa and Mr. Senter to see a brother of Patrick and ''relay
back'' the outcome. ''We offered to start him off, $50,000, and then down the
line he would be taken care of no matter where he wanted to go,'' Mr. Montiglio
said. ''The idea was that he would not testify and just go away.''

Patrick Penny did testify in the trial, but Mr. Gaggi was acquitted after a
juror who prosecutors say was bribed by some of the current defendants asserted
that there were irregularities in the deliberations. But on May 13, 1980,
Patrick Penny was shot - a killing that the prosecutors have attributed to some
of the defendants.

Threat of a Disturbance

Mr. Montiglio, in the court papers, also described how he and others, including
Mr. Borelli, extorted money from bar and restaurant owners.

Other members of the group, he said, would go into a place and threaten to start
a disturbance and then tell the owner that such things would happen ''more and
more and more.''

''Then I would get together with the owner and I would say I could probably
straighten that out,'' he said, adding that owner would subsequently pay him to
prevent trouble.

Mr. Montiglio, who is divorced and has two children, is now in the Federal
witness protection program and has pleaded guilty to racketeering charges in
connection with bribery, extortion, narcotics trafficking, prostitution and
dealing in stolen goods. He is awaiting sentencing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GROUPS PROTEST TOYS WITH WAR THEME

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Military toys came under attack by antiwar activists demonstrating at shopping
centers in Ohio, Seattle and Milwaukee, while people protesting one toy maker's
plans to market a Rambo doll marched outside company headquarters.

Demonstrations also were conducted last weekend near Washington and in Santa
Monica, Calif., where members of peace groups buried war toys near a cannon
memorial and beneath a makeshift headstone that read, ''Don't Buy War Toys. Rest
in Peace.''

A dozen antiwar activists picketed in West Hartford, Conn., home of Coleco
Industries Inc., which distributes Cabbage Patch Kids dolls. The marchers,
members of the War Resisters League, which regularly protests nuclear submarine
launches in Groton, Conn., object to Coleco's plans to bring out a toy modeled
on Rambo, a fictitious Vietnam veteran. The character was created by the actor
Sylvester Stallone in the movies ''First Blood'' and ''Rambo: First Blood Part
II.''

The group said its protest was part of the International Day Against War Toys.
''The War Resisters League feels very strongly that we need to be opposed to war
and the cause of war, and one cause is the acceptance by society of the military
culture,'' said a spokesman, Joanne Sheehan. ''War toys are a militarization of
youth and it has produced a situation where it is hard to find other creative
toys on toy shelves.''

She said that five of the current six best-selling toys are ''war toys,'' citing
Transformers, Masters of the Universe, Gobots, Voltron and G.I. Joe. ''The Rambo
doll is patterned after a horrendous, violent movie character,'' she said. ''The
character of Rambo makes war and killing exciting to kids.''

She said members of her organization requested a meeting with Coleco officials
to discuss the doll, but company officials rejected the idea.

Coleco officials were not available when comment from the company was sought.

In Milwaukee, members of the local chapter of Mobilization for Survival
distributed leaflets at the downtown Grand Avenue shopping center opposing toys
the group considers too violent. Barb Peterson, a spokesman for the group, said
such toys include ones that convert into robots and those that have a theme of
military warfare.

The leaflets quote studies finding that militaristic and violent toys prompt
children to show selfish and aggressive behavior. The group suggested that
shoppers look instead for nonviolent, creative toys.

At Northland Mall in Columbus, Ohio, members of the Gray Panthers, a group of
older Americans, handed out statements to youngsters protesting violent toys.
Fifteen people ranging in age from a 5-year-old girl to grandparents
demonstrated.

''Playing with war toys, such as G.I. Joes, and others like it makes you think
about war,'' the statement said. ''What the world needs now is peace, and it can
start with you, right here at home.''

About 25 placard-carrying protesters marched in front of a toy store in Langley
Park, Md. Two carried a large banner that said ''Give Peace Toys a Chance.''

Jerry Rubin, coordinator of the demonstration in Palisades Park in Santa Monica,
said the toys would be dug up and incorporated in a peace monument dedicated to
Samantha Smith, the schoolgirl who had written to the late Soviet leader Yuri V.
Andropov about peace. She was killed in a plane crash in August.

In downtown Seattle, leaflets urging shoppers to favor books, games and art
supplies over military toys were handed out by five members of Families for
Peace, an organization of parents disturbed by what they say is the
glorification of violence in toys and television programming.

''Kids are being taught that the only way to solve conflict is with a weapon,''
said Dianne Hulscher, who has three grown daughters and a 5-year-old son.

Not everyone agrees with the protesters. In one Milwaukee toy store, the hottest
items were robots, monsters and soldier replicas, along with toy guns and
swords.

Terry Trueden of Milwaukee said he doubted that military toys would cause
violent behavior.

''When I grew up it was cowboys and Indians,'' he said. ''Now it's G.I. Joe.''
Another parent, Theodora Ciezka of Milwaukee, said: ''The violence is in the
minds of the adults. To children, it's just playing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM RETURNS MORE REMAINS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: American servicemen standing watch as boxes containing the remains of
seven missing Americans were loaded onto a transport plane in Hanoi for the
flight to Hawaii. The Vietnamese also turned over evidence, including
identification cards, but no remains in 14 other cases. (Reuters)

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MORISON RECEIVES 2-YEAR JAIL TERM

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Dec. 4


Samuel Loring Morison, a former civilian intelligence analyst for the Navy, was
sentenced to two years in prison today for stealing classified documents and
giving secret American satellite photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier to a
British military journal.

In Federal District Court here, Mr. Morison's lawyers, who had requested
probation for their client, said he would appeal the prison sentence.

Pending a final ruling on the appeal, which may take several years, Mr. Morison,
the 41-year-old grandson of the naval historian Samuel Eliot Morison, was freed
by Judge Joseph H. Young in $100,000 bail.

Before the sentencing today, the Federal prosecutor, Assistant United States
Attorney Michael Schatzow, denounced the plea for probation as ''ludicrous'' and
as ''astounding arrogance'' on the part of a defendant he described as ''not
remorseful.'' The prosecution had recommended a sentence of four years in prison
and a fine of $10,000.

Effort to Set Example

Without a jail term, the prosecutor said, other Government employees are ''going
to think that what he did was not very serious, that the court does not think it
was very serious and that it is O.K. to do it.''

In their plea for probation, Mr. Morison's attorneys, Robert F. Muse and Mark H.
Lynch, argued that he was a ''patriotic and decent individual'' who felt the
construction of the Soviet aircraft carrier represented ''a serious threat to
the security of the United States'' about which Americans were entitled to know.

Mr. Morison had faced a maximum of 40 years in prison and $40,000 in fines.

The Morison case was only the second in which the Government had used the
espionage laws to prosecute a Federal employee for disclosing secret information
to the press. In the first, Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo were charged with
making public a Government history of the Vietnam War, known as the Pentagon
Papers. The case against them was dismissed in Federal Court on the ground of
Government misconduct.

Critics Pondering Reaction

Mr. Morison was charged with sending Jane's Defense Weekly, a British naval
journal, copies of classified satellite photographs of the Russian vessel in
drydock, under construction, which were then widely published elsewhere.

Although the Government's decision to prosecute Mr. Morison under the espionage
laws has been described by some constitutional authorities, and in many
newspaper editorials, as a threat to freedom of the press, there was only
scattered reaction from news organizations today.

Spokesmen for the American Society of Newspaper Editors, the American Newspaper
Publishers Association, the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press and the
Radio and Television News Directors Association said that their organizations
had not yet decided whether to join the American Civil Liberties Union, who
provided Mr. Morison's lawyers, in pressing the appeal.

In a statement, Terry McGuire, vice president and general counsel of the
publishers association, said his organization was considering ''whether the
long-term effects of the Morison case might adversely affect news gathering or
news publication.''

'Public Discussion Is Essential'

Russell C. Tornabene, executive officer of the Sigma Delta Chi, the Society of
Professional Journalists, said his association's freedom of information
committee had prepared the following statement:

''We think the Government should make every effort to prevent foreign nations
from stealing valuable industrial and defense secrets. But as a general
principle, we do not believe the espionage laws should be twisted to punish
whistle-blowers who reveal information about Government mistakes to the
public,'' the statement said.

''Classified information is routinely 'leaked' to journalists who print or
broadcast it,'' the statement concluded. ''Most disclosures come from dedicated
public servants who sincerely believe the information should be publicly
discussed. Much of this information should never have labeled 'secret' in the
first place and public discussion of it is essential if the people are to know
the facts in our democracy.''

Called Threat to Constitution

Morton H. Halperin, director of the civil liberties office in Washington, has
called the Morison prosecution and conviction ''a threat to the First Amendment
in its central purpose of protecting public debate about issues of public
importance.''

On the courthouse steps today, however, Mr. Schatzow scoffed at what he termed
editorialists' assertions that the Morison prosecution posed a threat to press
freedom.

''Remember,'' Mr. Schatzow said, ''the same picture was published by The
Washington Post and the TV networks, and nobody has prosecuted them.''

In his defense at the trial, and briefly in a statement to the court today, Mr.
Morison said he had ''made a mistake,'' in disclosing the documents, but that he
did not know he was committing a crime. ''I am not that sort of person,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia, Not the Philippines, Worries Asean

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 283 words


To the Editor:

As chairman of the Asean [the Association of Southeast Asian Nations] standing
committee, I find the news analysis ''Why the Philippines Is Making Its
Neighbors Nervous'' (Week in Review section, Nov. 24) baseless.

At no time during the 18th ministerial meeting of Asean that was held in Kuala
Lumpur last July nor during two recent meetings of the Asean standing committee
in Manila last Sept. 3 to 5 and Nov. 6 to 8 did any of the Asean delegates
express concern about the internal problems of the Philippines.

We are all developing countries in Asean, faced with varying degrees of
political, social and economic problems. That is why we observe scrupulously the
basic rule of noninterference in each other's domestic affairs.

If at all, serious concern has been expressed by Asean over foreign intervention
in the domestic affairs of Southeast Asian countries like Cambodia. It would be
unfortunate if our partners in the United Nations that have called for an end to
foreign military occupation and intervention in Cambodia would now be the ones
advocating direct intervention in the Philippines.

Whatever may be said about the Philippines, we continue to attract thousands of
foreign students including hundreds from the Asean member states to study in our
colleges and universities because of the comparatively higher educational and
technical training available in our country.

Our professionals are in great demand, not only in neighboring Asian countries
but also in the Middle East, as well as Western Europe and in the United States
and Canada.

PACIFICO A. CASTRO

Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs Republic of the Philippines Manila, Nov. 26,
1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Boys of Winter' to Close

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 47 words


''The Boys of Winter,'' the play by John Pielmeier about a company of marines on
a secret mission in Vietnam, will close after the matinee on Sunday at the
Biltmore Theater. The drama, directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, will have run for
nine regular performances and 31 previews.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SUIT SAYS U.S. CURBED FILMS OVER IDEOLOGY

BYLINE: By MARCIA CHAMBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 5


A group of 15 independent documentary film makers and production companies filed
suit today in Federal District Court here, charging that the Federal Government
had severely limited the distribution of their films abroad because of
differences in political ideology.

The film makers, many of whom live and work in Los Angeles, charged that
regulations issued by the United States Information Agency were being used ''as
a political censorship tool to hinder distribution'' of their films. The film
makers asked a Federal judge to order that six films be given the certification
they say is necessary to make foreign distribution realistically possible. The
subjects of the films include childhood in America, uranium mining, nuclear war
and Nicaragua.

David Cole, the film makers' lawyer, characterized the documentaries as ''from a
liberal perspective,'' and often critical of the Government's policy in Vietnam,
in Nicaragua, in the arms race and on environmental issues. ''The U.S.I.A. has
denied them certificates precisely because the films have been critical of a
conservative Administration,'' he said.

The suit, brought by the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York, names as
defendants Charles Z. Wick, director of the information agency, and John W.
Mendenhall, the nation's chief attestation officer and the person assigned to
review the films. Kathryn Fullen, public information officer for the agency,
said today that its legal office had not yet received a copy of the suit and so
could make no comment.

The film makers say that unless the information agency issues a certificate
stating that a film is educational, scientific or cultural in nature, the films
are subject to high import taxes from the foreign countries and voluminous paper
work that make distribution to schools and libraries abroad virtually
impossible.

Six Films in Case Are Listed

The six films that are the subjects of the suit and that were denied educational
certification are ''In Our Own Backyards,'' which describes the hazards of
uranium mining; ''Peace, a Conscious Choice,'' a film about nuclear war;
''Whatever Happened to Childhood,'' a film that describes how childhood has
changed in America; ''Save the Planet,'' a film about the history of the atomic
age; ''Ecocide: A Strategy of War,'' and ''From the Ashes . . . Nicaragua
Today.'' The suit asks a judge to find unconstitutional and overly broad the
regulations under which the films are denied certificates.

John Hoskyns-Abrahall, the president of Bullfrog Films Inc., the lead plaintiff,
said that despite three years of appeals, he had been unable to get a
certificate for ''Peace, a Conscious Choice'' and ''In Our Own Backyards.''
According to Mr. Hoskyns-Abrahall, who said he distributes his films to schools
and libraries through subcontractors in Canada, Australia and England, the
information agency had told him ''there is nothing to stop us from distributing
our films abroad.''

''But we cannot persuade our dealers to take our films without an educational
certificate,'' he said. ''It is a practical problem, a hassle going to customs,
paying duty, sometimes paying a royalty tax. Our distributors simply won't do
it.''

Under terms of an international agreement signed by 30 countries and adopted by
the United States through executive order and regulations in 1967, films of an
educational, scientific or cultural nature are approved for foreign distribution
and can avoid the fees and paper work if they ''instruct or inform'' about a
subject.

Mr. Cole said during an interview that difficulty in obtaining certificates
began in 1981, when the Reagan Administration came into power.

''We know of no protest prior to 1981,'' he said. ''This is the first time we
have had to challenge U.S.I.A. policies as unconstitutional in court. And we
have only done so after exhausting all of our appeals process before the
U.S.I.A.''

Mr. Cole said that the regulations used by the information agency under the
Reagan Administration are ''being applied inconsistently - they do not knock out
all films with a point of view, only those with which they disagree.''

In describing the selection process, Mr. Mendenhall has said he first reviews
the films - 2,000 to 3,000 each year. He rejects between 25 and 30 yearly. When
difficulties arise, Mr. Mendenhall may summon a committee of career officials
from more than a dozen Government agencies to review the questionable films. If
the committee cannot decide, then Mr. Mendenhall consults Government experts.

In some instances, the very agency whose practices are the subject of the film
may ultimately review and reject the film. For example, the Department of Energy
rejected ''In Our Own Backyards,'' saying it was propaganda.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JOYCE IS REPLACED BY SAUTER AT CBS NEWS

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


Edward M. Joyce, the president of CBS News, was replaced yesterday by the man
who had preceded him in the job, Van Gordon Sauter, the network announced.

The management change, a subject of speculation for weeks at CBS, comes after a
year of turmoil that has included a highly publicized, though unsuccessful,
libel suit by Gen. William C. Westmoreland, a threatened takeover of CBS Inc. by
Ted Turner, financial cutbacks that resulted in the elimination of 10 percent of
the positions in the division and an attempt by a group within CBS to buy the
news division.

The announcement brought expressions of relief from several CBS executives, if
for no other reason than that it meant an end to weeks of speculation as to the
future of CBS News management. ''It's been very disruptive over here,'' said one
executive, who spoke on the condition that he not be named. ''Everyone has been
frozen by all of this for two weeks. A decision hasn't been made in two weeks.''

Mr. Joyce, who took over the top news position when Mr. Sauter was appointed
executive vice president of the CBS Broadcast Group in 1983, yesterday accepted
a post as senior vice president of worldwide enterprises, in which he will be
responsible for distributing CBS news programs abroad.

Enhance Position of News

''I believe the arrangement applies the experience of our senior management
logically and combines unit functions efficiently,'' Gene F. Jankowski, the
president of the CBS Broadcast Group, said in a statement. ''At the same time it
provides for innovation and expansion in new markets.''

Mr. Jankowski, Mr. Sauter and Mr. Joyce did not return telephone calls
yesterday.

Mr. Sauter's return to his former position was seen as an attempt to enhance the
news division's position within CBS. Under the reorganization, he is to retain
his title, though with modified functions, as executive vice president of the
CBS Broadcast Group. The position formerly gave him authority over the news
division as well as the five television stations owned by CBS. Now he will
supervise the news and radio divisions.

The practical effect of the move will be the elimination of the management layer
between CBS News and Mr. Jankowski, which delights many in the division.

'Gulf Is Too Wide'

''I think what happened today is the realization on their part that the gulf
between CBS News and the top is too wide and they decided to narrow it,'' said
Don Hewitt, executive producer of ''60 Minutes,'' CBS's news magazine program.

William Leonard, whom Mr. Sauter succeeded as president of CBS News in 1982, and
who is now retired, said: ''Every layer of management between you and the top
removes you from being a special category -which news had always been at CBS -
toward something closer to just another item on the bottom line.''

Word of Mr. Sauter's return to CBS News met with disappointment in some corners
of the division. To many of the traditionalists at CBS, Mr. Sauter represents
the so-called new guard of news managers, those said to emphasize the more
cosmetic aspects of television journalism.

Mr. Sauter is remembered, for example, for drastically changing the hard-news
orientation of the ''CBS Morning News'' to a faster-paced, more
entertainment-oriented program. In 1982 he also changed the look of the ''CBS
Evening News,'' building it around Dan Rather at a time when it seemed that Mr.
Rather would not be able to sustain the ratings success of his predecessor,
Walter Cronkite. He ordered, among other changes, new sets, tighter camera
angles and shorter and faster-paced stories.

Mr. Rather has remained a close personal friend of Mr. Sauter and was said by
many within CBS to have lobbied for his return to the top news post.

Another change yesterday, seen as appealing to some traditionalists, was the
appointment of David C. Fuchs as senior vice president of CBS News and assistant
to Mr. Sauter. Mr. Fuchs, who had been senior vice president of broadcast
affairs, has been with CBS for 33 years, including 9 as a documentary producer.

Neal Pilson, one of three executive vice presidents of the broadcast group, was
given responsibility for the CBS-owned television stations, which previously
reported to Mr. Sauter.

Dominant Position

CBS's news division, long a ratings leader among the three networks, has held
its dominant position among the evening news programs and continues to be
successful with its news magazine, ''60 Minutes.'' But its efforts to duplicate
that success with a new magazine, ''West 57th,'' have had only moderate success
and have caused a schism within the news division over its highly stylized
format. And its morning news program lags badly behind those of the other two
networks.

Perhaps the most scrutinized weakness of the ''CBS Morning News'' was the hiring
this year of Phyllis George, a former Miss America who became co-anchor of the
broadcast although she had no prior news experience. Mr. Sauter has assumed
responsibility for the hiring, which was later conceded by the network to have
been a mistake. Miss George left the program after eight months.

The highly publicized Westmoreland libel suit, in which the general claimed that
a CBS documentary wrongly accused him of conspiring to underestimate enemy
strength during the time he commanded United States troops in Vietnam, resulted
in a CBS victory in court but was a public-relations blow to the news division.

Another public-relations problem was the attempt by Fairness in Media, a
conservative activist group supported by Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of
North Carolina, to mount a takeover of the network. The group was critical of
what it said was a liberal bias at CBS News.

The group's effort was followed by one led by Ted Turner, the Atlanta-based
communications entrepreneur. Though it was also unsuccessful, Mr. Turner's
takeover attempt led CBS to buy back a significant block of the company's stock,
a move that forced company-wide cost reductions. The cutbacks at CBS News were
said to strain its news-gathering operations, and some in the division
criticized Mr. Joyce for not better insulating news employees.

In a similar cutback crisis during his first tenure at CBS News, Mr. Sauter was
praised by his staff for protecting news jobs.

An indication of morale strains came recently when a group of CBS News employees
including Mr. Hewitt and Mr. Rather offered to buy the news division from CBS
Inc. The suggestion was immediately rejected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edward Joyce; photo of Van Gordon Sauter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 7, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Neglect in the Pacific

BYLINE: By Jonathan M. Weisgall; Jonathan M. Weisgall, a Washington lawyer who
represents the people of Bikini Atoll, is writing a book on U.S. nuclear testing
in the Pacific.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


This year may be remembered as the year the Pacific Ocean ceased to be America's
lake. New Zealand refused port entry to a U.S. destroyer, Australia backed down
from a commitment to help monitor an MX missile test and instability in the
Philippines has raised questions about American bases there.

Meanwhile, the Soviet Union, which set up a major naval base in Vietnam, has
offered economic aid to small island nations in the area. One deal has been
closed - a $1.7 million fishing pact with Kiribati, the former British colony of
the Gilbert Islands. The Greenpeace affair has galvanized antinuclear sentiment
in the region, much of it against the United States.

A subtle battle for the Pacific has started, and the United States should take
immediate steps to shore up its faltering relations in the region.

First, Congress should immediately pass the Compact of Free Association, which
establishes the future political relationship between the United States and its
United Nations trusteeship, Micronesia. The Compact is a bargain for this
country. It provides for indefinite ''strategic denial,'' preventing Soviet
access to Micronesia, and assures use for the next 30 years of Kwajalein Atoll,
an important missile range.

Different versions of the Compact were recently passed by the Senate and House.
Only a few legislative days remain this year, and the Micro-nesians are growing
restless. The U.S. lease on Kwajalein Atoll has expired, and some landowners are
occupying their islands.

Second, the United States should sign a fishing pact with the Pacific island
nations. Fishing rights are the most important resource of these nations, but
the United States does not recognize these countries' 200-mile exclusive
economic zones for tuna. Kiribati's fishing deal with the Soviet Union does not
reflect any ideological shift to the left. Rather, it reflects a need for a
reliable source of revenue, disgust with the American Tunaboat Association's
failure to pay fishing fees and disappointment that the United States Government
did not force the payment. Kiribati's annual budget is around $9 million, so
failure to pay was catastrophic and made the Russian offer that much sweeter.

The State Department is negotiating a regional fisheries agreement with the
island nations of the area. If the United States refuses to recognize these
nations' 200-mile fisheries, it is likely that Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu will
sign deals with the Russians soon.

Third, the United States should play a more active role in the area. There are
two United States Embassies among the dozen or so independent or self-governing
island states in the Pacific, and one regional Agency for International
Development office, which administers programs totaling $6 million annually. The
answer is not necessarily more aid, but better programs. We could learn from
China, whose 1984 foreign aid to Kiribati was 200 (much-loved) bicycles, or
Japan, which gave that country excess rice to sell in stores below retail
prices.

Fourth, the United States must consider that these pro-American islands are
challenging allied nuclear policies in the area. The Pacific has had direct
contact with nuclear issues since Hiroshima. The United States conducted 66
nuclear tests in the Marshall Islands, and France continues testing at Mururoa
Atoll. Japan has proposed dumping nuclear waste off the Northern Marianas.

In response to these developments, the 13 members of the South Pacific Forum,
including Australia and New Zealand, last summer ratified a treaty banning the
manufacture, testing or stationing of nuclear arms in almost all the South
Pacific. This wide antinuclear sentiment is summed up in a poster that says,
''If it's so safe, store it in Washington, dump it in Tokyo, and test it in
Paris.''

Washington should reassess its position on deep-sea nuclear dumping versus
above-ground storage and the effect that French nuclear testing may have on the
environment in the Pacific. If a cohesive policy for the region is not devised,
the United States may lose the battle for the Pacific. The area has
traditionally suffered from United States neglect because of the assumption that
it is America's lake, but the lake may be drying up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 7, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: IN ROME, THE BISHOPS CREATE THEIR OWN MYSTERY

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words

DATELINE: ROME, Dec. 6


They filed in one by one or in small groups, a collection of men in black
punctuated by the bright red sashes and skullcaps of cardinals or the slightly
more humble purple of bishops.

Each won a greeting from the Swiss Guards, whose colorful uniforms, designed by
Michelangelo, come from another time, another world.

In an exquisitely ancient city of marbled beauty, these men of the extraordinary
Synod had to pass up St. Peter's Church and enter instead the drafty,
ultramodern audience hall built by Pope Paul VI.

One did not have to be a traditionalist to wonder why the beauty of the ages had
to give way to this particular modernity: a convention center perfectly adequate
for Democrats or Republicans, perhaps, but not quite right for an institution
that often claims to think in terms of centuries.

But if the building lacked in mystery, the Synod itself seemed eager to make up
the difference. All its sessions were closed, except for a brief ecumenical
service restricted to a small number of visitors.

The debates were never characterized as such; the thrust and parry of the
heartless world of secular politics are not what the church is supposed to be
about.

Asked today about clashes of viewpoints on a particular subject, Bernard
Cardinal Law, the Archbishop of Boston, coined a phrase designed to give the
events a more spiritually inspired, almost Quaker, ring: He referred to
''spontaneous expressions of opinion.''

The usual reason given for closed sessions is that they allow a certain honesty
that open forums seem to discourage. Even Bishops are acutely aware of public
opinion, so why create a temptation to sin?

Yet one church official, who would prefer that the meetings be open, noted that
there was one compelling case for secrecy: the situation of the persecuted
churches.

''When Bishops from Vietnam or some countries in Africa or Eastern Europe have
the remotest fear that someone might overhear them, they clam up,'' said the
official, a priest noted for his liberal views.

The secrecy, of course, is only in part. The seal of the confessional does not
apply. The public part of the Synod was reflected in brief excerpts from
speeches that ended up filling pages. And there were regular briefings.

The most popular briefer by far was the Rev. Diarmuid Martin, an Irish official
of the Curia.

At the least, his efforts at circumlocution and evasion were often artful and
amusing; jokes and a musical Irish brogue often filled the gap left by the
paucity of genuine information.

Asked about the chances that any Synod document would be made public, Father
Martin replied that gambling by priests was against church law. He also noted
that Irish priests often placed their bets through their housekeepers. It was
the sort of flexible attitude toward official doctrine that has always kept
clever sinners just this side of apostasy.

Strict or loose constructionism, of course, is very much what the Synod is
about. The 161 Synod fathers were called upon to discuss the effect of the
Second Vatican Council on the Roman Catholic Church, and they spent a good deal
of time talking about the letter versus the spirit of Vatican II.

As in all debates, each side had its own weapons, ideas that could be invoked
not only for their merits, but as symbols of something broader. In such a
context, it helps if the ideas have an orthodox ring.

Liberals became the party of ''collegiality.'' The word refers to an idea,
developed from Vatican II, that the bishops shared authority with the Pope. Like
the War Powers Act in the United States Congress, ''collegiality'' is invoked -
politely of course - to suggest that there are limits on the powers of the man
at the top.

The idea has potentially broad implications, suggesting the possibility, at
least, of a substantial diversity of viewpoint within the church.

Thus conservatives rallied to another idea: they became the ''universal
catechism'' party. Their argument was essentially that so much confusion had
entered the minds of the Catholic faithful in the aftermath of the Second
Vatican Council that the time had come to write a document that would make clear
just what it is the Church believes.

The most likely effect of this would be to charge the Vatican with drafting such
a document - with the job very possibly going to the conservatives' hero, Joseph
Cardinal Ratzinger, the head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.
Rome, in other words, could assert itself again. So much for collegiality.

But the catechism idea proved so popular that many liberals decided to get on
board. For one thing, they estimated that such a document would take a long time
to write and would keep Cardinal Ratzinger's office busy. Moreover, if done
properly, such a catechism would be the product of wide consultations among
national bishops' conferences. In other words, collegiality.

It was Cardinal Ratzinger himself, one of the leading partisans, who condemned a
''party spirit'' in the Church, the concept of well-organized camps of
traditionalists and reformers battling not so much for the Lord as to control
the religious machinery.

That is one reason that every official spokesman here sought to emphasize that
it was a spirit of communion and common concern - Christian charity, perhaps
-that dominated the Synod hall.

For that and other reasons, comparisons between a Synod and a Parliament or a
Congress break down.

Not the least of these reasons is that Synods have no real power on their own;
they are advisory bodies to the Pope.

This can be disturbing to Westerners, and especially Americans, who are
accustomed to the triumph of majorities and to checks and balances.

But what is purgatory for some is the closest thing others get to heaven.

''We come to these meetings with a certain model and this doesn't live up to
it,'' said an American priest here. ''But there are a lot of people here from
countries where legislatures are places where the party hacks come to cheer the
leader. For them, this is a positively liberating, free-floating experience.''

Vatican II changed many things in the Church. Most notable among these is the
decline in the use of Latin.

Not too long ago, Latin was the lingua franca at all Vatican events. Prelates
constructed elegantly complicated arguments in elaborately turned Latin phrases.

Now Latin is an ''option,'' though the official language of official documents
is Latin. The babel of the world's languages is now the rule at Synods, with
English and Spanish espcially popular.

But a few hardy souls hold out for the language of Constantine. When the Bishops
broke down into language groups to discuss a final Synod document, six prelates
chose to carry out their discussions in Latin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 7, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


Questions appear on page 17. 1. The medallion, designed to be worn by children
of interfaith marriages, has an engraving of St. Christopher on the other side.
2. Under a vow of public silence, Yelena G. Bonner, a rights advocate who is the
wife of Andrei D. Sakharov, a leading Soviet dissident, left Moscow for a
three-month trip to the West for medical treatment. In South Africa, Winnie
Mandela, a foe of racial separation who is the wife of Nelson Mandela, long
imprisoned black rights leader, broke an officially imposed silence, pledging
vengeance for blacks killed by the police. 3. It has not detected any evidence
that the planet has a magnetic field. 4. The Sergeant York antiaircraft gun,
also known as Divad. 5. In the Philippines, Mr. Laurel, a former senator who had
been the first opposition leader to announce his candidacy for the Presidency,
accepted the offer of the vice-presidential spot on the ticket headed by Corazon
C. Aquino, the widow of the assassinated opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr.
6. The American Medical Association. 7. The book, ''Politics,'' is a new memoir
by Mayor Koch. 8. Alexander's. 9. George Gipp of Notre Dame. 10. 1982. 11. In
the first meeting in a Western capital between the Polish leader and a Western
head of state since Poland cracked down on the Solidarity trade union and
declared martial law in 1981, President Francois Mitterand received the Polish
leader, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski. 12. The screen will go dark in the Super Bowl
pregame show to allow viewers to go to the refrigerator or bathroom without
missing any of the program. 13. 30 to 34. 14. The Yankees were on top with an
average salary of $546,367. The Mets were No. 12, with an average of $389,365.
15. The chemical leak at the Union Carbide plant in Bhopal, India. A cyanide
antidote was not used to help the victims until several months after the
incident, partly because Union Carbide has repeatedly asserted that, based on
its own evidence and information, cyanide was not involved in the accident. 16.
A portable model of the Vietnam Memorial. 17. Action to save New York City's
90-cent subway and bus fare. 18. The highest price ever paid for a single bottle
of wine, $156,450, was paid at auction for an 18th-century Chateau Lafite,
believed to have been part of an order set aside for Thomas Jefferson. It will
be placed on exhibition. 19. Robert C. McFarlane, who resigned as the White
House national security adviser, had reportedly clashed with Donald T. Regan,
the White House chief of staff.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POTTER STEWART IS DEAD AT 70; WAS ON HIGH COURT 23 YEARS

BYLINE: By JOHN P. MacKENZIE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 3021 words


Potter Stewart, an Eisenhower Republican from Ohio who spent 23 years on the
Supreme Court, died yesterday in a hospital in Hanover, N.H., where he had been
admitted after suffering a stroke. He was 70 years old.

Milner E. Noble, a spokesman for the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, said
Associate Justice Stewart died at 3:20 P.M. He had been in critical condition
since being admitted to the medical center Monday, the spokesman said.

For half of his time on the Court Justice Stewart was a conservative, often
dissenting member of the Warren Court; for the other half he was at the decisive
center of the more conservative Burger Court.

He preferred a pithy phrase to a long philosophical opinion. He spoke of common
sense approaches to problems that sharply split the Court and the country along
ideological lines. Modesty and intense loyalty to the institution prevented him
from seeking to lead the Court from within and even prompted him to ask a
President not to consider him for Chief Justice.

'I Know It When I See It'

As he lamented publicly when he retired in June 1981, Justice Stewart's epitaph
could have been his phrase from a 1964 obscenity case: ''I know it when I see
it.''

For admitting that he could identify but not define hard-core pornography, he
was criticized as unjudicial but praised for candor. Only a few years later he
began arguing that judges should stay out of obscenity cases altogether except
when the obscenity was blatant or pandered to children.

It was not the only time Justice Stewart made a short, quotable remark.
Dissenting in 1966 from what he called a rigid, simplistic enforcement of
antitrust laws to halt a business merger, he complained that the decision's only
consistency with precedent was that ''the Government always wins.''

In 1972 he explained his vote to strike down state death penalty laws by saying,
''These death sentences are cruel and unusual in the same way that being struck
by lightning is cruel and unusual.''

When the Court in 1973 ruled that a debtor could be denied access to the
bankruptcy court for want of a $50 filing fee, he quipped: ''The Court today
holds that Congress may say that some of the poor are too poor even to go
bankrupt. I cannot agree.''

Justice Stewart wrote or joined in many decisions upholding the First Amendment
claims of reporters and news organizations, but he also wrote the Court opinion
rejecting press rights of access to prisons or pretrial court proceedings. On
civil rights issues he followed the Court's school desegregation rulings until
he regarded some busing orders as excessive.

In a dramatic departure from middle-of-the-road positions, he delivered the
Court's 1968 opinion reviving a Reconstruction-era law against discrimination in
real estate sales and other private transactions. He voted for stronger
enforcement of fair employement statues but argued for ''colorblind''
interpretations when he saw affirmative action programs leading to racial
quotas.

Mr. Stewart had a checkered record on issues of women's rights. He struck down a
Virginia law requiring excessive unpaid maternity leave for teachers but upheld
state employee disability plans that excluded maternity benefits. He voted
reluctantly to concur in the Court's 1973 decision striking down state laws
prohibiting abortion but wrote the Court's majority opinion upholding the power
of Congress to bar Medicaid payments for abortions.

Regarding the rights of criminal suspects, Justice Stewart usually cast his vote
on the side supported by the police and prosecutors, dissenting in such cases as
the 1966 Miranda v. Arizona ruling setting strict guidelines for confessions.
But when he saw a police intrusion between a defendant and his attorney, as in
Massiah v. United States in 1963, he voted to throw out evidence obtained in
violation of the right to counsel.

Despite his disagreements with many Warren Court decisions, Mr. Stewart resisted
later attempts to overturn them, preferring to limit those rulings. He
vigorously dissented in 1974 from an apparent overturning of a two-year-old
decision when ''the only perceivable change that has occurred is in the makeup
of this Court.'' Two years later he withdrew that charge of Court politicization
in a case that, he said, showed his fears had been exaggerated.

Influential Cincinnati Family

Potter Stewart was a member of an influential Cincinnati family. He was born on
Jan. 23, 1915, in Jackson, Mich., where his parents had been vacationing. His
father, a Cincinnati lawyer, served nine years as the city's Mayor and later
became a judge on the Ohio Supreme Court.

Potter earned academic scholarships to preparatory school and college, a Phi
Beta Kappa key and cum laude degrees from college and law school. He was a
graduate of the Hotchkiss School in Lakeville, Conn., Yale College and, after a
year of international law study at Cambridge University in England, Yale Law
School.

He spent two college summers on a Cincinnati newspaper and was chairman of The
Yale Daily News, but the only interruption on his path to a law career was
service in World War II as a naval lieutenant aboard oil tankers.

Mr. Stewart practiced law in New York briefly before and after World War II. He
returned to Cincinnati in 1947, joined a leading law firm and pursued an
interest in politics. He served two terms on the City Council and was the city's
vice mayor for two years. Senator Robert A. Taft Jr. was a family friend, but
Mr. Stewart leaned toward Dwight D. Eisenhower for the 1952 Republican
Presidential nomination.

Became Youngest Federal Judge

When President Eisenhower named him to the United States Court of Appeals for
the Sixth Circuit in 1954, Mr. Stewart was 39 years old, the youngest Federal
judge in the country.

Perhaps his most famous circuit court opinion was issued just two weeks before
his Supreme Court appointment in 1958 from the Second Circuit Court of Appeals
in New York, where he sat briefly as a visiting judge.

The case grew out of a libel suit by Judy Garland, the singer, against Marie
Torre, television columnist for The New York Herald Tribune. Judge Stewart held
that whatever First Amendment right the columnist might have to preserve the
confidentiality of her sources, she was required to divulge the source of
defamatory remarks about Miss Garland that apppeared in her column or serve a
jail sentence for contempt of court. Miss Torre went to jail.

On Court Before Confirmation

After the retirement of Associate Justice Harold H. Burton, President Eisenhower
appointed Judge Stewart during a Congressional recess, in October 1958,
permitting him to join the Court before the Senate confirmed him the following
May. At 43, he was the second youngest appointee since before the Civil War;
William O. Douglas was 40 when he was appointed in 1939.

The Court that Justice Stewart joined was closely divided on many of its most
important questions, which often gave the junior member the deciding vote in his
first few years. Although his vote was often sought by either side, he rarely
indulged in internal lobbying for the votes of others. He also established early
the practice of deciding most cases on the narrowest grounds with a minimum of
judicial philosophizing. He spoke of labels like liberal and conservative as
''fatuous,'' and when asked to describe himself, he said he thought of himself
primarily as ''a lawyer.''

One of his first major opinions for the Court, a 5-to-4 decision in a case
called Shelton v. Tucker, was important to constitutional law but somewhat
limited in scope. He ruled that an Arkansas law requiring public school teachers
to list every association or group membership violated the First Amendment.

It was one of a series of decisions laying down the principle that even when
Government is entitled to information, it must proceed carefully and no more
intrusively than necessary when freedom of speech, press, religion and
association are involved.

Resisted Officiousness

Another Stewart theme was resistance to Government officiousness and the
tendency of the police and officials to bother people with divergent beliefs or
ways of life. In 1961 he dissented when the Court upheld a Sunday closing law in
Pennsylvania, saying it forced an Orthodox Jew who wanted to observe his Sabbath
and do business on Sunday ''to choose between his religious faith and his
economic survival.''

''That is a cruel choice,'' he wrote. ''For me this is not something that can be
swept under the rug and forgotten in the interest of forced Sunday
togetherness.''

Justice Stewart was the lone dissenter when the Court struck down compulsory
prayer recitations and Bible-reading in public schools as an unconstitutional
establishment of religion. He argued that the state also had a right to support
individuals in their constitutional right to free exercise of religion. He said
later that he was embarrassed by the flood of fan mail he received from writers
who assumed he was expressing deep religious conviction rather than his view of
the Constitution.

He warned that ''government by big brother'' was near when the Court, in
Ginzburg v. United States in 1966, upheld an obscenity conviction out of what he
called personal distaste for the defendant's ''sordid business'' of hawking sexy
magazines.

'No Power to Pick or Choose'

He argued in dissent: ''The First Amendment protects us all with an even hand.
It applies to Ralph Ginzburg with no less completeness and force than to G. P.
Putnam's Sons. Putnam's was the publisher whose right to distribute the novel
''Fanny Hill'' was upheld the same day.

When the loitering ordinance of his hometown of Cincinnati came before the Court
in 1971, Justice Stewart objected to its loose language forbidding conduct that
was ''annoying'' to others. He struck it down as a violation of both due process
and the right of peaceable assembly.

In O'Connor v. Donaldson, a major 1975 mental health case, Justice Stewart held
that states may not confine the insane involuntarily if they are not dangerous
and can live safely out of institutions.

Defendant May Represent Himself

A week after that decision, the Justice delivered the Court's opinion in
Farretta v. California, saying the state does not always know best when a
defendant wants to represent himself without a lawyer. If the accused is
mentally competent and willing to take the risk, courts should not stop him.

''To force a lawyer on a defendant can only lead him to believe that the law
contrives against him,'' he wrote.

In civil rights, Mr. Stewart delivered two opinions with different results
growing out of the same 1963 demonstrations in Birmingham, Ala. He ruled in 1967
that even if the city's parade-permit ordinance was unconstitutional, the
demonstrators could not violate a court injunction enforcing it. In 1969 he
ruled that the same ordinance, properly tested on review of convictions for
violating it, was unconstitutional. The Court's clear message: test laws in an
orderly way, without defying courts, and you have a chance of winning.

His most far-reaching civil rights decision came in the 1968 case of Jones v.
Mayer Co., involving a lawsuit by a black St. Louis man who was rebuffed when he
tried to buy a suburban home. A law giving blacks new property rights after the
Civil War had lain dormant because of 19th-century Supreme Court decisions that,
Justice Stewart said, were based on an overly restrictive reading of the
Constitution. Revived, the law was a more sweeping ban on private housing
discrimination than Congress was able to pass a century later.

Proud of the Opinion

Justice Stewart was asked by the librarian of Hofstra Law School to name his
favorite case. He cited Rideau v. Louisiana but did not elaborate. That was a
1963 opinion reversing a murder conviction because jurors had been influenced by
television broadcasts of the defendant confessing to the sheriff.

Justice Stewart was part of the six-member majority in the 1971 Pentagon Papers
case that ruled out court injunctions against publication of the Defense
Department's secret history of the origins of the Vietnam War. Although the
Justices' opinions split in many directions, his opinion, joined by Justice
White, expressed the prevailing view that only material that would certainly
cause ''direct, immediate and irreparable damage to the nation or its people''
could be restrained by courts before publication.

He summarized the state of First Amendment law in a candid address at the Yale
Law School in 1974.

''So far as the Constitution goes,'' he said, ''the autonomous press may publish
what it knows and may seek to learn what it can. There is no constitutional
right to have access to particular government information or to require openness
from the bureaucracy. The Constitution itself is neither a freedom of
information act nor an official secrets act. The Constitution, in other words,
establishes the contest, not its resolution.''

Rulings on Women's Rights

Justice Stewart sought but rarely found a middle ground on issues raised by
women's rights organizations.

His opinions on contraception and abortion disclosed strong personal views
against restrictive state laws -he called Connecticut's contraceptive statute
''uncommonly silly'' - but an inability to find a constitutional basis for
striking them down. His concurring opinion in the Roe v. Wade abortion decision
in 1973 called on his colleagues to acknowledge the revival of so-called
''substantive due process'' - a lawyer's term for judges' substituting their
personal values for those of the legislature. His reservations persisted
throughout his Court service. He cast the deciding vote and delivered the 1980
opinion, in Harris v. McRae, that legislatures need not include abortion funding
in medical benefits.

In criminal law, Justice Stewart's 1972 vote against capital punishment laws was
based on what he considered unequal application of the death penalty. In 1976 he
voted with two other centrist Justices, Lewis F. Powell Jr. and John Paul
Stevens, to control the results of five major test cases. With the Court's other
members holding firm views totally for or against five newly re-enacted death
penalty laws, the centrist justices voted to uphold Georgia, Florida and Texas
laws while striking down mandatory execution laws in North Carolina and
Louisiana.

Sought Narrowest Grounds

Justice Stewart's quest for the narrowest possible grounds for decision was
exemplified in 1961 when he ruled that the police had violated the Fourth
Amendment by driving a wired ''spike mike'' through the wall of a Washington
townhouse to overhear conversations of gamblers next door. Urged to abandon
privacy concepts that depended on whether the police physically trespassed on
the suspects' private property, Mr. Stewart said the case could be decided by
adhering to the traditional dividing line, adding, ''But we decline to go beyond
it, by even a fraction of an inch.''

Six years later he cited that decision as part of the ''eroding'' of old privacy
doctrines, overruled two precedents and declared, in Katz v. United States, that
a microphone placed against an outside wall could be an invasion of privacy. As
usual, he summed it up in a phrase: ''The Constitution protects people, not
places.''

Justice Stewart was outspoken in the courtroom, asking pointed questions of
lawyers during arguments. After many other justices had abandoned the practice,
he delivered entire majority opinions or dissents orally from the bench when he
considered them important.

A Secret Call on Nixon

In 1969 he took a dramatic step to insure that he would not be named Chief
Justice. Amid press speculation that he might be elevated to replace the
retiring Earl Warren, he made a secret call on President Nixon. He told the
President that history had taught that it was unwise to promote Associate
Justices and that it was prudent to name a Chief Justice from outside the Court.
Some historians have disputed Justice Stewart's contention, but he feared
strained internal relationships at the Court.

After Mr. Nixon disclosed the meeting, Justice Stewart explained that he had
spoken to the President in part to put aside any personal ambition he might
harbor, keeping a promise to himself not to seek any higher office once he had
reached the Court. Justice Stewart recalled that after his White House visit ''I
felt better than I had felt in a long time.''

His retirement at age 66 - only Justices Sherman Minton and Charles E. Whittaker
retired at younger ages -was a surprise when it was announced just before the
close of a Court term in 1981. Any of five older Justices could have been
expected to retire sooner. Justice Stewart explained that he had been thinking
of quitting - but taking on special assignments on lower courts - soon after he
became eligible the previous year but that he had put off retiring to avoid an
election-year confirmation fight over his successor.

Justice Stewart became better known to many Americans in his retirement, when he
appeared with Fred W. Friendly in a public broadcasting series on the
Constitution.

Justice Stewart is survived by his wife, Mary Anne; three children, Potter,
David and Harriet Virkstis; a sister: Irene Bernard, a brother, Zeph, and six
grandchildren. ----Praise for Stewart WASHINGTON, Dec. 7 (AP) - Justice Stewart
was mourned today as ''a patriot and a good lawyer - indeed, a brilliant man of
the law'' by President Reagan, who said the Justice had lived a ''magnificent
life.''

Chief Justice Warren E. Burger said in a statement issued by the Court that the
death ''removes a splendid jurist from the bench.''

''For more than two decades Justice Stewart gave dedicated and distinguished
service to our country,'' he said.

Vice President Bush called Justice Stewart ''an outstanding man'' who was a
symbol of decency and honor. ''He was a constitutional scholar who interpreted
the Constitution without succumbing to the temptation to legislate from the
bench,'' Mr. Bush said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Potter Stewart (NYT/David Margolick)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


The Government is now requiring officials assigned in this country from East
Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria to book their travel arrangements
within the United States through the State Department.

The new policy, which runs counter to previous efforts to keep travel as
uninhibited as possible, will make it possible for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to keep track of the four nations' officials.

The Government did not indicate that travel by the nationals of these four
countries would be curtailed. But it has warned all the Eastern European allies
of the Soviet Union that their diplomats' right to travel freely will be curbed
if any of their nationals are found spying in areas that are closed to Soviet
citizens, State Department officials said today.

Hungary and Rumania Exempt

The moves are part of an effort to prevent East Europeans from spying on behalf
of the Soviet Union.

Two other Soviet allies - Rumania and Hungary - have also been warned against
spying, but their officials do not have to make travel bookings through the
State Department.

Other curbs are being placed on some diplomats from Cuba, Libya, Iran,
Afghanistan, North Korea, Vietnam, Mongolia and Cambodia and representatives of
the Palestine Liberation Organization.

The Government's rationale in curbing the Eastern Europeans was discussed
Thursday in Senate testimony by Rozanne L. Ridgway, Assistant Secretary of State
for European and Canadian Affairs. The testimony was made available today.

Explanation of Move

''Clearly, Moscow's East European allies do involve themselves as surrogates for
the Soviet Union in the illegal acquisition of intelligence and controlled
technologies,'' she said. ''In taking steps to reduce the espionage threat in
the United States, we are mindful of the East European dimension.''

The new curbs on some of the Eastern European countries reflect a foreign policy
that differentiates between the Soviet Union and its allies, and among the
Eastern Europeans.

The United States has been applying the most restrictive travel rules to Soviet
citizens in retaliation for Soviet curbs on the travel of Americans. The Soviet
Government not only requires that travel by Americans - and other foreigners -
be arranged through official agencies, but has placed about 25 percent of the
Soviet territory altogether off limits to foreigners.

In return, the United States has closed about 25 percent of its territory to
Soviet citizens, including areas of particular sensitivity, such as the Silicon
Valley computer development area near San Francisco.

Henceforth, four of the Soviet allies - Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany
and Poland - will have to book travel through the State Department, although
apparently no areas have been declared off limits.

No travel restrictions apply to Rumania and Hungary. A State Department official
said these two Soviet allies have been treated more favorably in recognition of
the independence of Rumania from the Soviet Union in foreign policy and of
Hungary's relaxed domestic attitudes.

Shultz Off to Eastern Europe

Secretary of State George P. Shultz is to leave Monday for Europe, where after a
meeting of NATO foreign ministers he will visit Rumania and Hungary as well as
Yugoslavia, which although Communist is not a member of the Soviet bloc.

Mr. Shultz's trip, his first visit to Eastern Europe as Secretary of State,
comes when the State Department has been under pressure to apply the same
treatment to all members of the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet bloc's military
alliance.

In the light of recent espionage cases, some involving Eastern Europeans
apparently acting on behalf of the Soviet Union, several bills have been
introduced in Congress to restrict the number of Soviet-bloc personnel in the
United States and to include Eastern Europeans in the restrictions previously
placed on the Soviet Union.

Senator William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, who is chairman of the
Permament Subcommittee on Investigations, introduced a bill Thursday to apply
travel curbs to all Eastern European nations, including Hungary and Rumania, as
well as to Cuba.

''It is clear that Poles, East Germans, Bulgarians, Cubans and others collect
intelligence at the direction of Moscow,'' he said. ''In many instances, the
data collected goes to the Kremlin even before the collecting country's
officials can scrutinize it. We must, therefore, restrict the movements of their
diplomats as we do their Kremlin bosses.''

Details of Curbs Are Provided

The American curbs were described last week before Senator Roth's subcommitteee
by James E. Nolan Jr., a former F.B.I. counterintelligence specialist, who heads
the State Department's special office on foreign missions. He spoke of these
curbs:

* Travel must be arranged through the State Department not only by personnel of
the Soviet Union and the four Eastern European countries in Washington, but by
their personnel assigned to the United Nations in New York. The curbs will also
apply to Cuban and Afghan diplomats in Washington, to personnel at the United
Nations missions of Cuba, Afghanistan, Libya, Iran, the Palestine Liberation
Organization, North Korea, Vietnam, Mongolia and Cambodia, and to United Nations
staff members from Afghanistan, Vietnam, Libya, Iran and Cuba.

* All requests to buy real estate are reviewed by Mr. Nolan's office. Soviet,
Cuban and Eastern European personnel must also submit apartment leases for
approval. Bulgarians and Czechoslovaks now have to lease their housing directly
from the State Department, and several requests have been denied for national
security reasons.

* For the past year, automobile license plates for foreign missions have been
issued by the State Department. The plates are coded to allow quick
identification of Soviet-bloc vehicles.

* All requests by Soviet-bloc nations to install or purchase telecommunications
equipment must be approved by the State Department. It recently turned down
requests by the Soviet Union for parabolic dishes for the roof of its new
embassy and its rest home in suburban Maryland on the ground that they could be
used to intercept sensitive information. The Soviet Embassy said it wanted it to
pick up satellite transmissions of Soviet television.

State Dept. Fears Retaliation

The State Department has been concerned that extending the travel restrictions
to Eastern Europeans would lead to retaliation against Americans, who are now
allowed to travel freely within the Eastern European countries, and thus cut
back on the gathering of valuable information.

''Given the closed and controlled nature of East European societies, our ability
to travel unimpeded by controls or restrictions is of significant value to us,''
Miss Ridgway said. ''The East Europeans do not impose discriminatory
restrictions on travel by U.S. personnel in their countries. Our personnel can
travel at will without advance notification or authorization.

''Hence, in reviewing possible travel restrictions on East European personnel in
this country, the challenge to our own interests is clear.

''We need to preserve our ability to acquire vital political and economic
information, maintain contacts with religious leaders, dissidents, academics and
cultural figures, monitor military maneuvers or the installation of new weapons
systems, expand opportunities for American businessmen, provide the full range
of consular services to American citizens in distress.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

20,000 YOUTHS AT RALLY PLEDGE TO BACK MARCOS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Dec. 7


About 20,000 pro-Government youths rallied today in support of President
Ferdinand E. Marcos and took an oath pledging their readiness to ''die for the
country.''

Mr. Marcos, who has called a special presidential election on Feb. 7, addressed
the crowd, saying, ''I come to you today as one who is leading the effort to
convert our people into dynamic and strong elements of society.''

The 90-minute rally in front of the presidential palace came a day after
thousands of people, some stopping near the palace to burn an effigy of Mr.
Marcos, called for the ouster of Gen. Fabian C. Ver, the armed forces Chief of
Staff. General Ver, one of 26 defendants acquitted on Monday of murder charges
in the 1983 assassination of opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr., took a
leave of absence during the trial, but was reinstated within hours of acquittal.

Mr. Marcos said Friday that he would decide General Ver's future in about a
week.

No Mention of Election

Mr. Marcos, who stood on a platform with his wife, Imelda, and local officials,
did not speak to the rally about the special election, in which the opposition
has said he will be opposed by Corazon Aquino, wife of the slain opposition
leader.

Participants at the rally, which was televised live nationwide, wore T-shirts
that said, ''President Marcos, Tested in Crisis.''

In the oath at the rally, the participants swore their readiness to ''sacrifice
and die for the country.''

A giant streamer strung across Freedom Park and over the heads of the crowd,
said, ''Sir, here we are, and we are ready.''

The crowd spilled into narrow side streets that have been off-limits for the
past 13 years to anti-Government demonstrators.

Members of Nationwide Group

The youths were members of a nationwide group organized by Mr. Marcos in the
early 1970s' under the leadership of his eldest daugther. The rally, which was
held under tight security, seemed low-key compared with previous
Government-organized demonstrations.

Mr. Marcos spoke for 45 minutes in Tagalog, the official national language, and
in English. He talked about the country's economic crisis, which he blamed on
increases in oil prices more than a decade ago, the nation's colonial past and
his 20-year-old regime's programs.

Mr. Marcos, 68 years old, on several occasions joked with his listeners, calling
them ''my fellow youths.''

Mr. Marcos said he wanted Filipinos to be a vibrant and resilient people instead
of one ''resigned to hopelessness and despair'' because Spanish and American
colonialists ''taught us that that was the will of God.'' ---- Press Coverage
Criticized MANILA, Dec. 7 (Reuters) - Philippine officials have criticized
foreign press coverage of their country, saying reports on the Communist
insurgency and political unrest were ''overblown and sensationalized,'' the
Philippine News Agency said today.

Foreign Minister Pacifico Castro told a meeting of Philippine diplomats on
Friday that foreign reporters were wrong to compare events in the Philippines
with those in Iran, Vietnam, Nicaragua or El Salvador.

''If I have discoursed on the perceptions of so-called independent journalists
and analysts of the political situation,'' Mr. Castro said, ''it is to deplore
the poor quality of contemporary reporting of the Philippines.''

He said the Vietnam War was a struggle for national liberation, while Iran had
an Islamic revolution against dynastic monarchs. Nicaragua had no democratic
tradition, he said, and El Salvador was ruled by military dictators until
elections last year.

Lieut. Gen. Fidel Ramos, the deputy armed forces chief, speaking at a convention
of hotel and restaurant representatives, said tourism had been affected by the
''unfavorable, overblown and sensationalized publicity the country usually gets
from the foreign media.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME IN CALIFORNIA PROTEST LOTTERY WINNERS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 7


Not all the winners in California's two-month-old lottery have also won the
public acclaim that usually accompanies such luck, and not all are being allowed
to enjoy their new wealth in this country.

Two of the first 11 to win the $2 million top prize turned out to be illegal
aliens. One voluntarily left the country with his winnings. The other was
ordered to leave.

Robert Taylor, a spokesman for the Lottery Commission, said the agency received
numerous letters and telephone calls of complaint after Jose Caballero won the
$2 million last month. Mr. Caballero, living with relatives in San Jose,
admitted he had entered the United States illegally from his native Mexico.

He voluntarily returned to Mexico after immigration officials said they would
seek to deport him, and it was the fact that he could take his money with him
that raised the objections. He won a $100,000-a-year annuity, less taxes. The
objectors said only people who were in the country legally should be entitled to
collect winnings.

A Top Winner Agrees to Leave

This week, Julio Morales, who won $2 million Monday, told the immigration
authorities in Los Angeles that he had entered the country illegally from
Guatemala. He was ordered to leave the United States.

Still, as a measure of the extent to which Californians have been drawn to the
game, the lottery commission expects to have sold 700 million tickets at a
dollar each by the end of the year. In addition to the 11 people who won $2
million, 109 winning tickets were worth $10,000 to $100,000 and 44.9 million
tickets paid $2 to $5,000.

Salvador V. Rodriguez of Santa Ana, a convicted burglar, aroused protests after
he won $50,000 while awaiting trial on drug and theft charges. He said he would
use his winnings to better himself.

Protests 'a Natural Reaction'

The protests, said Harvey N. Chinn, executive director of the Coalition Against
Legalized Lotteries, a church-affiliated group, are in part ''a natural reaction
by those working hard and paying taxes.'' He said much of the support for
starting the lottery was the desire by the middle class to shift some of the
financial support for schools to the lottery. The lottery, approved by the
voters in the 1984 election, was to have begun in March, but the task of
organizing it went on until October.

Among the alien winners, none have aroused more reaction than Hai Vo, a
Vietnamese refugee who spent $200 in welfare money on lottery tickets and won $2
million. Mr. Vo, who lives with his wife, three children and a cousin in a
one-bedroom apartment in San Francisco, has been unemployed since he came here
in 1984.

Protests were made to the Legislature. State Assemblyman Tom Bane, a Democrat of
Van Nuys, says he will sponsor a bill prohibiting people who bought lottery
tickets with welfare funds from collecting any winnings. Mr. Bane said it was
''the height of unfairness'' for anyone to use public assistance money to
compete with people who earned their money.

Lottery Is 'Not a Policeman'

Mr. Taylor said his office had received complaints about welfare recipients'
buying lottery tickets but that the lottery commission was not a ''public
marketplace policeman.'' He added, ''When you're drawing from a universe in
which there are all kinds of people, you're going to get a little bit of
everything.''

Daniel and Leslie Shiner of Mill Valley, 20 miles north of here, sued Mr. Vo in
Small Claims Court in Marin County, seeking to recover $616.26 from his
winnings. The amount matches their state income taxes, they said.

The Shiners say Mr. Vo had used some of their earnings to buy the tickets. They
cite a recent case in which a New Jersey court awarded half a gambling jackpot
to a friend of the winner who had lent the winner the money to play.

Mr. Shiner said he and his wife were dismayed at the flood of telephone calls of
praise they got from people he calls ''racists who think we're great.'' The
callers said refugees from Vietnam should not be allowed to profit from the
lottery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BISHOP CARROLL T. DOZIER, 74; EX-HEAD OF MEMPHIS DIOCESE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 52, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 394 words

DATELINE: MEMPHIS, Dec. 7


Bishop Carroll T. Dozier, retired head of the Roman Catholic Church's Memphis
Diocese, died today after suffering a stroke Thursday. He was 74 years old.

His 12 years as spiritual leader of the Memphis diocese's 64,000 Catholics were
marked by frequent controversy.

In 1976, Bishop Dozier conducted masses to bring back to the church Catholics
who had left the faith because of divorce or other disagreements with church
rules. The masses drew capacity crowds to municipal auditoriums here and in
Jackson, Tenn. Estranged Catholics were offered counseling and urged to look for
ways to return to the church.

The Bishop also offered general absolution to those in attendance, rather than
requiring the normal sacrament of confession. Under church law, such an action
is considered appropriate only under unusual conditions, such as the absence of
enough priests to hear confessions in time of war.

Pope Expressed Displeasure

Pope Paul VI and the head of the church's liturgical affairs, James Cardinal
Knox, personally expressed their displeasure to Bishop Dozier, but he refused to
back down.

Bishop Dozier's death was announced by the Bishop J. Francis Stafford, who
succeeded Bishop Dozier upon his retirement in 1983.

Gary Honnert, a spokesman for the diocese, said that Bishop Stafford, as well as
a few priests and close friends were with members of Bishop Dozier's family at
the bedside when the bishop died.

''Bishop Dozier was a prophet of the peace of Jesus Christ for his diocese, his
nation and the world as a man of the gospel,'' Bishop Stafford said.

''His powerful voice of conscience and reason will be sorely missed. His
contributions to the causes of justice, peace and particularly racial harmony
are immeasurable,'' he said.

Bishop Dozier was the first bishop of the Memphis diocese when it was created
out of the 21 counties in west Tennessee in 1971.

An early opponent of the Vietnam War, Bishop Dozier offered support and guidance
to draft resisters. He also called for the busing of students to achieve racial
balance in public schools, and he was an early supporter of women's rights.

''It is not sufficient to say, 'I love God,' '' he once said. ''There must be
total love of your neighbor.''

A native of Norfolk, Va., Bishop Dozier was ordained in Rome in 1937 and served
parishes in Virginia before coming to Memphis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bishop Carroll T. Dozier (UPI,1970)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY TELLS OF ROLE OF CHRONIC JUVENILE CRIMINALS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 61, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 7


A researcher who tracked the criminal history of every person born in 1958 who
lived in Philadelphia from 1968 to 1975 says his study shows the juvenile
justice system is too soft on the chronic offender.

''We know who he is by the time he is 13 or 14,'' said Paul E. Tracy, assistant
professor of criminal justice at Northeastern University.

While the study did not specifically address the question, Mr. Tracy said his
findings support the conclusion that more severe punishment would deter
juveniles from committing more crime.

''My idea is, let's do something about him early and not wait until he's an
adult,'' he said.

The study found that while only 7 percent of those followed were chronically
delinquent, that group committed 75 percent of all serious crimes in their age
group. About a third of the total had had at least one encounter with police,
the study found.

Previous studies have shown that 80 percent of chronic juvenile offenders will
become chronic adult offenders, Mr. Tracy said.

Larger Study Group

The study, by Mr. Tracy and two of his former colleagues at the University of
Pennsylvania, Marvin E. Wolfgang and Robert M. Figlio, is the largest study of
juvenile delinquency ever attempted in the United States, the authors said. It
is scheduled for publication this winter by Yale University Press.

Financed by a $1.5 million grant from the National Institute for Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, the study followed the 27,160 children born
in 1958 who lived in Philadelphia from the ages of 10 to 17. They reviewed each
youth's court, school, police and social agency records for those eight years.

''Although it had long been suspected that a small group of habitual, serious
offenders had skewed rates of offending, it was not known exactly how small this
group actually was or how great a share of offending could be attributed to
it,'' Mr. Tracy said.

Philadelphia was chosen for the study because of a similar, but smaller study
conducted there earlier that traced the criminal history of 9,945 boys born in
1945. The recent study included both sexes.

''The delinquency years for that age group, 1955 to 1962, was a very pleasant
time,'' Mr. Tracy said. ''What we wanted was a more contemporary society with
more influences. The Vietnam War was escalating. Kent State was about to happen.
Drugs had become routine in American culture. There was very, very rampant
economic growth.''

Police Policies Unchanged

He said another reason for choosing Philadelphia for the second study was that
its laws and Police Department policies had not changed significantly since the
first study.

The results probably reflect what is happening in most urban areas because
Philadelphia's population mix, crime rate and criminal justice system are
similar to those of other large cities, Mr. Tracy said.

''It's a very good pulse of what the whole country is doing,'' he said.

Surprisingly, the researchers found that roughly the same percentage of youths
in each generation committed crimes. In the later study, however, the
repeat-offenders tended to commit more crimes and the offenses were more
serious. Robbery, aggravated assault and rape cropped up much more often in
crime statistics for the group born in 1958.

Males were more than two-and-a-half times more likely to become delinquent than
females, the study found. It showed was no difference, in that context, between
black and white teen-agers.

Mr. Tracy said the researchers found that nearly half the youths who committed
four serious crimes were never placed on probation or jailed.

''The point is, if you let a kid do what he does with impunity, then he's going
to continue to do it,'' said Mr. Tracy. ''So my argument is that we ought to
start getting tough with delinquents early.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOBBYING GROUP SEEKS TAX REPEAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 88, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 7


Visitors to the downtown offices of Citizens for Limited Taxation catch on very
quickly that this organization emphasizes substance, not style.

Entry is by way of an elevator tucked into the dining area of a fast-food
restaurant. Passage to the top is shared with mops and buckets of floor cleaner.

Once inside, visitors are greeted by partly consumed meals, half-empty coffee
cups and reams of computer printouts.

But mention Citizens for Limited Taxation or its leader, Barbara Anderson, to a
state legislator, and he will likely snap to attention - albeit sometimes
grudgingly.

In five years this band of tax-curb advocates has become one of the most
effective and controversial political forces in the state. Its members forced
the tax-limiting Proposition 2 1/2 on state government in 1980, with the support
of 60 percent of the electorate and against the opposition of most appointed and
elected officials. The law caps municipal taxing authority at 2 1/2 percent of
the fair market value of property.

Starting at Grass Roots

''Everything starts at the grass roots level,'' Mrs. Anderson says. ''None of
the important issues start at the government level.''

This week, her organization wrote what is widely regarded as the second chapter
of this state's tax revolution. It collected more than 135,000 signatures in
support of a petition to repeal the state's 7.5 percent surtax on personal
income. The tax was imposed in 1975 during Gov. Michael S. Dukakis's first term.
The number of signatures is more than twice the minimum required to place the
issue on the ballot in November.

The petition also calls for limiting the growth in state tax revenues to a
three-year average of growth in taxpayers' wages and salaries. But Mr. Dukakis
and the Legislature hope to head off that issue. They are scrambling to pass a
surtax repeal bill before the voters get a chance to vent their feelings at the
polls.

Mrs. Anderson, the leading force in this upheaval, divorced her first husband, a
military officer, after he objected to her demonstrating against the Vietnam
War. These days her politics are generally considered conservative, but she
prefers the label populist.

She says the initiative petition is the trend of the future and the most
efficient way to return government to the people.

Relations With Governor

Her enthusiasm for cutting taxes has given her high visibility among the
electorate and in the Statehouse, where she is a registered lobbyist. She has
access to the Governor's policy advisers, but no access to the Governor. Therein
lies a story:

When Mrs. Anderson was introduced to Mr. Dukakis, shortly before he regained his
office in the 1982 election, she mentioned - in jest, she says -that she hoped
to repeal the surtax. Gov. Edward J. King had tried unsuccessfully in the bitter
primary to defeat Mr. Dukakis with the surtax issue. ''The temperature in the
room must have dropped 20 degrees,'' Mrs. Anderson recalled. ''He said, 'Well,
you're not going to get it' and turned on his heels.''

Since then, Mrs. Anderson says, she has not been able to get an audience with
the Governor.

Of course, the surtax repeal is no jest. It would cost the state about $260
million a year. And with the possiblity of a third King-Dukakis match in 1986,
Mr. Dukakis would like to see the matter resolved before the legislative year
ends Dec. 31.

Mr. Dukakis says the state can now afford to repeal the surtax, which he signed
into law in a severe recession. Today Massachusetts is enjoying a budget surplus
of historic proportions, estimated by some to be as high as $400 million.

Opposition From Towns

The repeal effort, however, has its detractors. The Massachusetts Municipal
Association, representing communities around the state, said last week that
repeal would leave the commonwealth's cities and towns $300 million in the hole
for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1986.

James M. Segel, the association's executive director, said the deficit would
come from not having the surtax to offset cuts in various Federal programs,
including revenue sharing, mass transportation assistance, housing and
development block grants.

''Why enact a permanent tax cut now?'' Mr. Segel asked. ''Why not wait until we
do know the shape of the Federal budget for fiscal year 1987?''

Mr. Segel's organization was one of the leading opponents to Proposition 2 1/2.
In recent months Mr. Segel has publicly applauded the measure and says it has
helped the state reduce its unhealthy reliance on property taxes.

Since Proposition 2 1/2, the revenue burden on citizens has dropped
dramatically, according to a report last week by a special tax overhaul
commission. The public-private commission said Massachusetts, for a long time
derisively regarded by industry as ''Taxachusetts,'' is now below the national
average in the per capita tax burden.

In the state Legislature, both the House and the Senate have passed different
versions of a repeal bill. Members of a legislative conference committee, who
were waiting to see the results of the initiative petition, say they expect a
compromise to be hammered out this week.

If not, Mrs. Anderson said her organization will spend the next 10 months
embarrassing every legislator who voted against the repeal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
EXHIBIT HONORS WAR VETERANS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. DUNN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 42, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1663 words


A permanent stamp exhibit commemorates the contributions and sacrifices of the
American armed services in Washington, D.C. It is located in a display case in
the upper east wing of the memorial display area between the Tomb of the
Unknowns and the Amphitheater. The exhibit, entitled ''to Honor Those Who
Served'' was presented by Postmaster General Paul N. Carlin to Arlington
National Cemetery during Veterans Day ceremonies.

The prominent display of 36 issues illustrates the important role stamps play in
honoring events, movements and national heroes. The stamps were chosen by
Arlington Cemetery officials from more than 100 issued by the Postal Service
since 1919 and dealing with veterans.

In making the presentation, Postmaster General Carlin stated, ''We hope this
exhibit will remind visitors in years to come of the courage of those buried
here and of the covenant that brought forth such sacrifices. Each stamp
represents a single chapter in America's covenant to preserve our free, just and
united country. . .as well as to secure those same rights for our friends and
allies.''

The oldest stamps in the display are the 1919 Allied Victory issue that
celebrates the end of World War I and the 50-cent Arlington Amphitheater single
from the 1922 regular series. Three stamps from the 1936 Army-Navy set also were
selected.

Other stamps with a Civil War theme are the 1949 Grand Army of the Republic and
Confederate Veterans issues and the 1961-65 Civil War Anniversary set. The
Spanish-American war veterans are remembered by the 1948 Rough Riders stamp. In
addition to the Allied Victory issue, World War I veterans were honored by a
1985 stamp that has been included in the display.

World War II stamps selected are the 1945 Iwo Jima Memorial, the 1946 Veterans
of World War II and the 1948 Gold Star Mothers issues. Korean War veterans are
singled out for honors by a 1985 single, while Vietnam War veterans are noted on
the 1970 Prisoners of War/Missing in Action single and the 1979 Vietnam Vets
stamp.

Individual leaders honored in the exhibit are General George S. Patton, Jr. on a
1953 commemorative, General John J. Pershing and General Robert E. Lee on 1954
stamps, President John F. Kennedy on the 1964 Kennedy Memorial issue, General
George C. Marshall on a 1966 regular, General Dwight D. Eisenhower on a 1969
single and General Douglas MacArthur on a 1971 commemorative.

Other stamps included in the display are the 1952 Service Women, 1955 Armed
Forces Reserve, 1969 American Legion, 1970 Disabled American Veterans, 1974
Veterans of Foreign Wars, 1980 Veterans Administration and 1983 Medal of Honor
stamps. Pre-stamped envelopes selected are the 1981 Blinded Veterans and 1983
Paralyzed Veterans issues.

New Zealand Plans

The New Zealand Post Office has announced its 1986 stamp calendar. The
relatively modest schedule includes 27 stamps and one souvenir sheet.

The stamps of New Zealand find their main appeal with British Commonwealth and
general collectors. Because the issues selected in recent years have used
popular themes, individual sets also have strong topical collecting appeal. The
1986 stamps are no exception.

The year's issues lead off Jan. 15 with a set of five stamps honoring the
centenary of the New Zealand Police Force. The stamps are printed in a setenant
strip. A horizoning banner inscribed ''New Zealand Police Centenary 25c'' splits
each stamp in half. The top half depicts in sepia tones a scene from the past.
The bottom half of each stamp shows a multi-colored scene of the modern police
force in action.

March 5 will see a set of four ''special topic'' issues illustrating vintage
motorcycles and two stamps for the International Year of Peace. The peace stamps
will be among the most popular with scores of nations expected to release stamps
for the latest United Nations theme.

On April 23, the native birds definitive series will be continued with $3 and $4
values. No one can accuse the New Zealanders of thinking small: the series began
in 1985 with $1 and $2 values.

A June 11 scenic bays issue of four stamps is expected to be well received,
while the 1986 edition of the popular annual health semi-postals will feature a
set of three singles and a souvenir sheet. On Sept. 17 the annual Christmas
issue will feature three Christmas carol stamps. The year's plans are rounded
out Nov. 5 with a ''Music in New Zealand'' theme that features classical, brass
band, pipe band and country and western music.

New Zealand's postal issues date back to 1855, making the nation one of the
earliest stamp-issuing entities. The first stamps, issued July 18 and featuring
a portrait of the young Queen Victoria, are extremely rare. The 1855 one pence
dull carmine, New Zealand N1 carries a Scott Catalogue value of $20,000 unused
and $10,000 used. Another great New Zealand rarity is the 1855 one shilling
bisect used for six pence postage. On cover, it carries a catalogue value of
$20,000.

The 1903 Christchurch Exhibition issue is one of the classics of the area. The
1940 Centenary of British Sovereignty set of 13 stamps that is within reach for
all collectors offers a comprehensive pictorial history of New Zealand.

Because its commemoratives are taken off sale within a few months of their
release, New Zealand's recent issues have quickly moved to a premium over face
value and are best obtained as new issues. Recent releases carry the same
catalogue value mint or used. For the collector seeking a bit of a challenge,
commercially used issues can be sought in addition to or instead of the mint
copies. Releases carry the same catalogue value mint or used.

The recent stamps of New Zealand can be obtained from local dealers or new issue
specialists. Earlier issues are available from British Commonwealth specialists
and well-stocked world wide dealers.

New Albums

One of the severest complaints against the Scott Publishing Company under its
previous owners was its failure to maintain the Scott Specialty album series.
Torn between the needs of the hobby for a diverse line of individual country
albums to stimulate collecting and its own inability to earn a profit on
limited-printing albums, the company opted for a strict bottom line approach and
began eliminating those albums that did not show a direct contribution to
profits.

When the Amos Press of Sidney, Ohio acquired Scott last year, that company
promised to restore many of the discontinued albums to the Scott line. Amos
Press recently released four parts of its International series and 10 Specialty
albums that previously were listed as out of print. The actions are the first in
a three-year program to reprint and update the Scott album line.

International albums once again available are Parts IA and IB, covering stamps
of the world from 1840 to 1940, Part 9 for 1973-74 and Part 11 for 1975-76. It
is interesting to note that the first 100 years of philately could be covered in
two albums, while the pace of new issues is such that a new album is now needed
every year. Suggested retail prices for each of these International Parts is
$79.95. Also released in November was the latest section in the 20-part series,
a 550-page edition for 1984 stamp issues.

Specialty albums that have been reissued, with retail prices in parentheses, are
for Australia and dependencies ($69.95), France ($79.95), Germany (1868-1949,
$49.95; Federal Republic of Germany, 1949 to date, $69.95; Colonies and
Administrative Areas, $79.95; German Democratic Republic, ($59.95), Great
Britain ($59.95), Ireland ($44.95), Israel Tab issues ($74.95), Japan ($84.95),
New Zealand ($69.95), Scandinavia and Finland (1850-1965, $59.95; 1966 to date,
$59.95) and Vatican City ($59.95).

Also back in print is the United States Postal Card album in the Scott National
series. A new set of pages in the series has been released for the United States
Trust Territories. The Postal Card album retails for $49.95 and the Trust
Territories pages sell for $7.95.

New Show

Philadelphia, Pa. will be the site for a new show scheduled from March 9 to 11,
1986. The new event, planned by Stamp Expo promoter Israel Bick, is timed to
attract dealers who will be gathering on the East Coast for the annual Interpex
event that will be held March 13 to 16 in New York City. The new Stamp Expo
'86/Atlantic will be held in the recently refurbished Holiday Inn at 18th and
Market streets in Philadelphia.

California Covers

The Marc Haas collection of California Postal History will be auctioned Saturday
at the Danbury, Conn. Hilton Inn by Richard C. Frajola, Inc. The auction will
include important pre-statehood stampless covers, classic United States stamps
on cover, illustrated covers, independent mail carriers, Pony Express usages,
Hawaiian mails and British Columbia mails.

Mr. Haas made philatelic history and drew international mass media attention in
1979 with the sale of his United States postal history collectilon to Stanley
Gibbons International for more than $11,000,000. While not matching that
collection in value, the Califoria collection does contain many of the most
important and interesting pieces in that popular area.

Pre-stamp material includes a folded letter with manuscript ''San Francisco Mar
15'' postmark that was carried on the first United States Government mail to
leave that city. Better stamp usages on cover include two covers with bisects of
the 1851 12-cent black issue used in place of a six-cent stamp.

The 11 Pony Express covers offered include the only recorded example of the
Running Horse illustrated postmark in carmine to be found on the front of a
cover. The highlight of the Hawaiian Mails section is a cover with the Honolulu
straight line postmark.

Because of the special appeal of these covers, the catalogue for this auction is
in full color and includes extensive reference annotations. It is available for
$10 from Richard C. Frajola, Inc., Moody Lane, Danbury, Conn. 06811.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Iwo Jima stamp; Photo of rare New Zealand issue

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
REVENGE FUELS COLD WAR MOVIES OF THE 80'S

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1738 words


''You can't squelch patriotism,'' Sylvester Stallone was quoted as saying late
last spring when it became apparent that ''Rambo:

First Blood Part II'' was turning into the box-office smash of the season. Maybe
you can't squelch it, but it's possible to distort it to ludicrous proportions.

This is being demonstrated once again by Mr. Stallone in his just-opened ''Rocky
IV,'' in which the actor, who refought and won the Vietnam War in ''Rambo,'' has
taken it upon himself to fight and win a war that hasn't yet been declared -
World War III. There's nothing left for a ''Rocky V'' except a Miltonian
confrontation with Satan. After that, God knows.  None of the Cold War movies of
the late 1940's and early 1950's - including such things as ''The Red Menace,''
''I Was a Communist for the F.B.I.'' and ''My Son John'' - was very successful
either with the critics or the public, possibly because the films preached a
negative, essentially defensive orthodoxy. ''Beware of the Communist subversive
within,'' they warned repeatedly. ''He could be your own father, brother'' or,
as in ''My Son John,'' ''your sexually suspect child.''

This was at a time when the public couldn't get its fill of newspapers that
headlined Senator Joseph McCarthy's latest ''revelations'' about Russian agents
in the Government and the armed services. Yet movie audiences - the same people
who were buying the newspapers - remained steadfastly unalarmed by films that
exposed domestic subversives as vodka-swilling, caviar-munching cynics, often
university-educated and of an intellectual bent.

Today's Cold War films are something else. They don't worry much about any
rottenness within, except for the vaguely leftist, wishy-washy Government types
who allowed the Vietnam War to be lost. They aren't whining and passive. They're
furiously aggressive. They're action melodramas first, with political subtexts
(the value of God, country, family) that aren't boringly spelled out but
efficiently represented in the iconography - an American flag, a
nondenominational church, a tot-packed school bus, a close-up of Sylvester
Stallone's right bicep.

Further, the action of these melodramas, more often than not, is prompted by a
need for revenge, the simplest, most visceral of emotions, and one that need not
be plausible to be dramatically effective. From ''The Duchess of Malfi'' and
''Timon of Athens'' to ''Death Wish'' (''One'' through ''Three''), Chuck
Norris's two ''Missing in Action'' films and Mr. Stallone's ''Rambo,'' revenge
sells.

It's also probably no coincidence that the most successful of today's Cold War
films take place not on home ground but mostly overseas in comparatively exotic
locations - Vietnam in ''Missing in Action'' and ''Rambo,'' and the Soviet Union
in ''Rocky IV'' (the last quarter of the film, anyway) and ''White Nights.''
Though ''White Nights'' is not a revenge film, its story about the escape from
the Soviet Union of a Russian defector to the West (Mikhail Baryshnikov) and a
disillusioned American defector to Russia (Gregory Hines) qualifies it as being
something more than latently Cold War melodrama.

For reasons not easy to pin down, the two Cold War action films that were set in
this country - John Milius's ''Red Dawn'' and Mr. Norris's ''Invasion, U.S.A.,''
both of which picture a World War III fought on native soil -have not done as
well at the box office as the films with foreign locations. It could be that
American audiences prefer not to fantasize about mayhem so close to home -that
sort of thing isn't as much fun to watch as Rambo's murdering Vietnamese and
Russians 6,000 miles away.

Or, the reason could be much more simple: neither film was a particularly
involving example of the action-revenge genre. Plot implausibilities that one
will accept in a film set overseas suddenly look ridiculous against a backdrop
of middle-American shopping malls, gas stations and split-level ranch houses.
(Even the plots of these films are, apparently, adjustable. In its Nov. 27
issue, Variety reports that pirated video cassettes of ''Rambo,'' which are
currently being circulated in the Middle East, carry subtitles that considerably
alter the film's story - changing the setting from Vietnam to the Philippines
and the time from today to 1943 and World War II. Gone are all references to the
Vietnamese and, especially, to the Russians, who have strong allies in the
Middle East. The villains have become the soldiers of Japan, where, of course,
much of the video equipment now being used in the Middle East was probably
manufactured.) These Cold War films of the 80's often deal in one-on-one
confrontations as exemplified in the climactic fight between the All-American
Rocky Balboa and the Russian Ivan Drago in ''Rocky IV,'' as well as in the
bitter enmity between Nr. Norris's American agent and Richard Lynch's psychotic
Russian terrorist in ''Invasion, U.S.A.'' Yet, because the characters are so
up-front and simple-minded, so devoid of personality, wit and humanity, the
films, like political cartoons, give the impression of being about
confrontations between ideologies.

Far different are the confrontations between East and West seen in the James
Bond films, which are too comic and self-aware to appeal to gut-reaction
jingoism. In the Cold War novels of Graham Greene and John Le Carre, winning is
less important than the ways in which the authors examine moral and spiritual
alternatives. Though ''Target,'' Arthur Penn's new spy thriller, has the
narrative shape and the technology of a cloak-and-dagger film, it's primarily
concerned not with who's right or wrong - it seems to assume the audience can
make up its own mind. Rather, it's about the toll taken on the lives of agents
of both East and West in the ongoing Cold War. It has intelligence.

Defenders of the Stallone oeuvre - the ''Rocky'' and ''Rambo'' movies - like to
describe them as ''fables,'' as if equating these films with fairy tales would
somehow dignify the manner in which they romanticize empty-headed behavior.
When, near the end of ''Rambo,'' the Stallone character single-handedly wipes
out an entire Vietnamese encampment, their Russian military ''advisers,'' as
well as all their aircraft, he's ''hanging tough'' all right, but it's hanging
tough not as a moral or political imperative but as style, as slaughter for its
own sake.

''Rocky IV,'' which isn't vicious or violent though a flag-waver, set new
box-office records over the Thanksgiving weekend. In its first five days, it
took in more money than any other nonsummer opening, including ''Beverly Hills
Cop,'' but not as much as either ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom'' or
''Return of the Jedi.''

In this latest and possibly final chapter of the saga, Rocky Balboa, who was
supposed to be over the hill 10 years ago, decides to return to the ring once
again to fight Ivan Drago (Dolph Lundgren), the Russian champ who stands a head
taller than Rocky and outweighs him by about 60 pounds. Ivan, we are given to
understand, is virtually a robot, a man manufactured by scientists with the help
of computers and steroids.

Mr. Stallone, who's beginning to look more and more like a life-size, inflatable
doll made in his own image, not only stars in the film but also wrote and
directed it as if extremely tired. The Rocky character has grown away from him.
Yet in this respect, the Rocky character may be more representative of a certain
kind of American than even Mr. Stallone is aware of. He's the sort of man who,
while expressing sympathy for the underprivileged, is inclined to say, ''If I
made it on my own, so can you.''

Now wealthy, successful and famous, still happily married to the passive Adrian
(Talia Shire) and the father of a child from central casting, Rocky has no place
to go that has any relation to the street fighter who won the title in ''Rocky
II.'' Because Rocky has everything, Mr. Stallone is hard-pressed to find him a
cause to fight for. He does, of course, but it's pretty lame.  In ''Rocky IV,''
about one-third of which seems to be clips from the first three films, Rocky
returns to the ring after Apollo Creed (Carl Weathers), the black fighter from
whom Rocky won the title, is cold-bloodedly beaten to death by Ivan Drago in an
exhibition match in Las Vegas. Though clearly outmatched, Rocky agrees to fight
Drago in the Soviet Union, thus to avenge the death of his friend and to show
the world who's tops.

That Rocky succeeds is no surprise, but what is unexpected that he succeeds
without any suspense and at no great cost to himself. He just goes into the ring
and whips the big, dumb Russian lunkhead, winning not only the bout but also,
according to the film, the screaming, tumultuous admiration of the the entire
Soviet Union, including the Communist Party's general secretary and the members
of the Politburo.

Rocky's victory oration to his new Russian fans must be preserved. ''During this
fight,'' he observes presciently, ''I saw a lot of changes. We were just two
guys killing each other, but I guess that's better than 20 million. If we can
change, you can change, and everybody can change. . . .'' I'd love to watch this
film with a Moscow audience. One of the more ingenious interpretations of
''Rocky IV'' is reported by Jeff Rovin in his new paperback biography titled
''Stallone! A Hero's Story.'' ''A few critics,'' writes Mr. Rovin, ''have
applauded it as a fable of sorts in which the third world, represented by
Apollo, is pounded down by the Soviets, only to be avenged by America.''

Apollo Creed is black. He's also a fun-loving millionaire who, when first seen
in ''Rocky IV,'' is floating around his kidney-shaped swimming pool wondering
how to get back into the public eye. Only in America, I suspect, could someone
identify Apollo Creed with the third world.

On the basis of ''Rocky IV,'' Rocky Balboa would seem to have gone a distance
from which no fictional character returns. However, Rambo, ''the pure fighting
machine'' of ''First Blood'' and ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' goes on. In his
book about Mr. Stallone, Mr. Rovin says that Rambo will come back in a movie in
which he rescues hostages from a third-world country, possibly Afghanistan,
Nicaragua or Iran.

Mr. Rovin quotes a Stallone associate as saying that wherever the film is set,
''a primary consideration'' is climate. ''It's got to be hot so Stallone can
show off his body.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
TV NEWS: WHEN EXPERIENCE TAKES OVER

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words


How does television cover the news, and who says it's news, anyway?
Coincidentally, two programs this week ask the questions, and even if their
answers aren't definitive, it's good to know that someone is thinking about the
subject. As Peter Jennings says on one of the programs, citing an ABC survey of
young people, ''Nearly 70 percent consider television news their most important
source of information.'' In fact, Mr. Jennings could have gone further. Ever
since 1963, according to the Roper Organization, more people, young and
otherwise, have said they get their news from television than anywhere else.
Television images inform our thinking, but why those particular images? ''Making
the News,'' an ABC ''Notebook Special,'' Wednesday afternoon at 4, says they
arise from a journalistic collaboration. ''Race Against Prime Time,'' Tuesday
night at 11 on Channel 13, says it's all more complicated than that. Each
program, in its way, is pretty good.

Consider ''Making the News'' first. It is meant for young people, and it is
benign. Roone Arledge, the president of ABC News; Av Westin, the producer of
''20/20''; Lynn Sherr, the correspondent, and Mr. Jennings face a panel of
youngsters and answer their questions. Most are routine; a few are provocative.
Are television reporters allowed to express their opinions? ''Ah, that's a good
question,'' Mr. Jennings says, and mentions the ''checks and balances'' in
television news. Mr. Westin does, too. We get an impression that television
reporters are not allowed to express opinions.

Nonetheless, toward the end of the program, as an example of how ABC covers
feature stories, we see a segment on the pop singer Madonna. She is, the
reporter says, ''a clever, calculating, ambitious, aggressive 25-year-old,'' who
has ''packaged herself to sell - the whole adding up to more than the individual
parts.'' This critic doesn't doubt that description for a moment, although it
does seem to be opinion and not reporting. Actually, television reporters often
express opinions, certainly more freely than newspaper reporters do, and when
Mr. Jennings and his colleagues speak about ''checks and balances,'' they are
being a little misleading. It would be more accurate to say that opinions can be
expressed on television if they are consensus opinions. The checks and balances
do not wipe out opinions; they only bring them in line with newsroom thinking.
We see some of this in ''Race Against Prime Time.''

The one-hour documentary, shown as part of Channel 13's ''Intercom'' series, is
an admirable piece of work. It gets down to particulars. It begins by showing us
segments of three ABC broadcasts - from 1982, 1980 and 1968 - all dealing with
racial violence in Liberty City, a predominately black area of Miami, Fla.
''What are these images telling us about the problems in these [kinds of]
communities?'' the narrator asks. ''What are these images telling us about
television news?''

''Race Against Prime Time'' - produced and directed by David Shulman - then
examines the coverage of Liberty City on the three television networks and their
affiliated stations in Miami. One striking thing here is that the coverage, no
matter which network or affiliate did it, looks pretty much the same. But credit
the documentary with not belaboring the obvious. Did television, even at the
local level, pay attention to Liberty City only when violence broke out? Did it
look at legitimate black grievances only when there were riots? The answer to
both questions is yes, although the documentary does not get moralistic.
Television has always been attracted to conflict, and a riot plays better than a
grievance.

Meanwhile, ''Race Against Prime Time'' asks an assignment editor at one Miami
station, ''What is this thing called news?'' Scoff if you will at the generality
of the question, the assignment editor has an interesting answer: ''Believe it
or not, there are no rules.'' Indeed, the assignment editor has a piece of the
truth. Cast your mind back to the Democratic and Republican national conventions
in the summer of 1968. The Democrats met in Chicago; the Republicans met in
Miami Beach. Which convention was accompanied by more violence?

Any reasonably attentive television viewer with a memory going back 17 years
will say the Democratic Convention, of course. Chicago, on those hot summer
nights, was full of helmeted, visored policemen, pushing, kicking and clubbing,
all in the fullness of prime time. (Actually, most of the disorders had taken
place in the afternoons, even though the film was shown at night.) On
television, as Theodore H. White would later write, Hubert H. Humphrey ''was
nominated in a sea of blood.''

Therefore, we remember Chicago as violent, and it is likely we remember the
Republicans in Miami Beach not at all. In fact, while the Republicans met,
streets really did run with blood. Six people died in nearby Liberty City;
nobody died in Chicago. ''Race Against Prime Time'' doesn't note the Republican
Convention, nor does it compare the coverage of events in Chicago and Miami, but
one wishes it had. By any traditional standard, Miami was the more violent
story. The people there weren't clubbed; they were killed. Television scarcely
noticed. The rioters were poor and black and they had no political agenda. They
had no idea of how to attract coverage, either. The Chicago demonstrators had an
agenda: They wanted to influence a political party, particularly on Vietnam, and
they knew a thing or two about news conferences, interviews and the value of
planning demonstrations weeks in advance. Liberty City couldn't compare with
that.

Thus, ''Race Against Prime Time'' is a little misleading when it seems to
suggest that television is inevitably drawn to images of violence. Sometimes
violence isn't enough; it has to fit into a framework of ideas and
pre-conceptions. What is news? ABC's ''Making the News'' indicates that
television news is something that's decided on each morning; editors and
correspondents share in a conference call. The process seems cut and dried.
''Race Against Prime Time'' says that television news, especially as it applies
to racial issues, evolves from a messier process. Image and reality may clash;
often, expedience takes over. That's closer to the truth.

''Race Against Prime Time'' ends with a coda, printed words on the screen:
''Reliable sources have told us that television images inescapably embody a
viewpoint and that traditional ideas about 'objectivity' are false and
misleading - we agree.'' This is a poor way to end the program; it's as if the
documentary is making fun of itself. On the other hand, it is something to think
about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N. ROUNDS UP MORE THAN THE USUAL SUSPECTS

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y.


Perhaps no activity of the United Nations has been more colored by politics in
the last decade than its handling of human rights. The United States has long
complained of a ''double standard,'' charging that the organization plays
favorites, concentrating on violations in countries friendly to Washington while
ignoring others.

Although the 43 member nations of the Geneva-based United Nations Commission on
Human Rights tackle dozens of items during a six-week session every spring, it
is the commission's reports on individual countries that receive global
attention at the General Assembly in the fall. Countries are chosen for
investigation by a majority vote of the commission, whose membership is
geographically distributed and therefore reflects the political biases of the
United Nations as a whole. But this year, for the first time, the General
Assembly is considering reports criticizing abuses in Afghanistan and Iran as
well as the hardy perennials - Chile, Guatemala and El Salvador. Late Friday, an
Assembly committee condemned human rights violations in all five countries. The
Assembly is expected to take a formal vote Tuesday, Human Rights Day.

South Africa's system of apartheid and its occupation of Southwest Africa and
the situation in the territories occupied by Israel are considered such grievous
violations of human rights that they are dealt with by separate bodies reporting
directly to the General Assembly. Special groups also investigate executions,
torture and disappearances worldwide.

There are, of course, many other candidates for scrutiny. Urging consideration
of the state of emergency in Nicaragua, repression in Haiti, Paraguay, Libya,
the Philippines, North Vietnam, North Korea, Rumania and Cuba and executions of
opponents of Iraq's Baathist regime, the Dutch delegate, A. C. M. Hamer, said
last week that the United Nations could do more to ''avoid the suggestion of
selectivity.''

Still, the selection of Afghanistan and Iran was hailed by Vernon A. Walters,
the chief American delegate, as ''a new beginning.'' Despite opposition from the
Soviet Union, Afghanistan made the list because so many nonaligned countries
oppose the Russian military occupation of another nonaligned state, according to
commission members. Iran has few friends to defend its interests.

Simply being investigated, however, does not always guarantee equal treatment.
Speakers in the Assembly debate have complained that the reports vary widely in
quality, partly because the mandates of United Nations investigators are
ill-defined, leaving much to their individual styles, personalities and
backgrounds. Some behave more like diplomats trying to negotiate with
governments than like critics, say some human rights advocates.

Investigators, barred from both Afghanistan and Iran, relied on testimony from
outsiders. Nevertheless, the Afghan report, written by an Austrian law
professor, Felix Ermacora, has been praised for detailing abuses since the
Russian troops went in six years ago. It concluded that the regime is guilty of
indiscriminate mass bombings and killings of civilians; mutilations and routine
torture; the forced evacuation of rural areas; the jailing without trial of tens
of thousands of political prisoners, and religious intolerance.

On the other hand, Andres Aguilar, the Venezuelan jurist who drafted the report
on Iran, has come under fire from Western diplomats, Iranian exiles and others
who say he did not adequately document the torture and executions carried out by
the regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Iran's delegate, Said Rajaie Khorassani, commended Mr. Aguilar for ''exercising
a lot of impartiality.''

Some contend that panel reports can even damage the prospects for human rights
in an investigated country. ''In some respects the report on El Salvador is
factually wrong and leaves the impression that human rights is a high priority
of the Government and the military, which is just not true,'' said Michael
Posner, executive director of the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights.

The United Nations report sees a decline in death squad murders, which it says
are not supported or protected by high-ranking officials or officers of the
Salvadoran armed forces. In its ''supplement'' critique of the U.N. document,
the Lawyers' Committee says there has been an increase in those killings, which
it believes were carried out by forces under Government control.

''We see clear evidence that key sectors in the military lack the political will
to end the abuses or to punish those responsible for past crimes,'' said the
Lawyers' Committee report. ''Unless that issue is resolved, and until the
civilian government assumes clear control over the military, we fear that El
Salvador's ongoing human rights nightmare is likely to continue.''

Americas Watch, a human rights group that monitors abuses in Latin America,
issued a similar reply to the United Nations report on Chile.

United Nations officials acknowledge that the system is not perfect. ''You
cannot detach the discussion of human rights from basic political
considerations,'' says Dr. Kurt Herndl, Assistant Secretary General for Human
Rights. ''The Human Rights Commission isn't like a court that determines whether
rights have been violated. Political alliances play a role.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of remains of burned-down house in Kabul, Afghanistan (Sygma;
Hanneke Kouwenberg and Joris Versteeg)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GORBACHEV'S MOST FAVORED NATIONS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


For a man who snubbed the Kremlin only a few years ago, Prime Minister Robert G.
Mugabe of Zimbabwe was surprisingly accommodating last week during his first
official visit to Moscow. He signed two trade and economic agreements and said
nothing about old grudges that stemmed from Soviet support for his rival, Joshua
Nkomo, during their long guerrilla war against white minority rule. ''We look to
the Soviet Union,'' Mr. Mugabe said, ''for example, inspiration and, indeed,
guidance.'' .

Mr. Mugabe was the latest in a growing list of third world leaders who have met
with Mikhail S. Gorbachev. While world attention was concentrated on the new
man's relations with the United States and President Reagan, the Soviet leader
has been quietly injecting new vigor into contacts with developing countries.
''Gorbachev has given a new burst of life, if not creativity, to Soviet foreign
policy in the third world,'' a Western diplomat said.

The most important development, potentially, may be gradual improvement in
relations with China. But Soviet officials and Western diplomats said this
process will take many years and is likely to be slowed by Soviet doubts about
Peking's adoption of Western-style economic practices. In the meantime, since
assuming power in March Mr. Gorbachev has welcomed Rajiv Gandhi of India, who
came here twice, Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya, Mengistu Haile Mariam of Ethiopia,
Hafiz al-Assad of Syria, Didier Ratsiraka of Madagascar, Le Duan of Vietnam,
Kaysone Phomvihan of Laos and Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua.

Some are longtime Soviet allies. With them, Moscow has been arranging new arms
sales and shoring up relations, which were somewhat neglected during the years
when the Kremlin was distracted by the leadership transition from Leonid I.
Brezhnev to Yuri V. Andropov to Konstantin U. Chernenko to Mr. Gorbachev. Syria
and Ethiopia, for example, are important allies in the Middle East and Africa.
Laos and Vietnam are considered members of the Soviet bloc.

But Mr. Gorbachev has also been forging new relationships. In the Persian Gulf,
Moscow established diplomatic relations in October with Oman, a country that
Washington has courted intensively because of its strategic location beside the
Strait of Hormuz. Diplomatic relations were also opened last month with the
United Arab Emirates. Trade with Saudi Arabia, which has no formal relations
with Moscow, increased 16 percent in the first half of 1985, to $235 million.

These steps, while limited, are preparing the way for long-range efforts to
expand Soviet influence in the Persian Gulf region, diplomats believe. As long
as Russian troops remain in Afghanistan, an intensely Islamic country, they
said, Moslem leaders are likely to be hostile toward the Soviet Union. Mr.
Gorbachev must also walk a careful line in the Iran-Iraq war. Soviet aid to Iraq
has been increasing, but Moscow has tried to stay on good terms with Iran.

The Soviet presence in Afghanistan also affects relations with India. Mr. Gandhi
has avoided criticizing the Soviet military involvement there but has called for
returning Afghanistan to nonaligned status. The Indian leader received trade and
investment credits totaling $1.5 billion when he visited Moscow in May. But he
has also improved his relations with Washington. Mr. Gorbachev has agreed to
visit India, probably next year.

Caution in Nicaragua

Moscow is also vigorously promoting ties with Southeast Asia. Trade is
increasing with Malaysia, a big supplier of rubber and palm oil; last month,
Yakov P. Ryabov, a Deputy Prime Minister, visited Kuala Lumpur to discuss the
sale of Soviet cargo helicopters. Not all Moscow's efforts have been successful,
however. In October, a Soviet trade delegation met a cool reception in Thailand.
Indonesia has rejected a $180 million loan to build three hospitals. Liberia
expelled all Soviet diplomats last summer.

The changes in Mr. Gorbachev's approach toward the third world, like those in
other policy areas, have been mainly a matter of style and intensity, Western
diplomats say. ''The basic goal still remains the building of ties and influence
in the hope that eventually some of these countries will transfer from a
nonaligned or pro-Western status to a more pro-Soviet position,'' a diplomat
said.

In regions of high risk, the diplomats added, Mr. Gorbachev has acted
cautiously. They cited Nicaragua, where he has cemented ties to the Sandinistas
by providing desperately needed oil and increasing the flow of Soviet arms but
has refrained from actions that could provoke a United States military response
against Nicaragua.

''As we look at the overall picture in the third world,'' an American diplomat
said after Mr. Mugabe's visit last week, ''we see a more assertive and confident
Soviet policy, but so far we don't see anything unusually alarming.'' Added
another American: ''We think the trends are still favorable to Washington
because the Soviet model is tarnished.'' Moscow cannot provide the kind of help
many of these countries want, he said. ''Many of them found they couldn't build
a prosperous economy on the basis of Soviet arms shipments.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prime Minister Robert G. Mugabe with Soviet Prime Minister
NokolaiRyzhkov

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WEIGHING THE RISKS AND RIGHTS OF HOMELESSNESS

BYLINE: By David Margolick

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


When the friends of Gary Doe, one of New York City's estimated 50,000 homeless
people, sought to retrieve him, they faced at least two problems - one
logistical, one legal. They knew that even if they managed to track him down,
they might be powerless under the law to force him to abandon his life on the
streets.

Gary (not his real name) was a 1982 graduate of Columbia Law School. He knew
that under the Constitution, in all but the most extreme cases, the homeless
have a legal right to their homelessness. And that right, civil libertarians
contend, does not evaporate whenever the mercury dips below freezing.

In January, Mayor Koch ordered the police to remove homeless people from the
streets involuntarily, if necessary, and take them to municipal hospitals during
severely cold nights. Earlier this week, as thermometers registered 27 and the
air felt 50 degrees colder, the ''cold-weather emergency'' policy went into
effect again - and this time it was designed to keep more of the homeless off
the streets more of the time.

In January and February, the policy became effective when the temperature
dropped to 5 degrees, taking the wind-chill factor into effect, and a person was
deemed to be in imminent danger of harming himself or others. Last week, the
temperature cutoff was set at 32 degrees, and self-neglect was deemed
endangerment.

By the end of the week, the police said that more than 200 homeless people had
agreed to leave the streets and had been taken to city shelters by patrol car.
At least 13 others were involuntarily transported to hospitals for psychiatric
evaluation, many of them strapped to stretchers. The shelter population reached
a record total of 8,239 single adults on Tuesday night.

As the sweep of the homeless resumed, so did criticism from civil libertarians
who contended that the homeless were losing their freedom without due process of
law.

It is a truism that government must be - as Blackstone put it in an era when
language was more blunt - ''the general guardian of all infants, idiots and
lunatics.'' Where civil libertarians and the Mayor disagree is over precisely
how far the power of the state to control the mentally ill may be extended - a
question the courts have faced but never squarely answered.

The precedent most directly on point is the 1975 case of O'Connor v. Donaldson,
brought by a man whose father committed him to the Florida State Hospital at
Chattahoochee and who was held there against his will for 15 years.

Writing for the United States Supreme Court, Justice Potter Stewart stressed
that the mentally ill could not be institutionalized indefinitely and
automatically. What had to be considered, he stated, was whether the person
posed a danger to himself or to others and whether anyone on the outside was
willing to care for him.

That is the standard that has been adopted by the courts and Legislature of New
York. The state's Mental Hygiene Law authorizes the police to take into custody
anyone ''who appears to be mentally ill'' - that is, who appears to be
substantially at risk of harming himself or others.

Of course, definitions vary. Thomas Bergdall, the general counsel of the Human
Resources Administration, suggested that a person's presence on the street
during periods of bitter cold created a presumption that he was unable to
protect himself.

''It's our experience that people are at risk, even though they may think
they're taking care of themselves,'' he said. He noted the celebrated 1982 case
of Rebecca Smith, a homeless woman living in a cardboard box who died of
hypothermia while city officials sought a court order permitting them to take
her to a city shelter.

Jane Putnam, the social worker who directs Gouverneur Hospital's Project Help, a
program for the homeless, applauded the Mayor's new policy. ''We have been
seeing people die with their rights on,'' she said.

Lawyers of the New York Civil Liberties Union counter that while a small number
of the homeless have serious mental problems and should be removed, most are
competent and have devised ways of coping with the cold that they find
preferable to the shelters. Given conditions in some city-run facilities, they
suggest, a person's preference for the streets may be a sign of mental health
rather than illness.

''You don't create an across-the-board rule that when the temperature reaches
32, anyone who refuses to go to a shelter is mentally ill and dangerous,'' said
Robert Levy, a staff lawyer for the civil liberties group.

A Matter of Choice

He noted the case of Nella King, a 59-year-old former nurse who was handcuffed
and strapped to a stretcher Tuesday after she resisted attempts to remove her
from a midtown street corner. Three days later she was released from
Metropolitan Hospital and returned to the streets, where she had already
survived two winters.

Civil libertarians would be the first to admit that the roundup of the reluctant
homeless hardly rises to the scale - or raises the same level of concern - as,
say, the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II or the mass
arrests of the Vietnam War era. Thus far, of course, the number of persons
removed involuntarily from New York's streets has barely broken into the double
figures.

Mr. Levy argued, however, that a right to decent shelter is in itself a civil
liberty, one to which the city committed itself four years ago in a consent
decree.

''The real civil liberties issue here is not the one raised by those very few
who are being taken to the hospitals against their will,'' he said. ''It's the
ever-increasing number of people who have no safe and decent place to sleep at
night.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of one of New York City's homeless (NYT/Larry C. Morris)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS 1985;
NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 9087 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1984. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Quoted
comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

ALONG WITH YOUTH: Hemingway, the Early Years. By Peter Griffin. (Oxford,
$17.95.) A ''wonderful and intimate book'' that ''brings to life the young
Hemingway with all his charm, vitality, good looks [and] passionate dedication
to writing.''

THE AMATEURS. By David Halberstam. (Morrow, $14.95.) The ''deftly told story''
of the ''quest of four oarsmen to become the United States's single sculler in
the 1984 Olympics.''

ANOTHER NAME FOR MADNESS. By Marion Roach. (Houghton Mifflin, $14.95.) ''A
devastatingly vivid and touching picture of what it is like to live with a loved
one'' suffering from Alzheimer's disease.

BEFORE THE TRUMPET: Young Franklin Roosevelt, 1882-1905. By Geoffrey C. Ward
(Harper & Row, $19.95.) This ''multigenerational family saga'' begins ''long
before Franklin Delano Roosevelt's birth in 1882 and ends on his wedding night
in 1905 . . . and provides a richly evocative description of the cloistered and
comfortable existence of the old New York families whose mid-19th-century
estates lined the Hudson River.''

BRIGHAM YOUNG: American Moses. By Leonard J. Arrington. (Knopf, $24.95.)
''Replaces older, badly flawed biographies and gives readers as good a picture
as they are likely to get of the man who assumed leadership'' of the Mormons in
1844.

CAVOUR. By Denis Mack Smith. (Knopf, $18.95.) An ''extraordinary saga of
deception, ruthlessness, blunders and turns of fortune in the life of the man
who more than anyone else brought about the unification of Italy in 1861.''

CHAIM WEITZMANN: The Making of a Zionist Leader. By Jehuda Reinharz. (Oxford,
$29.95.) This first of a projected two-volume biography is ''a massively
detailed report on the perplexing vagaries'' of Weitzmann's life up to 1914.

CHAPLIN: His Life and Art. By David Robinson. (McGraw-Hill, $24.95.) The Times
of London film critic's ''account of [Charlie] Chaplin's career as film maker,
actor, director, writer, husband, producer, composer, lover and tycoon is . . .
certainly the major biography thus far.''

THE CHIEF: A Memoir of Fathers and Sons. By Lance Morrow. (Random House,
$16.95.) The relationship between Lance Morrow, a successful journalist, and his
father, Hugh, a top aide to Nelson Rockefeller, is explored with ''clear-eyed
candor and writing skill that reveal both passion and confusion.''

THE DANGEROUS SUMMER. By Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $17.95.) A posthumously
edited version of Hemingway's 1959 account (parts were published in Life in
1960) of a summer-long duel between Spain's two leading matadors.

DUST TRACKS ON A ROAD: An Autobiography. By Zora Neale Hurston. (University of
Illinois, Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $8.95.) Three chapters have been restored to
this edition of the influential black novelist's 1942 autobiography, marked by
its ''verdant language and twin voices.''

FDR. By Ted Morgan. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) This ''one-volume biography''
provides ''a fascinating three-dimensional portrait'' of ''a great man with
human frailties.''

FRANK AND MAISIE: A Memoir With Parents. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon & Schuster,
$17.95.) The author's affectionate recollections of ''his ebullient Australian
father and his downright and unconventional English mother . . . the leading
Roman Catholic publishers of their day.''

THE FRINGES OF POWER: 10 Downing Street Diaries 1939-1955. By John Colville.
(Norton, $25.) ''The best, and . . . likely to be the last, of the personal
memoirs dealing with the direction on the Allied side of World War II at the
highest level,'' by Winston Churchill's secretary.

GIACOMETTI. By James Lord. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) A ''fascinating''
gossipy biography that shows that the Swiss sculptor was ''one of the few
artists of our time to lead a life, rather than to make a career, and to pursue
art as a religion as well as a vocation.''

HENRY JAMES: A Life. By Leon Edel. (Harper & Row, $24.95.) A one-volume
condensation and revision of the author's five-volume work, ''one of the most
ambitious of modern life histories.''

IVY: The Life of I. Compton-Burnett. By Hillary Spurling. (Knopf, $22.95.) Ivy
Compton-Burnett, the reclusive British novelist, died in 1969, and this
''voluminous'' biography is ''intelligent, richly detailed, warm and
sympathetic.''

LOUISE BOGAN: A Portrait. By Elizabeth Frank. (Knopf, $24.95.) A ''thoughtful''
examination of the life and work of Louise Bogan (1897-1970), ''a turbulent
woman whom Auden in the 1940's considered 'the best critic in America' and one
of its best poets.''

ORSON WELLES: A Biography. By Barbara Leaming. (Viking, $19.95.) This authorized
biography, published before Welles's death in October, ''paints [him] as a
sometimes difficult but ultimately dear person, an enormous talent done in by
the vicissitudes of [movie] studio economics.''

OUR THREE SELVES: The Life of Radclyffe Hall. By Michael Baker. (Morrow,
$17.95.) A ''fine new biography'' of the ''well-regarded middlebrow'' British
novelist and lesbian advocate.

ROBERT CAPA: A Biography. By Richard Whelan. (Knopf, $19.95.) ''As portrayed in
Richard Whelan's fact-packed, fast-paced biography,'' Robert Capa ''was a
lovable libertine who became the world's greatest war photographer.''

THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON. By Michael Mott. (Houghton Mifflin,
$24.95.) An authorized biography of the influential monk and author written ''in
clear and unpretentious and vigorous prose.''

THE TRUE CONFESSIONS OF AN ALBINO TERRORIST. By Breyten Breytenbach. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) The political and literary memoirs of ''the
pre-eminent living Afrikaans poet,'' who spent seven years in a South African
prison.

T. S. ELIOT: A Life. By Peter Ackroyd. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) Given the
fact that Peter Ackroyd was not allowed to quote from the poet's unpublished
works and letters and was limited in what he could quote from Eliot's published
works, this is ''as good a biography as we have any right to expect.''

A VIETCONG MEMOIR. By Truong Nhu Tang, with David Chanoff and Doan Van Toai.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) This memoir by a ''dedicated nationalist
who was never a Communist but was willing to work with the Communists'' is about
''the death of a dream, a dream of an independent, peaceful and democratic
Vietnam.''

WALLACE STEVENS: A Mythology of Self. By Milton J. Bates (University of
California, $24.95.) A ''comprehensive biological study'' that ''documents how
the poet's life ran a soberly determined course worthy of his most stolid
Pennsylvania-Dutch ancestor.''

WOMAN IN THE CRESTED KIMONO: The Life of Shibue Io and Her Family Drawn From
Mori Ogai's ''Shibue Chusai.'' By Edwin McClellan. (Yale, $15.95.) Mori Ogai's
''Shibue Chusai'' (1916) is the ''chronicle of a scholarly doctor who lived in
the last decades of premodern Japan'' and who died in 1858. Edwin McClellan
focuses on the life of one character in the book - Shibue Io, ''a remarkable
woman'' who was Chusai's fourth wife and who outlived him by 26 years.

YEAGER: An Autobiography. By Chuck Yeager and Leo Janos. (Bantam, $17.95.)
''Written in a disarmingly flat, down-home style,'' this story of the famed test
pilot ''may read like a boy's adventure fantasy but is plain, documented
truth.''

Children's Books

BEYOND THE CHOCOLATE WAR. By Robert Cormier. (Knopf, $11.95.) ''Very much a
sequel'' to ''The Chocolate War,'' ''a favorite with teen-age readers,'' this
book takes up the story of events at the Trinity School, where terror reigns.
(Ages 12 and up.) COME SING, JIMMY JO. By Katherine Paterson. (Lodestar/Dutton,
$12.95.) ''An engaging fantasy'' about a boy in a family of country singers and
what it might be like to become famous. (Ages 10 and up.) ONCE THERE WAS A TREE.
By Natalia Romanova. Illustrated by Gennady Spirin. (Dial, $10.95.) A
contemporary Soviet ''pro-environmental morality tale,'' containing ''luminous
nostalgic landscapes, animal portraits and elegant detailing.'' (Ages 5 and up.)
THE PEOPLE COULD FLY: American Black Folktales. By Virginia Hamilton.
Illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon. (Knopf, $12.95.) An ''extraordinary and
wonderful'' retelling of Afro-American folk tales, some familiar to a general
audience, some not. (Ages 8 to 12.) SARAH, PLAIN AND TALL. By Patricia
MacLachlan. (Charlotte Zolotow/Harper & Row, $10.) ''An exquisite, sometimes
painfully touching little tale of a lonely, widowed, late-19th-century prairie
dweller, his two children and the laconic [woman] from Maine who comes to share
their life.'' (Ages 8 to 10.) SEASONS OF SPLENDOUR: Tales, Myths & Legends of
India. By Madhur Jaffrey. Illustrated by Michael Foreman. (Atheneum, $15.95.) A
book that ''leads us through the Hindu year with a memoir and the cycle of
stories told by the elders in Miss Jaffrey's Brahmin household'' in Delhi.
Beautifully told and illustrated. (Ages 5 and up.) THE STORY OF MRS. LOVEWRIGHT
AND PURRLESS HER CAT. By Lore Segal. Illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky. (Knopf,
$12.95.) ''A brief, enchanting, alarming and funny-profound'' book about chilly
Mrs. Lovewright, who ''fails to extract coziness from her cat.'' Wickedly
illustrated. (Ages 5 to 9.) WHAT'S INSIDE: The Alphabet Book. By Satoshi
Kitamura. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) A bewitchingly imaginative alphabet
book in which improbable things are revealed in the proper sequence by a
Japanese-born artist working in England. (Ages 3 to 5.) WHISKERS & RHYMES.
Written and illustrated by Arnold Lobel. (Greenwillow, $13.) A delightful
collection of poems, mostly personified by cats, that ''stand a good chance of
being . . . sung by generations of children to come.'' (Ages 5 to 8.) THE YEAR
IT RAINED. By Crescent Dragonwagon. (Macmillan, $12.95.) A fine novel that faces
''unflinchingly the anguished and so often unsuccessful attempts to get past all
the precious but heavy baggage of love between mother and child.'' (Ages 12 and
up.) Crime BRIARPATCH. By Ross Thomas. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) In his
''typical . . . sophisticated style,'' ''one of the best storytellers around''
sends a Government agent to a small Southern city where a car bomb has killed
the agent's policewoman sister.

THE DUTCH BLUE ERROR. By William G. Tapply. (Scribners, $12.95.) Brady Coyle,
the Boston lawyer for the very rich, enters the world of philately. This
''smooth'' tale provides ''a great deal of fun.''

FLETCH WON. By Gregory Mcdonald. (Warner, $14.95.) ''The Kurt Vonnegut of the
mystery story'' recalls the first reportorial triumph of Irwin Maurice Fletcher,
foe of sham, hypocrisy and murderers of major donors to art museums.

MR. YESTERDAY. By Elliott Chaze. (Scribners, $12.95.) Two believable Alabamians
- a newspaper editor and a washed-up reporter, Mr. Yesterday - investigate a
murder tied to a nuclear waste dump. An often funny book that ''achieves a
bang-up ending.''

PRIMA DONNA AT LARGE. By Barbara Paul. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) In an ''unusually
pleasant divertissement,'' Geraldine Farrar, the turn-of-the-century
Metropolitan Opera star, figures out who put the ammonia in the French
baritone's throat spray.

SARATOGA HEADHUNTER. By Stephen Dobyns. (Viking, $13.95.) A jockey planning to
expose race fixing in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., is beheaded in the home of a
nice-guy private eye. For all its ''feeling . . . of small-town quietness,'' the
third Charlie Bradshaw mystery has ''absolutely no flab.''

SLEEPING DOG. By Dick Lochte. (Arbor House, $15.95.) Leo G. Bloodworth,
50-year-old specialist in missing persons, joins forces with Serendipity
Dahlquist, 14-year-old owner of a missing dog. Mr. Lochte's first novel ''should
be in strong contention for an Edgar.''

SWEET JUSTICE. By Jerry Oster. (Harper & Row, $13.95.) ''One of the most
brilliant procedurals of the last few years'' begins with the murders of a
would-be molester in New York's subways and a beautiful, unscrupulous television
anchor.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

AFRICA: The People and Politics of an Emerging Continent. By Sanford J. Ungar
(Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) ''This thoughtful safari through sub-Saharan Africa
. . . generally maps out the history and salient modern features of the place
with cool clarity and without dogma or pontification.''

BLACK BOX: KAL 007 and the Superpowers. By Alexander Dallin. (University of
California, $14.95.) ''Through careful, nonideological analysis of the known
facts,'' the author ''reaches the disturbing conclusion that mechanical or human
error alone almost surely did not cause [Korean Air Lines flight 007] to stray''
over Soviet territory before it was shot down.

BREAKING WITH MOSCOW. By Arkady N. Shevchenko. (Knopf, $18.95.) The
''highest-level Soviet official ever to defect to the West'' offers ''some gems
of history'' as he probes the nature of the Soviet Government and its leaders.

THE BUTTON: The Pentagon's Strategic Command and Control System. By Daniel Ford.
(Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Drawing ''attention to some fundamental problems of
nuclear strategy,'' the author introduces ''the layman to the world of radars,
surveillance satellites and nuclear command posts.''

THE CANADIANS. By Andrew H. Malcolm. (Times Books, $17.95.) ''For many
Americans,'' this book by The Times's former Toronto correspondent ''will be a
helpful, timely and tightly packed introduction'' to our northern neighbors.

A CERTAIN PEOPLE: American Jews and Their Lives Today. By Charles E. Silberman.
(Summit, $19.95.) An ''interesting and comprehensive but perhaps too
optimistic'' study of the remarkable success of Jews in the United States that
is ''both an objective and a personal work.''

THE CITY OF JOY. By Dominique Lapierre. Translated by Kathryn Spink. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) ''Brilliant reportage'' about ''suffering, sorrow, cruelty and
deprivation'' in Calcutta.

A COAT OF MANY COLORS: Pages From Jewish Life. By Israel Shenker. (Doubleday,
$19.95.) The themes of this ''carefully written book about Jewish survival and
the hope of redemption'' move ''from God and the sacred texts through history .
. . to the Promised Land.''

DISTANT NEIGHBORS: A Portrait of the Mexicans. By Alan Riding. (Knopf, $18.95.)
Those ''who wish to understand the 'many Mexicos' of wealth and poverty, of
authoritarianism and democratic experimentation . . . might well begin'' with
this book by a New York Times correspondent.

ECONOMICS IN THE REAL WORLD. By Leonard Silk. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The
economics columnist for The Times is ''very good on the interplay between
politics and economics, on the way rational policy gets worn down by rubbing up
against political rocks and hard places.''

THE EUDAEMONIC PIE. By Thomas A. Bass. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The
compelling story of ''a group of young men and women associated with West Coast
universities'' who, during the 1970's, devised a ''scheme to break the bank in
Las Vegas.''

FINAL CUT: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of ''Heaven's Gate.'' By Steven
Bach. (Morrow, $19.95.) A ''readable and enlightening'' account of the movie
business in general and the $36-million film fiasco in particular, that would
itself make a good movie.

FUNNY MONEY. By Mark Singer. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''A down-and-dirty look at the
people who fed off the boom in oil and gas exploration'' in the late 1970's and
the collapse of the Penn Square bank.

HOLY DAYS: The World of a Hasidic Family. By Lis Harris. (Summit, $16.95.) A
''beautiful portrait'' of an ultra-Orthodox Jewish family from Crown Heights,
Brooklyn, told ''with precision and elegance.''

ILLITERATE AMERICA. By Jonathan Kozol. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A passionate yet
''carefully documented'' examination of the plight of ''60 million illiterate
and semiliterate American adults.''

THE MANTLE OF THE PROPHET: Religion and Politics in Iran. By Roy Mottahedeh.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A work of ''reconciliation and reflection,'' this
book rises above ''the current feud between Iran and the West [and] leaves open
the possibility of a world beyond one of rage and bitterness.''

THE NATURE AND LOGIC OF CAPITALISM. By Robert L. Heilbroner. (Norton, $15.95.)
The author of ''The Worldly Philosophers'' ''sees capitalism as having yielded
enormous achievements''; he also sees it ''as having fatal flaws.''

NICARAGUA: Revolution in the Family. By Shirley Christian. (Random House,
$19.95.) ''Very much a reporter's book,'' this study of what happened in
revolutionary Nicaragua by a Pulitzer Prize-winner, now a reporter for The New
York Times, focuses on American policy and missed opportunities.

THE PENTAGON AND THE ART OF WAR: The Question of Military Reform. By Edward N.
Luttwak. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''The author, a hawkish advocate of
increased defense spending but nonetheless a severe critic of the military
establishment, makes a very persuasive case for radical and fundamental reform''
of America's military.

THE SCHOOLS WE DESERVE: Reflections on the Educational Crises of Our Times. By
Diane Ravitch. (Basic Books, $19.95.) In this collection of 21 essays written
within the last decade, Diane Ravitch ''brings to bear a keen intelligence
working in the service of a neoconservative educational outlook.''

SECRECY AND DEMOCRACY: The CIA in Transition. By Stansfield Turner. (Houghton
Mifflin, $16.95.) A ''short, interesting and highly unusual memoir'' by the
director of Central Intelligence from 1977 to 1981.

SO FAR FROM GOD: A Journey to Central America. By Patrick Marnham. (Elisabeth
Sifton/ Viking, $17.95.) ''A book of travels . . . reflecting the whims and
incidents'' experienced by a British reporter ''as he wandered overland down
California, through Mexico and into Central America.''

WAITING: The Whites of South Africa. By Vincent Crapanzano. (Random House,
$19.95.) This account of the anthropologist author's encounters with white South
Africans in a small country town in 1980-81 is ''insightful into the processes
of deception and self-deception.''

WITH ALL DISRESPECT: More Uncivil Liberties. By Calvin Trillin. (Ticknor &
Fields, $14.95.) A collection of 45 of the author's ''very funny'' satirical
pieces from The Nation and one from Vanity Fair.

THE ZERO-SUM SOLUTION: Building a World-Class American Economy. By Lester C.
Thurow. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) In ''seeking to create a new platform for
Democrats'' and to build a stronger American economy, the author proposes, among
other things, a value-added tax and a $1-a-gallon tax on gasoline. He ''deserves
credit for calling it as he sees it: 'No pain, no gain.' ''

Essays & Criticism

A BOOK OF ONE'S OWN: People and Their Diaries. By Thomas Mallon. (Ticknor &
Fields, $15.95.) A study of diaries and their authors that ''shuttles back and
forth through the centuries, establishing bonds among all of those solitary
figures at their journals.''

CONVERSATIONS WITH AMERICAN WRITERS. By Charles Ruas. (Knopf, $17.95.) In these
14 interviews, Charles Ruas ''displays the essential qualities of any first-rate
interviewer: a thorough knowledge of, an irrepressible curiosity about, a
profound sympathy for'' writers and their work.

EDMUND WILSON. By David Castronovo. (Ungar, $15.50.) This ''account of Wilson's
career is concise, lucid and oddly - for an academic book -convivial.''

THE FLOWER AND THE LEAF: A Contemporary Record of American Writing Since 1941.
By Malcolm Cowley. (Viking, $25.) A ''splendid'' collection of literary essays
and reminiscences.

THE FORCE OF POETRY. By Christopher Ricks. (Oxford, $29.95.) ''In this gathering
of essays, the eminent English critic . . . looks at poetry over a considerable
range [and] assures us through clarifying analysis of its power and force in our
lives.''

THE GLORIOUS ONES: Classical Music's Legendary Performers. By Harold C.
Schonberg. (Times Books, $24.95.) An ''entertaining survey of vocal and
instrumental greatness'' by the former senior music critic of The New York
Times.

HABITATIONS OF THE WORD: Essays. By William H. Gass. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
The philosopher-novelist William H. Gass's ''large reading and . . . intense,
animated philosophical mind'' are on display in his first collection of essays
in seven years.

MICROWORLDS: Writings on Science Fiction and Fantasy. By Stanislaw Lem. Edited
by Franz Rottensteiner. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.)
These essays by the Polish novelist, essayist and ''vigorous opponent of science
fiction as currently practiced'' reveal ''a brilliant mind with a hearty
appetite for science, philosophy and literature.''

NOT EXACTLY WHAT I HAD IN MIND. By Roy Blount Jr. (Atlantic Monthly, $14.95.)
Recent essays that add up to a ''funny and engaging book, with occasional
poignant and serious moments.''

OCCASIONAL PROSE. By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.)
''Everywhere'' in these essays, reviews and reminiscences of writers and
friends, written during the last 15 years, ''appear bracing opinions tartly
expressed.''

AN OMELETTE AND A GLASS OF WINE. By Elizabeth David. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking,
$18.95.) In this collection of food journalism written during the last 35 years,
Elizabeth David demonstrates her ''unparalleled feeling for the social ambiance
of a dish.''

OPERA & IDEAS: From Mozart to Strauss. By Paul Robinson. (Harper & Row, $22.95.)
A historian places opera ''firmly in intellectual history and [shows] in a more
than cursory fashion, how attitudes toward society, culture and politics shape
great operatic works.''

PLAUSIBLE PREJUDICES: Essays on American Writing. By Joseph Epstein, (Norton,
$17.95.) Irreverent essays from such periodicals as Commentary and The New
Criterion contend that ''American literary culture is in bad shape.''

THE REVENGE OF THE PHILISTINES: Art and Culture, 1972-1984. By Hilton Kramer.
(Free Press, $25.) The ''account of art's recent past'' in these 84 essays by a
former chief art critic of The Times is ''original and complex.''

RHYTHM-A-NING: Jazz Tradition and Innovation in the '80s. By Gary Giddins.
(Oxford, $17.95.) These essays by a writer for The Village Voice are marked by
the author's ''graceful prose and the breadth and depth of his critical
understanding.''

SECRET GARDENS: A Study of the Golden Age of Children's Literature. By Humphrey
Carpenter. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) What at first seems ''a series of
pleasant and informally presented literary discussions of the classics of
British children's literature'' turns out to have ''a stimulating polemical edge
that is also . . . fiercely argumentative.''

TABLE OF CONTENTS. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.95.) The author
''is in top form, and his voice fairly constant'' in these ''eight essays
originally published in The New Yorker between 1980 and 1984'' that range from
bears to small-town family doctors.

Fiction

THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $16.95.) ''The ambiguity of
family happiness and unhappiness'' is one of the ''persistent concerns'' of Anne
Tyler's seven novels, and this is ''one of [her] best.''

ALWAYS COMING HOME. By Ursula K. LeGuin. (Harper & Row, Cloth, $50. Paper, $25.)
''With high invention and deep intelligence,'' this novel, which comes with a
tape cassette of songs and dances, ''presents, in alternating narratives, poems
and expositions,'' the author's ''most consistently lyric and luminous book . .
. an entire ethnography of the far future.''

ANNIE JOHN. By Jamaica Kincaid. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) Jamaica
Kincaid ''has packed a lot of valuable insight about the complex relationship
between mothers and daughters into this slender novel of interrelated stories.''

THE ASSAULT. By Harry Mulisch. Translated by Claire Nicolas White. (Pantheon,
$13.95.) This ''parable of war'' is the ''first novel to appear in America by
one of the Netherlands' most revered, award-winning novelists.''

THE BEANS OF EGYPT, MAINE. By Carolyn Chute. (Ticknor & Fields, Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $7.95.) ''Startling and original,'' this first novel is about an
incestuous family in rural Maine.

BETSEY BROWN. By Ntozake Shange. (St. Martin's, $12.95.) ''More straightforward
and less idiosyncratic than [Ntozake] Shange's first novel, 'Sassafrass, Cypress
& Indigo,' 'Betsey Brown' creates a place that is both new and familiar, where
both black and white readers will feel at home.''

THE CALL. By John Hersey. (Knopf, $19.95.) In the story of ''a farm boy from
upstate New York who . . . undergoes a religious conversion [and] dedicates his
life to the task of winning China for Christ,'' John Hersey ''manages to strike
universal notes.''

CARACOLE. By Edmund White. (Dutton, $17.95.) ''Shrewdness and self-awareness
ooze from every intricate sentence, every linguistic arabesque and hothouse
epigram'' in this novel, which is framed around ''a series of sexual encounters
in an unnamed capital city.''

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC. By William Gaddis. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) The
author's third novel in 30 years is shorter, more accessible, ''but as mazily
and mercilessly adroit'' as ''The Recognitions'' and ''JR.''

THE CIDER HOUSE RULES. By John Irving. (Morrow, $18.95.) ''By turns witty,
tenderhearted, fervent and scarifying,'' this novel, about a New England
abortionist who runs an orphanage, is ''an example, now rare, of the courage of
imaginative ardor.''

COLLECTED STORIES. By Tennessee Williams. (New Directions, $19.95.) ''Given this
chronologically arranged and presumably ultimate collection, any fair account of
Williams's fiction must surely agree that six or eight pieces are of an
invigorating individual mastery.''

CONTINENTAL DRIFT. By Russell Banks. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A bleak novel that
''charts, in alternating chapters, the eventually intersecting paths of two
people desperately on the move'' - a young man from New Hampshire and a Haitian
woman.

THE CUNNING LITTLE VIXEN. By Rudolf Tesnohlidek. Translated by Tatiana Firkusny,
Maritza Morgan and Robert T. Jones. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) ''The
first English translation of Rudolf Tesnohlidek's story . . . with pictures by
Maurice Sendak, is a beautiful book to look at and a pleasurable one to read.''

DO LORD REMEMBER ME. By Julius Lester. (Holt, $13.95.) The Rev. Joshua Smith,
known to his followers ''as the Singing Evangelist and to one white newspaper
reporter . . . as 'The Colored Billy Graham,' '' examines his life in this
''neatly balanced, well modulated'' novel.

EQUAL DISTANCE. By Brad Leithauser. (Knopf, $17.95.) This first novel about
three Americans in Japan ''is like an update of Hemingway's 'Sun Also Rises' - a
revision of the expatriate theme that incorporates what we've learned in a half
century's pursuit of disillusionment.''

THE FIFTH SON. By Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $15.95.) ''The experience of surviving
the Holocaust falls like a curtain between father and son'' in this novel as the
son ''attempts to break through his father's unmerciful emotional veil.''

THE FINISHING SCHOOL. By Gail Godwin. (Viking, $16.95.) In a ''finely nuanced,
compassionate psychological novel'' about the friendship between an adolescent
girl and a middle-aged woman, the author makes ''a wise contribution to the
literature of growing up.''

FISKADORO. By Denis Johnson. (Knopf, $14.95.) This ''startlingly original book
is an examination of the cataclysmic imagination, a parable of apocalypse that
is always present and precedes redemption in a cycle of death and birth,
forgetting and remembering.''

FOREIGN LAND. By Jonathan Raban. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $16.95.) ''Few first
novels . . . establish their authors as novelists with such authority'' as this
one about ''contemporary England as confronted by an elderly Englishman who has
spent his adult life abroad.''

FORTUNE'S DAUGHTER. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $15.95.) ''This novel's great
strength lies in its two heroines, who both find themselves drawn, without
plans, hopes or full understanding, into the inevitably mythological process of
pregnancy and childbirth.''

FOXYBABY. By Elizabeth Jolley. (Viking, $14.95.) In this ''delicious and
sustaining'' novel, ''a random collection of human beings find themselves in a
remote place and there discover unfamiliar and surprising things, to return to
the world changed in some way.''

GALAPAGOS. By Kurt Vonnegut. (Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte, $16.95.) ''The story,
sort of, of a second Noah's ark, a 1986 nature cruise . . . that in the wake of
planetary catastrophe . . . is fated to land on the Galapagos Islands and
perpetuate the human race.''

GLITZ. By Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $14.95.) The adventures of a Miami
policeman in Puerto Rico and Atlantic City come ''to a smashing and satisfying
conclusion.''

THE GOOD TERRORIST. By Doris Lessing. (Knopf, $16.95.) ''Doris Lessing has
returned to Earth'' from her ''Canopus in Argos'' novels in this tale of a
''daughter of upper-middle-class parents'' who gets mixed up with leftist
radicals.

GREASY LAKE & OTHER STORIES. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $16.95.) For the
characters in this ''brilliant new collection'' of stories, ''life in
contemporary America is . . . filled with peaks of exhilaration and excitement
but also fraught with hidden dangers and potential embarrassments.''

THE HARD KNOCKER'S LUCK. By William Murray. (Viking, $14.95.) A fast-paced
''entertainment'' about ''a race track, art thievery and forgery, shoplifting, a
melancholy quasi-love affair . . . with a few additional picaresque moments of
greed, comedy and melodrama.''

HER FIRST AMERICAN. By Lore Segal. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''In her mix of history,
memory and invention, and the ruthless honesty which has always characterized
her work,'' Lore Segal ''shows us ourselves, and reveals herself.''

HOME TRUTHS: Sixteen Stories. By Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $17.95.) These
''powerful stories,'' set mostly in the 1930's and 40's, represent some of the
''best work'' by this Canadian writer who now lives in Paris.

HONORABLE MEN. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) ''In his
attempt to come to grips with a longstanding American obsession -how the values
. . . of our Puritan forefathers still permeate some of their descendants . . .
- [Louis] Auchincloss adds a significant work to his long and considerable
canon.''

HOTEL DU LAC. By Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $13.95.) The author's ''most
absorbing novel'' chronicles a single woman's vacation at a hotel on the shore
of a Swiss lake.

THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS. By Isabel Allende. Translated by Magda Bogin. (Knopf,
$17.95.) ''With this spectacular first novel,'' Isabel Allende becomes ''the
first woman to approach on the same scale as [male Latin American writers] the
tormented patriarchal world of traditional Hispanic society.''

THE IMAGE AND OTHER STORIES. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$17.95.) Short stories that form ''a world of unruly lust, overwhelming
jealousy, love that carries beyond the grave'' and ''take a reader in and pull
him along at a fever pitch.''

IN COUNTRY. By Bobbie Ann Mason. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) This first novel about
purging the aftereffects of the Vietnam War is ''an exceptional achievement, at
once humane, comic and moving.''

LAKE WOBEGON DAYS. By Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $17.95.) A ''comic memoir'' of
the author's hometown, ''fictionalized under the name Lake Wobegon, Minn.,'' and
popularized on his American Public Radio program ''A Prairie Home Companion.''

LANARK: A Life in 4 Books. By Alasdair Gray. (Braziller, $20.) First published
in England in 1981, this Scottish writer's first novel is ''a quirky
crypto-Calvinist 'Divine Comedy,' often harsh but never mean.''

LATER THE SAME DAY. By Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.) The
author's third collection of short stories is marked by ''honesty and
guilelessness'' and an ''artfully intricate prose style full of surprises.''

LINDEN HILLS. By Gloria Naylor. (Ticknor & Fields, $16.95.) In her
''provocative, iconoclastic'' second novel, Gloria Naylor has adapted Dante's
''Inferno'' for ''a tale of lost black souls trapped in the American dream.''

LONESOME DOVE. By Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) Larry McMurtry's
''antimythic groundwork - his refusal to glorify the West - works to reinforce
the strength of the traditionally mythic parts of [this novel] by making it far
more credible than the old familiar horse operas.''

LOVE ALWAYS. By Ann Beattie. (Random House, $16.95.) In her ''most comic novel
thus far,'' Ann Beattie ''poses some hard questions about her own art within a
structure drolly modeled on the soap opera.''

THE LOVER. By Marguerite Duras. Translated by Barbara Bray. (Pantheon, $11.95.)
A novel of ''unremitting intensity'' about the sexual initiation of a young
woman living in Saigon in the 1930's.

A MAGGOT. By John Fowles. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A difficult but rewarding
''unconventional'' novel in the Fowlesian tradition.

MEN AND ANGELS. By Mary Gordon. (Random House, $16.95.) ''With subtlety and
feeling,'' Mary Gordon contrasts ''a moral life, a religious life, an artistic
life, a family life.'' These are ''at times mutually exclusive ways of being and
of seeing.''

MIDAIR. By Frank Conroy. (Seymour Lawrence/ Dutton, $15.95.) In these short
stories, ''as in 'Stop-Time,' [Frank] Conroy writes exceptionally well, often
painfully so, about children, especially the relationship between sons and
fathers,''

MONEY: A Suicide Note. By Martin Amis. (Viking, $16.95.) John Self, ''a
half-American Brit,'' self-destructs in this comic escapade of ''trans-Atlantic
urban show-biz patter and smart literary patterns.''

MUSEUM PIECES. By Elizabeth Tallent. (Knopf, $14.95.) An ''engrossing and
beautifully expressed'' first novel that examines ''the debris of a marriage''
between an archeologist and a painter.

NOTHING HAPPENS IN CARMINCROSS. By Benedict Kiely. (Godine, $16.95.) This novel
''brims with fire, bombs and dead men, much to the pain and woe of [its hero],
who was born in the North of Ireland, like [Benedict] Kiely, but who has grown
up as an Irish-American.''

THE OLD GRINGO. By Carlos Fuentes. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) The author's ''most ambitious novel, the first in
which he attempts to integrate all that he knows and call up of history, myth
and thought.''

A PERFECT PEACE. By Amos Oz. Translated by Hillel Halkin. (Helen & Kurt
Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.) In his ''most powerful'' novel, about
''a generational conflict over the meaning of the Israeli experience,'' Amos Oz
''examines the disjunctions of history and the ways in which a people . . .
transcend such divisions.''

REASONS TO LIVE. By Amy Hempel. (Knopf, $11.95.) These ''conspicuously
contemporary'' stories, ''more than half of which have never been published
before,'' exhibit ''a kind of minimalism that robs us of nothing, that has room
for the largest themes.''

SELF-HELP: Stories. By Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $13.95.) A ''funny, cohesive and
moving'' collection in which the author ''examines the idea that lives can be
improved like golf swings and in so doing finds a distinctive, scalpel-sharp
fictional voice that probes . . . the depths of our fears and yearnings.''

A SHORT HISTORY OF A SMALL PLACE. By T. R. Pearson (Linden/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) Neely, N.C., is the setting of this ''beautiful'' first novel that
''despite being mired in melancholy'' is ''remarkably funny.''

SLOW DANCING. By Elizabeth Benedict. (Knopf, $15.95.) A first novel whose
''strength is in its sympathetic portraits of three well-meaning people more
comfortable in their public roles than in their private lives.''

SMALL WORLD: An Academic Romance. By David Lodge. (Macmillan, $15.95.) ''An
exuberant, marvelously funny . . . tale of professors on the make'' that
''suggests that despite the depredations of critics, the capacity of art to give
pleasure still endures.''

SOLSTICE. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton, $15.95.) This story describing the
friendship between two women by a novelist ''never squeamish about looking into
the dark places of the soul'' will ''dispel a lot of comforting ideas about the
nature of women.''

STANLEY ELKIN'S THE MAGIC KINGDOM. By Stanley Elkin. (Dutton, $16.95.) Seven
British children with fatal diseases visit Walt Disney World, and the author
''strips away the sentimentality and replaces it with an honest look at the
grotesque possibilities we all carry around and prefer not to see.''

THE STORIES OF MURIEL SPARK. (Dutton, $18.95.) If the author, one of the most
''gifted and innovative'' British novelists of her generation, ''does not
consistently impress one as being a short-story writer of the same caliber, it
may be because the bold economy of her novelistic technique sometimes seems like
a cutting of corners in the more confined space of the short story.''

THINGS INVISIBLE TO SEE. By Nancy Willard. (Knopf, $14.95.) In her first novel,
Nancy Willard ''transforms reality into something endlessly magical'' as she
''creates a world in which there is a constant interplay between the living and
the dead, between things visible and invisible.''

UNDER THE BANYAN TREE AND OTHER STORIES. By R. K. Narayan. (Elisabeth Sifton/
Viking, $16.95.) A collection of 28 stories by the Indian English-language
writer, ''an almost placid, good-natured storyteller whose work derives its
charm from the immense calm out of which he writes.''

WAITING FOR THE END OF THE WORLD. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields,
$16.95.) This second novel ''digs deep into the underside of New York City and
comes up with a vision of urban life that is by turns dizzying, real and
exaggerated.''

WHITE NOISE. By Don DeLillo. (Elisabeth Sifton/ Viking, $16.95.) A small college
town in the Middle West is threatened by an industrial accident in this ''timely
and frightening'' novel, which ''succeeds . . . brilliantly'' in documenting
modern-day America's ''epidemic evasiveness and apprehension.''

WORLD'S FAIR. By E. L. Doctorow. (Random House, $17.95.) This ''peculiar hybrid
of novel and memoir'' about a young boy, very much like the author, growing up
in the Bronx in the 1930's, suggests that ''the process of remembering is by
definition a process of invention.''

ZUCKERMAN BOUND: A Trilogy and Epilogue. By Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, Cloth $22.50. Paper, $9.95.) ''The Ghost Writer,'' ''Zuckerman
Unbound,'' ''The Anatomy Lesson,'' plus ''a wild short novel, 'The Prague Orgy,'
which is at once the bleakest and the funniest writing Roth has done'' - all add
up to ''the novelist's finest achievement to date.''

History

THE AIRMAN AND THE CARPENTER: The Lindbergh Kidnapping and the Framing of
Richard Hauptmann. By Ludovic Kennedy. (Viking, $18.95.) Ludovic Kennedy
''assembles facts, disassembles false theories and sweeps the reader inexorably
toward the terrible conclusion that a country eager to atone for an unthinkable
crime permitted an even worse one.''

BRIBES. By John T. Noonan Jr. (Macmillan, $29.95.) This history of bribery from
ancient times to the present is also concerned with ''morals, religious doctrine
and literary criticism.''

THE BRITISH EMPIRE IN THE MIDDLE EAST 1945-1951: Arab Nationalism, the United
States, and Postwar Imperialism. By Wm. Roger Louis. (Oxford, $55.) ''Based on a
staggering amount of recently released official and private papers,'' this
''magnificent and comprehensive'' book ''unravels with compelling detail the way
in which the British 'official mind' engaged in [an] imperial and strategic
juggling act, as it sought to preserve national interests.''

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE EUROPEAN JEWS. Revised and Definitive Edition. Three
Volumes. By Raul Hillberg. (Holmes & Meier, $159.50.) The author has brought his
36-year investigation to culmination in this massive study that ''marshals a
vast array of sources'' and is ''superbly organized.'' The scholarship is
''thorough and careful'' and the writing ''clear, readable, often graceful.''

EAGLE AGAINST THE SUN: The American War With Japan. By Ronald H. Spector. (Free
Press, $24.95.) Demonstrating ''depth, breadth and careful scholarship,'' this
history is the ''most concise and comprehensive account so far of the Pacific
war from the American point of view.''

EXODUS AND REVOLUTION. By Michael Walzer. (Basic Books, $15.95.) With ''care and
clarity,'' a political philosopher ''makes the case for the story of Exodus as a
continuing metaphor for revolution,'' including America's.

THE FALL OF SAIGON: Scenes From the Sudden End of a Long War. By David Butler.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''Imitating the format employed . . . in 'Is Paris
Burning?' '' David Butler ''presents some extraordinary vignettes from what he
aptly describes as the Fellini-like atmosphere'' of South Vietnam as the
Communists took over in 1975.

GERMAN BIG BUSINESS AND THE RISE OF HITLER. By Henry Ashby Turner Jr. (Oxford,
$25.) This ''absorbing'' account of ''the personal and financial links'' between
German business and Nazism argues that ''big-business money was of marginal
importance to the rapidly expanding Hitler movement.''

HEART OF EUROPE: A Short History of Poland. By Norman Davies. (Oxford, $35.) The
author of ''God's Playground: A History of Poland'' has written a work with
''sweep, a rare analytical depth and a courageous display of . . . personal
convictions.''

A HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE: Settings and Rituals. By Spiro Kostof. (Oxford, $45.)
''A magnificent guided tour through mankind's architecture from prehistoric
caves to the extension of Harvard University's Fogg Museum.''

INVENTING THE DREAM: California Through the Progressive Era. By Kevin Starr.
(Oxford, $19.95.) The second volume of a ''monumental history of California''
tells ''the story of how Americans of many kinds of background . . . found
themselves in the ultimate Garden of the World . . . and then were changed by
the myths they themselves had created.''

LAY BARE THE HEART: An Autobiography of the Civil Rights Movement. By James
Farmer. (Arbor House, $16.95.) The civil rights leader presents a ''candid and
lively'' look at himself and the ''front-line aspects'' of the movement.

THE LONG MARCH: The Untold Story. By Harrison E. Salisbury (Cornelia & Michael
Bessie/ Harper & Row, $22.95.) An ''engrossing and revealing'' re-creation of
the Chinese Red Army's 1934-35 Long March by a former New York Times foreign
correspondent.

THE LOST SOUL OF AMERICAN POLITICS: Virtue, Self-Interest, and the Foundations
of Liberalism. By John Patrick Diggins. (Basic Books, $23.95.) An ''often
searing portrait'' that ''aspires to explain in historical terms the peculiar
amalgam of self-interest and religion, of economic privatism and national
patriotism . . . that marks our own ambiguous era.''

THE PARADOX OF HISTORY: Stendhal, Tolstoy, Pasternak, and Others. By Nicola
Chiaromonte. (University of Pennsylvania, Paper, $13.95.) In six essays
presented at Princeton University in 1966, the Italian critic (1905-72)
''reflects on what he takes to be fundamental notions of the relations of
individuals to those historical events that rock the foundations of their
societies and overturn whole civilizations.''

PSYCHOTHERAPY IN THE THIRD REICH: The Goring Institute. By Geoffrey Cocks.
(Oxford, $24.95.) A ''valuable study'' of how psychoanalysis, the ''Jewish
science,'' fared under the Nazis and Hermann Goring's cousin.

SOCIALISM AND AMERICA. By Irving Howe. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) In
this ''stimulating'' and ''learned'' book, ''graced with a princely
generosity,'' Irving Howe ''stands between the Old Left and the New'' and
examines, among other things, why Socialism has failed in America.

SON OF THE MORNING STAR. By Evan S. Connell. (North Point, Cloth, $20; Perennial
Library, Paper, $8.95.) This narrative of Custer's last stand is marked by
''elegant'' prose and ''dry wit.''

THE SOONG DYNASTY. By Sterling Seagrave. (Harper & Row, $22.50.) The lives and
times of Charlie Soong's three sons and three daughters, who ''carved out a
permanent niche in the steamy politics of the Chinese republic in the years from
its founding in 1911 to its fall in 1949.''

THE SPOILS OF TIME: A World History From the Dawn of Civilization Through the
Early Renaissance. By C. V. Wedgwood. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A fair-minded,
''scrupulous'' and ''straightforward account of how men and women moved from
primitive savagery to the comparative sophistication of the Renaissance.''

Poetry

THE BRANCHING STAIRS. By John Ash. (Carcanet, $7.50.) The first book by this
British poet to be published in the United States is haunted by the ghosts of
Eliot, Auden, Proust, Baudelaire and Laforgue. ''This may be the most auspicious
debut of its kind since Auden's.''

COLLECTED POEMS 1947-1980. By Allen Ginsberg. (Harper & Row, $27.50.) A complete
collection of the poetry of the most celebrated Beat, gathered from the many
small-press volumes and magazines in which the works have appeared, with
sometimes extraordinary notes by the poet.

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF PAUL BLACKBURN. Edited by Edith Jarolim. (Persea Books,
$37.50.) The late Paul Blackburn was the most characteristic poet of the 1960's.
His work, assembled here ''from ephemeral publications and manuscripts, rescues
[him] from a near oblivion that is itself 'very 60's.' [His] work holds an
extreme variety of pleasures.''

ETERNITY'S WOODS. By Paul Zweig. (Wesleyan University, $15.95.) The ''one truly
essential collection of poems'' by ''one of our most inventive literary critics
and biographers,'' who died last year - ''a deeply felt and necessary human
work.''

THE LAMPLIT ANSWER. By Gjertrud Schnackenberg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$12.95.) This poet has an ''intelligent, resonant, sometimes ravishing way with
words,'' and her work ''shines throughout with a luminous craft and a wise
reflective sense of culture and its claims on human feeling.''

PRAYING WRONG: New and Selected Poems 1957-1984. By Peter Davison. (Atheneum,
$18.95.) Twenty new poems plus about three-quarters of those published in past
books are here, ''chosen with a connoisseur's detachment. This will
unquestionably be the Davison volume to own for a long time to come.''

STATION ISLAND. By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) ''A book of
poems to be read through rather than dipped into. There is bone and sinew and
song here, and an urgency that grabs you by the sleeve - sometimes by the throat
- and makes your blood race.''

AN UMBRELLA FROM PICADILLY. By Jaroslav Seifert. Translated by Oswald Osers.
(London Magazine Editions, $12.50.) The works in this, the first volume of
Jaroslav Seifert's poems to be translated since he won the Nobel Prize for
Literature last year, were written in the 1970's. It is heavily autobiographical
and thus especially useful to people who know little of the Czechoslovak poet's
life and work, although the translation is somewhat pedestrian.

Science Fiction

FIRE WATCH. By Connie Willis. (Blue Jay, $14.95.) In her first collection of
stories, the author ''deploys the apparatus of science fiction to illuminate
character and relationships, and her writing is fresh, subtle and deeply
moving.''

FREE LIVE FREE. By Gene Wolfe. (Tor, $16.95.) The author of the four-volume
''Book of the New Sun'' turns to ''that problematic mix of nonscientific lore
and dreams of power known as the occult.''

HELLICONIA WINTER. By Brian W. Aldiss. (Atheneum, $17.95.) The final volume of
the author's ''masterful trilogy whose theme is nothing less than the
interrelationship of all living (and nonliving) things.''

NEUROMANCER. By William Gibson. (Ace, Paper, $2.95.) In this ''freshly imagined,
compellingly detailed'' 21st-century world ''advances in computer technology and
bioengineering have made it possible to create human beings of preternatural
strength and agility.''

ROBOTS AND EMPIRE. By Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $16.95.) The author has ''once
again turned an ethical dilemma into the basis of an exciting novel of
suspense'' in this tale about two intelligent robots.

STARS IN MY POCKET LIKE GRAINS OF SAND. By Samuel R. Delany. (Bantam, $16.95.) A
''challenging and satisfying'' novel about ''a universe of the far future, which
contains more than 6,000 inhabited worlds and a marvelously rich blend of
cultures.''

Science & Social Science

BRAIN AND PSYCHE: The Biology of the Unconscious. By Jonathan Winson.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $16.95.) ''A compelling and well-written book, intriguing
both for its view of the brain in light of the computer revolution, and for its
attempted revision of certain Freudian notions about the mind.''

CHANCING IT: Why We Take Risks. By Ralph Keyes. (Little, Brown, $15.95.) An
''entertaining writer with a light touch'' divides the risks we take into those
involving physical danger and those involving ''commitment, intimacy and
self-knowledge.''

THE COGNITIVE COMPUTER: On Language, Learning, and Artificial Intelligence. By
Roger C. Schank with Peter G. Childers. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) A ''clear,
funny and smart'' account of ''the problems involved in trying to get computers
to mimic human reasoning.''

CRIME AND HUMAN NATURE. By James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Herrnstein. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.95.) This ''important'' and controversial summary of behavioral
science's theories about crime ''will be the starting place for discussions of
the subject for years to come.''

THE FLAMINGO'S SMILE: Reflections in Natural History. By Stephen Jay Gould.
(Norton, $17.95.) ''One of the sharpest and most humane thinkers in the
sciences'' offers a new collection of essays on a variety of scientific topics.

FROM ONE TO ZERO: A Universal History of Numbers. By Georges Ifrah. Translated
by Lowell Bair. (Viking, $35.) An ''exhaustive . . . history of numerals (number
symbols) and numeration systems from prehistoric times to the Renaissance.''

HABITS OF THE HEART: Individualism and Commitment in American Life. By Robert N.
Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler and Steven M. Tipton.
(University of California, $16.95.) In this ''well-written'' book, the authors
conclude that middle-class Americans ''have largely lost the language they need
to make moral sense out of their private and public lives.''

HEALING THE WOUNDS: A Physician Looks at His Work. By David Hilfiker. (Pantheon,
$14.95.) A doctor's ''brutally honest . . . medical odyssey from idealism to
disenchantment and back.'' . . . THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH: A Political History
of the Space Age. By Walter A. McDougall. (Basic Books, $25.95.) An
''exhaustively researched, brilliantly conceived and beautifully written''
account of space exploration by the United States and the Soviet Union.

IN THE NAME OF EUGENICS: Genetics and the Uses of Human Heredity. By Daniel J.
Kevles. (Knopf, $22.95.) In this ''well-written narrative,'' Daniel J. Kevles
examines ''the symbiotic relations between the genuine science of genetics . . .
and the political programs and prejudices of eugenicists.''

THE KNOWLEDGE MACHINE: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Man. By Donald
Michie and Rory Johnston. (Morrow, $16.95.) The authors argue that ''in an
increasingly complex world we need all the sources of knowledge we can get,
including machines.''

MASKS OF THE UNIVERSE. By Edward Harrison. (Macmillan, $18.95.) A
''provocative'' and ''scholarly review'' of ''aspects of philosophy and theology
that border on the scientific enterprise'' that is ''a marvelous piece of
historical research.''

MIGRAINE: Understanding a Common Disorder. By Oliver Sacks. (University of
California, $17.95.) In this expanded, updated and resubtitled edition of the
book (first published in 1970), Dr. Sacks ''describes the various manifestations
of migraine and their relationship to mental and physical well-being.''

THE NEW OUR BODIES, OURSELVES: A Book by and for Women. By the Boston Women's
Health Collective. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, Paper, $12.95.) This revised
and expanded edition of a 1973 work ''remains an excellent source for a woman
evaluating medical care.''

PERFECT SYMMETRY: The Search for the Beginning of Time. By Heinz R. Pagels.
(Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) In this ''attempt by a well-known particle physicist
to look at the first moments after creation and even to look at the creation
event itself,'' Heinz R. Pagels shows he is ''one of less than a handful of
active scientists who can write excellent prose about the scientific frontier
for a general audience.''

REFLECTIONS ON GENDER AND SCIENCE. By Evelyn Fox Keller. (Yale, $17.95.) In nine
''philosophical'' essays, the author ''analyzes the pervasiveness of gender
ideology, investigates how it became established and how it still shapes the
course of scientific theory and experimentation and speculates what science
might be like if it were gender-free.''

REVOLUTION IN SCIENCE. By I. Bernard Cohen. (Harvard, $25.) A history of
physical science from the 17th century to the present day ''carefully documented
and told in a straightforward, comprehensive style.''

A SCIENTIST AT THE SEASHORE. By James Trefil. (Scribners, $16.95.) A physicist
takes readers on ''a marvelous excursion from the beach to the ends of the solar
system.''

STAR WARRIORS: A Penetrating Look Into the Lives of the Young Scientists Behind
Our Space Age Weaponry. By William J. Broad. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) When a
New York Times reporter spent time ''as a neutral observer with the group of
scientists who are actually trying to make [''Star Wars''] work,'' he ''was not
able to find a single scientist who said to him that [it] would.''

VITAL LIES, SIMPLE TRUTHS: The Psychology of Self-Deception. By Daniel Goleman.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) ''By helping us to become aware of how it is that we
are not aware,'' this book by a New York Times reporter ''performs a valuable
service.''

THE WOODS HOLE CANTATA: Essays on Science and Society. By Gerald Weissmann.
(Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) In this ''lively collection of essays'' on medicine and
science and their ''socioeconomic context,'' Gerald Weissmann, a physician and
researcher at New York University Medical Center, gathers ''an impressive array
of literary, historical and sociological sources.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Notable Paperbacks

BYLINE: By C. Gerlad Fraser

SECTION: Section 7; Page 82, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2613 words


This selective list of paperbacks was chosen from the New & Noteworthy column
since the Christmas issue of 1984. It includes autobiography, biography, novels,
stories, memoirs, essays, history, science, social science and poetry. ABORTION
AND THE POLITICS OF MOTHERHOOD. By Kristin Luker. (University of California,
$7.95.) The abortion conflict in America is viewed in this analysis as a battle
largely between women of different economic classes and a different social
outlook. THE ALBANY CYCLE. By William Kennedy. (Penguin, $17.85.) A boxed set of
three novels - ''Legs'' (1975), ''Billy Phelan's Greatest Game'' (1978) and the
Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Ironweed'' (1983) - that are set in Albany in the late
1930's. AMERICAN DIPLOMACY. By George F. Kennan. (University of Chicago, $5.95.)
A collection of the former diplomat's lectures on wars, foreign policy, the Far
East, modern diplomacy and the Soviet Union. THE BALLAD OF TYPHOID MARY. By J.
F. Federspiel. Translated by Joel Agee. (Ballantine, $3.50.) A fictional version
of the life of a typhoid carrier who became an American legend - the
19th-century Swiss immigrant Maria Anna Caduff (a k a Mary Mallon). BLACK APOLLO
OF SCIENCE: The Life of Ernest Everett Just. By Kenneth R. Manning. (Oxford
University, $8.95.) The biography of a notable black scientist who died in 1941.
A complex story moving from South to North, from poverty to the emerging
scientific institutions of 20th-century America and Europe. BLOODS: An Oral
History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans. By Wallace Terry. (Ballantine,
$3.95.) Twenty black veterans reminisce to a former Vietnam correspondent for
Time magazine. THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud. Volume One:
Education of the Senses. By Peter Gay. (Oxford University, $9.95.) This is the
first in a projected work of at least five volumes exploring the inner world of
the European and American middle classes from the 1820's to the start of World
War I. The initial volume focuses on Victorian sexuality. BROTHERS AND KEEPERS.
By John Edgar Wideman. (Penguin, $6.95.) Two Pittsburgh brothers: the younger is
convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment; the older becomes a
Rhodes scholar, a novelist and the author of this memoir. CHILDHOOD. By Nathalie
Sarraute. Translated by Barbara Wright. (George Braziller, $8.95.) In 71
vignettes the French novelist Nathalie Sarraute, born in 1900, recounts her
early years. THE CITIZEN KANE BOOK. By Pauline Kael, Herman J. Mankiewicz and
Orson Welles. (Limelight, $16.95.) The book contains an essay, ''Raising Kane,''
on the making of the classic 1941 movie; the shooting script; and a shot-by-shot
breakdown of the completed film. DEMOCRACY. By Joan Didion. (Pocket Books,
$3.95.) An elderly ''blueblood'' in Honolulu is the killer of a nisei politician
and of his own socialite daughter in this enigmatic novel. EDISTO. By Padgett
Powell. (Owl/Holt, $5.95.) Simons Everson Manigault, age 12, is stumbling toward
manhood. He lives with his mother in Edisto, a mostly undeveloped strip of the
South Carolina coast not far from the exclusive development of Hilton Head.
EDITH WHARTON. By R. W. B. Lewis. (Fromm, $12.95.) R. W. B. Lewis's book
received the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1975 and the National Book Critics
Circle nonfiction award in 1976. EMPIRE OF THE SUN. By J. G. Ballard.
(Washington Square/Pocket Books, $4.50.) The author was a child in Shanghai
during World War II. Best known as a science fiction writer, he has created a
searing tale of an 11-year-old trying to survive in wartime China. FOREIGN
AFFAIRS. By Alison Lurie. (Avon, $3.95.) A 54-year-old professor of English, a
Southern businessman she meets on a trans-Atlantic flight, a young American
faculty member at a London university and an aristocratic English television
actress constitute the cast of ''Foreign Affairs,'' for which Alison Lurie won
this year's Pulitzer Prize for fiction. THE FOREVER STREET. By Frederic Morton.
(Fawcett, $3.95.) A novel about a blacksmith who leaves a dying Slovak village
for Vienna and there discovers a magic brick from the Wailing Wall. THE GLORY OF
THEIR TIMES: The Story of the Early Days of Baseball Told by the Men Who Played
It. By Lawrence S. Ritter. (Vintage, $7.95.) Twenty-six tape-recorded firsthand
accounts of playing baseball in the major leagues between 1898 and 1947. GOD
KNOWS. By Joseph Heller. (Dell, $4.50.) The author's fourth novel is about the
biblical King David. The writing is inspired by Brooklyn, the Marx Brothers and
perhaps even ''Monty Python.'' ''THE GOOD WAR'': An Oral History of World War
Two. By Studs Terkel. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The war in the words and memories of
the men and women who lived it - infantrymen, admirals, nurses, bureaucrats,
entertainers, conscientious objectors. THE GREAT CAT MASSACRE: And Other
Episodes in French Cultural History. By Robert Darnton. (Vintage, $7.95.) A
collection of essays on ''ways of thinking in 18th century France,'' according
to the author - ''how [people] constructed the world, invested it with meaning,
and infused it with emotion.'' THE GROWTH OF BIOLOGICAL THOUGHT: Diversity,
Evolution, and Inheritance. By Ernst Mayr. (Belknap/Harvard University, $12.95.)
This book probes the development of ideas now important in biology. HIM WITH HIS
FOOT IN HIS MOUTH: And Other Stories. By Saul Bellow. (Pocket Books, $4.50.)
Five stories by the winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize in Literature. HOME BEFORE
DARK: A Biographical Memoir of John Cheever by His Daughter. By Susan Cheever.
(Pocket Books, $4.50.) An intimate memoir that appeared in 1984, two years after
John Cheever's death. AN IMAGINARY LIFE. By David Malouf. (George Braziller,
$6.95.) In A.D. 8 the Emperor Augustus sent Ovid, the Roman poet, to a barely
civilized Black Sea village. ''An Imaginary Life'' describes what Ovid's life in
exile might have been. INFAMY: Pearl Harbor and Its Aftermath. By John Toland.
(Berkley, $4.50.) A defense of the military commanders in Hawaii, Adm. Husband
Kimmel and Lieut. Gen. Walter Short, who were blamed for being caught unprepared
for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. IN SEARCH OF LOVE AND BEAUTY. By Ruth
Prawer Jhabvala. (Penguin, $4.95.) Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's first work of fiction
set in the United States. The principal characters are European refugees - a man
and the women drawn to him. INVISIBLE MEN: Life in Baseball's Negro Leagues. By
Donn Rogosin. (Atheneum, $7.95.) Fresh scholarship on the Negro baseball leagues
in a racially segregated America between 1920 and 1950. KISS OF THE SPIDER
WOMAN. By Manuel Puig. Translated by Thomas Colchie. (Vintage, $3.95.) Most of
this novel (which has been made into a film) is a running dialogue between two
prisoners in Latin America - an apolitical, homosexual movie buff and a
heterosexual Marxist student. KNOCK WOOD. By Candice Bergen. (Ballantine,
$3.95.) The daughter of the famed ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, Candice Bergen
began life as a Hollywood child ensconced in opulent vulgarity. Her
autobiography is funny and revealing. A LATE DIVORCE. By A. B. Yehoshua.
Translated by Hillel Halkin. (Obelisk/Dutton, $9.95.) A. B. Yehoshua's
protagonist leaves Israel for Minnesota and returns to get his wife's consent to
a divorce. LEAVING THE LAND. By Douglas Unger. (Ballantine, $3.50.) This fine
first novel by a farmer turned writer tracks the transformation of family farms
into corporate farms. LITTLE BIG MAN. By Thomas Berger. (Seymour
Lawrence/Laurel, $4.95.) A novel that consists of the memoirs of a 111-year-old
former cowboy, allegedly the sole white survivor of the battle at Little
Bighorn. THE LITTLE DISTURBANCES OF MAN. By Grace Paley. (Penguin, $5.95.)
Eleven seriocomic stories of men, women and love. LOUIS ARMSTRONG: An American
Genius. By James Lincoln Collier. (Oxford University, $9.95.) A biography of the
great jazz musician. MACHINE DREAMS. By Jayne Anne Phillips. (Pocket Books,
$3.95.) An assured and gifted writer's first novel explores family legends. Its
shocking moments arise from small, ordinary ones. MAYOR. By Edward I. Koch with
William Rauch. (Warner, $3.95.) The provocative autobiography of the Mayor of
New York. THE MIND-BODY PROBLEM. By Rebecca Goldstein. (Laurel/Dell, $4.50.) A
philosophy professor's first novel, in which Renee, a philosophy student, faces
a classic dilemma - reconciling ''the outer place of bodies and the inner
private one of minds.'' A MINOR APOCALYPSE. By Tadeusz Konwicki. Translated by
Richard Lourie. (Aventura, $7.95.) A Polish novelist's vision of his world's
slow death - the decay of Warsaw and the death of the narrator's friends and,
presumably, himself. MODERN TIMES: The World From the Twenties to the Eighties.
By Paul Johnson. (Harper & Row, $9.95.) A 60-year history that covers all major
countries and is filled with people, events and historical changes. MY SEARCH
FOR WARREN HARDING. By Robert Plunket. (Laurel/Dell, $3.95.) The pursuit of a
trunkful of love letters from Warren G. Harding by a historian who seduces the
former President's granddaughter and spends time with zanies in Los Angeles. A
first novel. MYSTERIES OF WINTERTHURN. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Berkley, $4.50.)
This novel is actually a philosophical investigation into the nature of mystery
- the mystery of personality and of religious experience. NICHOLAS AND
ALEXANDRA. By Robert K. Massie. (Laurel/Dell, $5.95.) A history of Russia under
Czar Nicholas II. OLD WORLD, NEW WORLD. By Mark Dintenfass. (Bantam, $3.95.) The
fictional saga of a Polish family covers eight decades, beginning with Jacob and
Sophie Lieber's arrival in America. THE ONLY PROBLEM. By Muriel Spark.
(Wideview-Perigee/Putnam, $8.95.) The major characters are Harvey, a rich
Canadian living in France, and Effie, his revolutionary wife, who plants bombs
in supermarkets and department stores. The novel is an account of the perils
that surround our unsuspecting lives and a disputation on the Book of Job. THE
OTHER VICTORIANS: A Study of Sexuality and Pornography in Mid-Nineteenth-Century
England. By Steven Marcus. (Norton, $7.95.) The author examines pornographic
novels, flagellation literature and ''My Secret Life,'' a wealthy Englishman's
autobiography, in this analysis of Victorian sexuality. PARTNERS. By Veronica
Geng. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $6.95.) There are 29 humorous pieces here,
including a record review of the Nixon White House tape recordings and a
romantic memoir featuring Mao Zedong. The title comes from a parody of newspaper
wedding announcements. PITCH DARK. By Renata Adler. (Bantam, $5.95.) A woman
decides to end a long romance with a selfish, inconsiderate married man whom she
still loves. PRINCE OF PEACE. By James Carroll. (Signet/New American Library,
$4.95.) A novel concerned with a charismatic antiwar priest, changes in the
Roman Catholic Church in America and personal disloyalty. RELIGION IN THE
SECULAR CITY: Toward a Postmodern Theology. By Harvey Cox. (Touchstone/Simon &
Schuster, $7.95.) The 1970's saw a resurgence of traditional religion in
countries as different as Iran, Poland and the United States. Harvey Cox
perceives the changes as a revolt against the modern world. THE SAMURAI. By
Shusaku Endo. Translated by Van C. Gessel. (Aventura, $7.95.) A Spanish
missionary bent on converting the Japanese to Christianity is the hero of this
novel, which takes place some 400 years ago. THE SEASON: A Candid Look at
Broadway. By William Goldman. (Limelight, $8.95.) For his examination of the
1967-68 Broadway season the author saw every new show and interviewed critics,
playwrights, producers and ticket brokers. SLOW LEARNER. By Thomas Pynchon.
(Bantam, $3.95.) A collection of five stories, four written while Thomas Pynchon
was a college student. SON OF THE MORNING STAR. By Evan S. Connell. (Perennial
Library/Harper & Row, $8.95.) An elegantly written study that presents a massive
amount of information on George Armstrong Custer's last stand. STENGEL: His Life
and Times. By Robert W. Creamer. (Dell, $8.95.) In the autumn of 1960, when
Casey Stengel was fired, he had managed the New York Yankees for 12 years,
winning 7 World Series and 10 American League pennants, an unsurpassed record.
STONES FOR IBARRA. By Harriet Doerr. (Penguin, $4.95.) At age 73 Harriet Doerr
published this novel, about an American couple operating a copper mine in the
Mexican village of Ibarra. It won the 1984 American Book Award for a first work
of fiction. THE STUDIO. By John Gregory Dunne. (Limelight, $7.95.) A report on
the 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation, the book describes with considerable
precision how Hollywood works. SWEENEY ASTRAY: A Version From the Irish. By
Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $7.95.) ''Sweeney Astray'' is a story
poem, translated from the medieval Irish ''Buile Suibhne.'' TAPPING THE SOURCE.
By Kem Nunn. (Dell, $3.95.) Nominated for an American Book Award, ''Tapping the
Source'' is set in a hedonistic Southern California community where a
19-year-old country boy is looking for his sister. THINKING ABOUT CRIME. By
James Q. Wilson. (Vintage, $7.95.) A collection of insightful essays on crime
and punishment that includes material originally published in Commentary, The
Public Interest and other periodicals. TRAGEDY AND COMEDY. By Walter Kerr. (Da
Capo, $9.95.) Walter Kerr, who retired from The New York Times as Sunday drama
critic in 1983, discusses the development of the two dramatic forms and analyzes
a variety of masterpieces. THE TRAVELS OF JAIMIE MCPHEETERS. By Robert Lewis
Taylor. (Arbor House, $8.95.) Jaimie and his father, traveling to California
gold fields in 1849, meet Indians, outlaws and Mormons and have many adventures.
Winner of the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for fiction. THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF
BEING. By Milan Kundera. Translated by Michael Henry Heim. (Harper Colophon,
$6.95.) The emigre novelist focuses on two couples in contemporary
Czechoslovakia, but the real concern of this cunning and witty book is the
recent history of his homeland. VICTORY OVER JAPAN. By Ellen Gilchrist. (Little,
Brown, $7.95.) Fourteen short stories about Southern women from World War II to
the present in a collection that won the 1984 American Book Award for fiction.
WATERLAND. By Graham Swift. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $6.95.) The two
critical events in this novel are the discovery of a dead body when the narrator
is a boy of 10, and his retirement 43 years later as a history teacher in a
London school. WEAPONS AND HOPE. By Freeman Dyson. (Cornelia & Michael
Bessie/Harper Colophon, $6.95.) A guide to the concepts and problems of nuclear
deterrence. WHEN AND WHERE I ENTER: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in
America. By Paula Giddings. (Bantam, $8.95.) A narrative history of black women
from the 17th century to the present. WILD JUSTICE: The Evolution of Revenge. By
Susan Jacoby. (Harper & Row, $6.95.) The author traces the processes through
which human desire for revenge was domesticated into the mechanisms of law. THE
WITCHES OF EASTWICK. By John Updike. (Fawcett, $4.50.) The witches in John
Updike's inventive novel are three divorced, middle-class women in a small Rhode
Island town. WITH A DAUGHTER'S EYE: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and Gregory
Bateson. By Mary Catherine Bateson. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $4.95.)
Margaret Mead's only child, Mary Catherine Bateson, writes about her parents,
the eminent anthropologists. WOMEN IN SCIENCE: Portraits From a World in
Transition. By Vivian Gornick. (Simon & Schuster, $6.95.) More than 100 female
scientists between the ages of 24 and 78 were interviewed for this book on the
problems and ambitions of women in science.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS 1985;
TRAVEL AND NATURE

BYLINE: By William Least Heat-Moon; William Least Heat-Moon, the author of
''Blue Highways,'' is writing a book about the Kansas prairie.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1985 words


My life as a reader can be numbered. I began as a 398.2; then I was a 920, and
still later became an 820, an 813 and even a 822.33. Now, in my middle years, I
am yet another number. A librarian asked me what kind of writing I do. I told
her. She said, ''Why, you're a 910.'' In the Dewey Decimal system, 910 -
geography and travel - is a nice number to be from. It's a shelf of journeys,
peoples, places. It's not just the world, it's the world in motion. I'm happy in
910, happy to be in the realm of the 910's that follow. CHINA. By Hiroji Kubota.
Illustrated. 204 pp. (Norton, $65.) It took the photographer Hiroji Kubota three
years to get permission to photograph in China and seven years and 200,000
clicks of the shutter to collect this fine gathering of 186 color photographs.
The pictures reveal China from the time when the current open-door policy was
only a narrow slit to the now cavernous entrance provided the West, especially
the United States. When historians look back to what may prove to be the most
significant change of a national outlook in this century, Mr. Kubota's images
will show China just crossing the threshold, just inviting the West in, timidly
peeking out. He assigned himself all of China - one billion people, 3.7 million
square miles and 55 minority nationalities. The book is especially full of
China's minorities; at times the reader forgets the overwhelming majority
presence of the Han Chinese, so rich are the photographs of the Kazakhs, the
Uighurs, the Tibetans, the Mongolians. Mr. Kubota's approach is not that of the
pure photojournalist. There seems to have been no interaction between the
photographer and the photographed, and rarely do the subjects confront the
camera. Rather, he is closer to a pictorialist in his fine landscapes and
cityscapes, closer to a skilled tourist photographer in his portraits. The
pictures, most taken through a polarizing filter, bring out a richness of color
and mood, but often they lose facial expression in deep shadow. His view of
China is entirely respectful and his technique is orthodox. Even so, with the
Chinese propensity for abrupt reversals of major national policy, Mr. Kubota
cannot help revealing a tension between old and new; his portrait shows well a
nation just opening and precariously balanced. ISAK DINESEN'S AFRICA: Images of
the Wild Continent From the Writer's Life and Words. Illustrated. 142 pp.
(Sierra Club, $35.) Here is Africa without truncheons and Uzi submachine guns,
without starved bodies in cloth bags, without the doom of the last rhinoceros.
Like the forthcoming Robert Redford-Meryl Streep movie, ''Out of Africa,'' this
version is meant to be redolent of romance and eternal beauty, even if Dinesen's
memoir is not. If Dinesen's Africa alerts new readers to her finely cut prose,
that's good; if it jostles awake the dozing to the imperiled magnificence of
Africa, that is even better. Dinesen said she found big-game hunting ''a fine
and fascinating art,'' but when it came to the photographic safari, ''I was a
fairly good shot with a rifle, but I cannot photograph.'' She believed that even
the best African pictures ''bore less real likeness to their objects than the
chalk portraits drawn upon the kitchen door by our Native porters.'' Therefore
she resisted the growing popularity of illustrated travel books by insisting
that the images in ''Out of Africa'' be only those of language. The Sierra Club,
which has before wedded photographs to the words of Thoreau and John McPhee,
writers who seem to prefer the strength of the unaccompanied word, has ignored
Dinesen's wishes and illustrated nearly 100 brief passages from her memoirs and
letters - most of them from ''Out of Africa'' - with 100 color photographs and
33 black-and-white period snapshots of her life on her coffee plantation in the
Kenya Highlands. I am glad that Dinesen refused photographic illustration and
relied on her poetic images, for they are the soul of her book. But I am also
glad the Sierra Club has challenged her esthetic. Their book, which does not try
to depict the precise content of a passage but rather evokes correlative
photographic responses, complements Dinesen's texts splendidly. To see these
photo-graphs is to understand in part, and to feel even more, the grandeur of
East Africa. To see what moved her to write is not to dilute her excellence but
to amplify it. CAPE COD: Henry David Thoreau's Complete Text With the Journey
Recreated in Pictures. By William F. Robinson. Illustrated. 230 pp. (New York
Graphic Society/Little, Brown, $35.) Thoreau's warmest book has been hauled in
here for illustration, although not for the first time. Years ago it appeared
with watercolors by Amelia Watson and later again with photographs by Herbert
Gleason. William F. Robinson's new treatment includes not only watercolors but
also botanical illustrations, woodcuts, period maps and early photographs. Mr.
Robinson has topped it off with his own photographs of a Cape Cod Thoreau would
recognize today. The attempt is to add a new dimension by depicting Thoreau's
scenes as exactly as possible. The 150 black-and-white photographs and
illustrations serve several ends - delight, provocation, elucidation. Since
Thoreau's own working method was to piece together his books over the years -
''Cape Cod'' consolidates walking tours he took over several years - and since
he died before he could finish the book, I find Mr. Robinson's additions fully
in the Thoreau spirit. I carp only at the muddied reproduction tolerated by the
New York Graphic Society, which is usually technically excellent as evidenced by
their books of Ansel Adams's tonally rich photographs. ZANE GREY: A Photographic
Odyssey. By Loren Grey. Illustrated. 213 pp. (Taylor Publishing Company, Dallas,
$19.95.) For a reader fascinated by the West of the Easterner Zane Grey, this
composite portrait of and by the writer of the purple sage will be a pleasant
tour. The journey, however, is more over the Pacific waters than the western
slopes. Time and again in the more than 100-picture family album by his son,
Loren, Zane Grey appears posed with fish or rod or reel or trophy in hand. Here
is a book of strung-up marlin and bear Teddy Roosevelt would have loved. With
the photographs tending toward dead wildlife and the captions and text leaning
toward filial piety, the Grey enthusiast may still want a fuller portrait to
come from the large family store of photographs. DREAM TRACKS: The Railroad and
the American Indian 1890-1930. By T. C. McLuhan. Illustrated. 208 pp. (Abrams,
$37.50.) This book is at once a celebration and a lament for American Indian
tribes. These more than 100 hand-colored photographs, produced for the
advertising department of the Santa Fe Railroad in the first third of this
century, show many details of Southwestern American Indian life. We see the
sorrow in the Hopi and Navajo and Pueblo faces, much of it from their awareness
that corporate America was using the myth and romance of native America not to
assist Indian people but to peddle tourism (the Santa Fe-Fred Harvey ''Indian
detours''). Never mind that Pueblo Indians wear Sioux war bonnets; never mind
the false colors of the breechcloth; forget the Navajo's silver turned to gold.
Such distortions aside, what remains is a remarkable collection of tribal faces,
customs and life. Even the hand coloring, when done honestly by the best of
Santa Fe's retouchers, can add poignance. What's more, some of these photographs
come from William Henry Jackson and A. C. Vromans, both recognized for their
portrayals of native America. To the credit of the railroad, its advertising
showed the Indian with dignity if not always with accuracy; yet surely a company
does not have to distort culture or corrupt history to sell itself. For this
reason, the good historical summary by T. C. McLuhan, author of ''Touch the
Earth,'' is necessary reading before turning to the photographs. When one
understands the origins of the pictures, one might understand how a spiritually
impoverished people struck out into the Western deserts, in Fred Harvey's
Packards, in search of materially impoverished peoples whose lives still
connected to first causes. RIVER JOURNEYS. By Russell Braddon, Christina
Dodwell, Germaine Greer, William Shawcross, Brian Thompson and Michael Wood.
Illustrated. 208 pp. (Hippocrene Books, $19.95.) These half-dozen travel pieces
by as many hands chronicle brief trips up or down six rivers great in name or
challenge. Michael Wood, stirred by Joseph Conrad, steams up the Congo;
Christina Dodwell floats the Sepik and Waghi rivers of Papua New Guinea; William
Shawcross goes up the Mekong in Vietnam and Cambodia in a journey interesting
because of the circumstances of war; Germaine Greer rides on the Sao Francisco
of Brazil; with a good humor, Russell Braddon pursues from source to mouth the
Murray of Australia; and Brian Thompson covers the Nile. I like the idea, but
the results mostly range from television script reportage to thorough
description like that in the encyclopedic Nagel Guides. Buried in the middle of
the book, however, is the best essay - Miss Greer's presentation, detailed and
disturbing, of cultural decay. This piece, not the Congo one, Joseph Conrad
would recognize. Facing the truth that these somewhat canned journeys were
occasioned by the desire to produce a television short series, she reports her
own meetings and those of the male film crew with the Brazilians. Unlike some of
the other voyagers, she does not celebrate the adventurer over the adventure.
Her presence alone comes close to making the book good. SIGHTSEEING: A Space
Panorama. Edited by Barbara Hitchcock. Illustrated. 105 pp. (Knopf, $24.95.)
Down here on the planet we yet await the first poet-traveler of outer space to
send us crafted language, to move us with evocative images. Until that voyager
goes up, we sublunary sorts will have to do with machine images from Hasselblads
and Nikons. As this book shows, that's still easy doing. The compiler of this
collection wished to make a photographic album that would turn space travel into
sightseeing. (And here all these years Americans have been trying to turn
sightseeing into travel.) The reversal gives an excuse for another space book,
but it does not produce a new vision of the beyond. Nevertheless, the images are
grand, although I wearied a bit of Middle Eastern deserts turned to abstractions
and the cargo bays of the Space Shuttle open to encompassing blackness. Of the
more than 150,000 photographs in NASA files, surely the range is broader than
these 84 suggest. GRAND TETON NATIONAL PARK: Where Lightning Walks. MOUNT
RAINIER NATIONAL PARK: Realm of the Sleeping Giant. OLYMPIC NATIONAL PARK: Where
the Mountain Meets the Sea. Photographs by Pat O'Hara. Text by Tim McNulty.
YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK: Nature's Masterpiece in Stone. Photographs by Pat
O'Hara. Text by David Robertson. 72 pp. each. (Woodlands Press, 853 Camino Del
Mar, Del Mar, Calif. 92014, cloth, $30 each; paper, $16.95 each.) These
exquisite photographs should in themselves be strong enough to stop the
degradation of our lands. They won't, of course, but Pat O'Hara, working in the
now widely imitated vision of Eliot Porter, makes an estimable contribution to
an awareness that leads to concern. He records so lushly in color and tone that
these photographs are too rich if viewed too many at a sitting. Better for the
viewer to treat the books as double-size Sierra Club engagement calendars and
savor one picture for a week. And better also for the viewer to skip inane
captions like, ''Here, patterns on the forest floor and the soft light of an
overcast day provided a compelling photographic opportunity.'' I hope Woodlands
Press, using an improved text or none at all, will produce more books about more
parks - and include the parks of the East and Middle West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of astronaut Owen Garriott outside Skylab, 1973; Photo of Indians
at Grand Canyon railroad station

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS 1985;
WISHING FOR MILTON'S POWER AND TOLSTOY'S ZANINESS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3098 words


The Book Review invited a number of well-known writers to think wishfully about
the following topic: ''If Santa Claus were the muse, what would you ask for?''
We were invoking literary inspiration at large, and our writers - of poetry,
novels, short stories, biography, history, essays, children's books, detective
and science fiction and cookbooks - showed just how fanciful the holiday spirit
can be. Scott Spencer Author of ''Endless Love'' Of course, Santa has never
really cared for me. He's ignored my requests. I told him - ''Look, all I want
for Christmas is my two front teeth,'' and I got Lincoln Logs instead.

Years later I pleaded with him - ''Santa,'' I said, ''Santa, bring my baby back
to me,'' and what I got instead was a report that she'd been at a party 800
miles away on the arm of the guy who'd brought helium to the bash.

I don't want to jinx myself. Maybe this will be my year. Maybe even in the
pre-Christmas rush, Santa scans The New York Times. So listen, big guy, if you
happen to be in the neighborhood I wouldn't at all mind if you dropped off a way
I could write a novel so that it goes into a reader the way it does me - in a
fierce but illusive surge of feeling, completely independent of the tap tap tap
of narrative's scruffed striped cane. Betty Rollin Author of ''Last Wish''
That's easy. Not a thing, thanks, I'd say. I'd say it politely because you want
to stay on the good side of these muses. Maybe it's me, but every time one of
them whispers in my ear I get a busted eardrum. No, I'd like an intermission
now, a respite from inspiration. And given the inspirations of the past, it is
my solemn wish that nothing ever happen to me again that is interesting enough
to write about. (Some of my friends - and husbands -want me to promise that even
if it does, I won't.) Meanwhile, if the real Santa comes calling, I would ask
for an inspiration of a different order. A nice new stove, say. I'd take extra
care, of course, to keep my hands off the burners. Rosellen Brown Author of
''Civil Wars'' What I would like most at the moment is another voice, a
different one. This would be a loan, you understand, not a permanent change; I
do not hate myself. But I have written six books, extremely dissimilar in form
and tone and substance. Yet when I sit down to write another, here I come again.
I would know the voice of that sensibility anywhere, the notes it hits, the ones
it invariably misses, their timbre, the length of its breaths.

Doesn't the person who writes Eudora Welty's words feel different in her skin
and bones than Alice Walker, say, or Alice Munro, the way you can imagine
wearing a friend's clothes and moving in a subtly altered way? I dare to think I
can imagine what George Eliot thought about over her morning coffee, and maybe
Chekhov over his tea, but not Jane Austen and, latterly, not Gertrude Stein or
Flannery O'Connor; how they thought, not what. How the thinking felt.

One year as a clown, one as a scourge - then I would come home surfeited, have a
good sleep and wake in the morning to slip back into my capacities and
inca-pacities, the familiar fit of my own wisdom and ignorance, since both make
the voice, its characteristic sound and range. By then I might even have missed
myself; I might almost be glad to be home. Art Buchwald Author of '' 'You Can
Fool All of the People All the Time' '' Please, Santa, give me an entirely new
vocabulary so I don't have to use the same words over and over again.

I'm not asking for the five-syllable words that roll off Bill Buckley's tongue,
nor the one-syllable ones of Harold Robbins. But I would appreciate something in
between, so I could insert a biggie every so often to let people know when it
comes to language I don't fool around.

Also, I would like a much better memory. As time goes on, I keep forgetting what
the subject is I'm writing about. For example, I've lost my train of thought
with what I'm doing right now. I know it has something to do with Christmas and
The New York Times, but for the life of me I can't figure out how the two fit
together. Anne Wingate, a k a Lee Martin and Martha G. Webb Author of ''A White
Male Running'' I would like a lot more markets for good solid poetry with form,
substance and meaning, and for good solid fiction with plot, characters and
coherence instead of a million pages of extraneous sex. I would like a lot less
''I saw an umbrella in the grass and had a fight with my mistress and my
daughter threw up and changed my life.'' This is personal; I'm married to a
brilliant unpublished poet.

Other than that, my wants are very simple: I just want the ability to write
romantic suspense as well as Elizabeth Peters, to write human-interest mysteries
as well as John D. MacDonald and to convey immediacy as well as Kurt Vonnegut -
and I want Steven Spielberg and George Lucas to call and ask me to write an
Indiana Jones movie. So, Muse, if you'll bring me all of that, and make it
snappy, I'll be happy. . . . Muse? Muse? Where did you go? Surely I didn't
offend you? Samuel Shem Author of ''Fine'' I wouldn't ask for much. Better to
give than to receive.

Perhaps just: the wisdom of the Bible, the feminine sensibility of Virginia
Woolf, the heart-wrenching drama of Sophocles, the whimsy of Lewis Carroll, the
sheer bigness of Tolstoy, the stark bearing-witness of Anne Frank, the American
presence of Faulkner, the tubercular miniaturism of Kafka, the restraint of
Wallace Stevens, the peace of Buddha, the gentle Russian sorrow of Chekhov, the
zaniness of Groucho, the vicious passion of Dostoyevsky, the industry of Joyce,
the court sense of Larry Bird, everything of Shakespeare.

Yet one must take care, asking. Muses are temperamental. In a fit of pique the
muse could wreck everything. One might receive: the whimsy of the Bible, the
tubercular miniaturism of Sophocles, the vicious passion of Buddha, the
restraint of Faulkner, the wisdom of Lewis Carroll, the sheer bigness of
Groucho, the American presence of Chekhov, the heart-wrenching drama of Wallace
Stevens, the zaniness of Tolstoy, the peace of Kafka, the feminine sensibility
of Dostoyevsky, the industry of Joyce, the gentle Russian sorrow of Larry Bird,
the court sense of Virginia Woolf, nothing of Shakespeare. Far better to give.
From Shem to all: Happy holidays! Dave Smith Author of ''The Roundhouse Voices:
Selected and New Poems'' May I have enough healthy years, luck and skill to
write a poem or two that gives you joy outrageous, breaks people's hearts,
sticks in the American craw and helps send three little Smiths to college. If
you nix this, please send back James Wright for a Christmas party featuring
tales of those gone ahead, long songs, power punch, fine fiddles and Patsy Cline
as Patsy Cline. For stocking stuffers: a letter from the MacArthur folks that
doesn't begin, ''Please evaluate poet X''; all the forms of passion that
prohibit trotting through the meters; the chance to field a team of American
poets in basketball against the best from England, Poland, Russia or any other
nation, including California. Carolyn Kizer Author of ''Yin: New Poems'' I ask,
Muse, that you let me sing, for a few short weeks, like Christopher Smart, so
that I may mourn and celebrate my late cat, Myshkin, who companioned me for
nearly 20 years, whose ghost footsteps pace with me each morning as I limp down
the stairs. Give me the acid, for a month or three, of Alexander Pope, that I
may etch a ''Dunciad'': its subject, writers' workshops, at which, for my sins,
I have done time. Help me, O Spirit, bite the hand that fed me, as all true
poets do. Give me the power of the Milton that wrote the ''Areopagitica'' to
oppose all bigotry and censorship.

And if, like any greedy child at Christmastide, I ask too much, simply slip into
my stocking four little lines -lines that equal those of the immortal lady
Anonymous, which begin, ''O Western wind, when wilt thou blow.'' This I ask in
the name of that gentle prophet and poet whose day draws near. Barbara Tuchman
Author of ''The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam'' Santa Claus is
indubitably a gift giver, while I think of the muse in a somewhat different
category - as an inspirer or as an agent provocateur of one's talents, such as
they are. As my 4-year-old grandson put it the other day when I asked him not to
make those awful noises that come from watching television shows about
superheroes, ''That doesn't come from TV, it comes from me. My body tells me to
act rough, that's why I make the noises.'' I am in much the same situation;
something makes me want to write and so I write. I don't really feel the need of
''literary gifts''; I have always been in a condition in which I cannot not
write.

The gift I would really like for Christmas from Santa Claus or the muse, or
whoever has the power to grant it, would be a renewal of the physical energy I
had when I began, or even as late as 10 or even 5 years ago. One cannot write
without the energy that makes the motor go, not to mention that carries one
physically through the corridors of strange libraries and archives for purposes
of research. It may be disputable if I say that one needs energy more than
literary inspiration to function as a writer; but that is what I have discovered
on arriving at the stage called ''senior citizen,'' which one is led to believe
will be serene and comfortable. This is sheer deception, and one wonders why the
elders of a past age unkindly left us the pretense. Doubtless they generally
died too soon to know otherwise.

In any event, no gift for a senior could be more welcome, from whatever
miraculous source, than some small measure of the old energy.

Robert B. Parker

Author of ''A Catskill Eagle: A Spenser Novel''

If Santa Claus were the muse I would ask for the same thing he brought me last
year. If it's not broke, don't fix it. Kathy Acker Author of ''Blood and Guts in
High School'' In his essay ''On Language as Such and on the Language of Man''
Walter Benjamin speaks of two kinds, or two polarities, of language:

First, ''the bourgeois conception of language'' when a human communicates
''factual subject matter to other men.'' This language he calls invalid and
empty, whereas the language whose purpose isn't other than itself, whose purpose
is pleasure, naming ''by which nothing beyond it is communicated'' and ''as such
is the mental being of man,'' is ''both creative and the finished creation.''
Since this is Christmas, I would ask for a living language. Maya Angelou Author
of ''The Heart of a Woman'' First, let me say that I am your most eager fan, Ms.
Claus, not for your attentions to me, but for the great gifts you have lavished
on others. I admire, without a speck of envy, the insight you've given to Toni#1
and the luscious language you poured out to the other Toni.#2 I have not been
jealous at all of the plots you can't resist doling out to Paule,#3 nor the
poignancy you have lavished on Alice.#4 Margaret's#5 stockingful of passion and
Gwendolyn#6 with her cornucopia of lyricism have not caused me one iota of
covetousness, nor do I pine for Audre's#7 clarity, Rosa's#8 productivity or
Zora's#9 insouciance.

I assume you are black (are you kin to Clarence Muse? I met him once), but I
want you to know that I am really proud of the generosity, if not indulgence,
you have shown to our sisters of the paler hues. You could not have given
Edna#1#0 more wit, nor Emily#1#1 more mystery, and the control of English you
dumped on Joan#1#2 is (mind you, I don't blame you) almost excessive.

Could I please have perfect hearing so I can express the melody of speech, an
O.E.D. vocabulary to capture the nuance of thought, a bottomless soul to care
about human frailties and a gentle humor to laugh at our unending foibles? This
is the first fan letter I have ever written to a famous muse, and if you grant
my wishes, I will, I promise, never split another infinitive or dangle any
participle in front of your ever so understanding face again. #1Toni Morrison,
#2Toni Cade Bambara, #3Paule Marshall, #4Alice Walker, #5Margaret Walker,
#6Gwendolyn Brooks, #7Audre Lorde, #8Rosa Guy, #9Zora Neal Hurston, #1#0Edna St.
Vincent Millay, #1#1Emily Dickinson, #1#2Joan Didion. Julee Rosso and Sheila
Lukins Authors of ''The Silver Palate Good Times Cookbook'' A learned Italian at
a bar once told us - a trifle whimsically - that the nine sister Muses were
love, science, beauty, hunting, history, poetry, literature, the arts and song.
If Santa were a muse, we'd wish for the style of Cecil Beaton, the clarity of
Georgia O'Keeffe, the green thumb of Walt Whitman, the patience of Penelope and
the adventure of Indiana Jones. Then for the palettes of the Fauves, the
mischief of Puck, the taste of Thomas Hoving, the perseverance of Pissarro and
the stuff of Sam Shepard. And just for Christmas, the wrappings of Christo, the
whimsy of James Galway, the fantasy of Alice's tea party, the spirit of Julia
Child and the understanding heart of Solomon.

Of course if Santa were a human, we could ask him only for the miracle of peace.
Martin Amis Author of ''Money: A Suicide Note'' I should like to be given a
20,000-line blank-verse epic poem, so funny, moving, true and beautiful that the
days following its appearance would be a spontaneous global holiday. Opposed
soldiers would cross the mine fields and embrace. If the poem were read out loud
in key areas, rain would fall on the parched and the fallow, and when, during
the next round of talks in Geneva, the old actor reconfronted the prison warden
(the poem is so unanswerably pure even an aide's illiterate precis does the
trick) they would melt sobbing into each other's arms.

But this is a sinful dream of literary power. In fact, I'd settle for a new
short story that would ease or illuminate a single reader's day.

Shirley MacLaine

Author of ''Dancing in the Light''

I'd love some kind of collapsible portable contraption on which I can trim my
prose and my body at the same time. Ray Bradbury Author of ''Death Is a Lonely
Business'' What would I list and ask for from a Christmas muse?

The ability to stand in the doorway of any museum gallery and, from across the
room and without looking at the little brass plates, name the painters, one by
one. Not to be one-up, mind you, but to teach my eye, my mind and finally my
blood the amiable differences, so I could write better about them. And last but
no less important, I would like to be able not only to read the prefaces he
wrote for his plays, but then remember easily all of those wonderful words of
George Bernard Shaw. To be able to quote with ease from that grand old man would
make me seem wiser than I am. Katherine Paterson Author of ''Come Sing, Jimmy
Jo'' Santa Claus and I have had problems ever since the jolly old elf appeared
at a Christmas party when I was 5.

Under the tree was a gorgeous doll with real hair that I desired with all my
heart. He gave it with a ''ho ho ho'' to a snooty child of my acquaintance who
already had everything, and handed me a tiny tissue-wrapped package containing a
tin harmonica. If he wants to make up for the inequities of my childhood, then
what I ask is the ability to write a book that will evoke in my young readers
the feelings that haunted me when, at 8 and 11, I read ''The Secret Garden'' and
''The Yearling.'' These feelings went beyond sorrow and delight. I often had
those when I read, but these rare books did something more. They filled me with
wonder. I should like to write such a book before I die. Robert Craft Author of
''A Stravinsky Scrapbook'' Poetry, the smallest mite, the tiniest touch of the
wand to inspire the trying. I began with it, wrote nothing else, published a few
attempts in the little magazines of the 1950's, have kept the folders full of
failures and still write with it in mind. No matter. Trying to write it, one
labors for oneself only, during the only time when impatience can be conquered.
The joy of fitting a word, of combining two words, three . . . but that is
already a hoard. The wastage of words in all other writing! ''Victorieusement
fui le suicide beau.'' Whatever the line means, one likes to imagine Mallarme's
feelings when the startling adverb came to him.

My heroes are poets. I have rejoiced in the privilege, unearned, of spending
evenings with Eliot, days and weeks with Auden, occasions with Cocteau, hours
with Dylan Thomas, Robert Graves, Robert Lowell, Joseph Brodsky, Eugenio
Montale, Ingeborg Bachmann. I venerate them all. Rita Mae Brown Author of
''Sudden Death'' Surely, the Devil invented the Christmas card - if Santa were
the muse he'd whip out those greetings so I was free to work. He'd also pay my
bills.

From this Santa I would like an end to split infinitives and split ends. Also,
no more dangling participles, although I would be thrilled with a pair of
danglers from Tiffany's. Might Santa whisper in my ear the perfect marriage of
character and plot? I've given up on the other kind. My generation marched
against war, racism and sexism. Now they're out marching against the seven
deadly sins. I do wish Santa would give these people a wild spark so I could
include them in my novels.

Finally, since Santa is the muse for only one day he must find a substitute for
the other 364 days. Santa should bring to every writer a cat to curl up in her
or his lap. That's the real muse. Anne Bernays and Justin Kaplan Authors of,
respectively, ''The Address Book'' and ''Walt Whitman: A Life'' Here are a few
gifts we'd like to receive this Christmas: more good ideas than we can possibly
use, including one for a book that ''writes itself''; a merciless self-editor;
the words to describe even a placid, everyday domestic scene without being
boring. We'd also appreciate three courses of lessons - one in making better use
of space, time and energy, another in increasing esthetic adrenaline and
literary stamina, and the third in how to make people believe us when we tell
them, ''The work is go-ing fine.''

And last, we'd like a promise from Santa to renew this generous offer every
year. Tom Robbins Author of ''Jitterbug Perfume'' Now don't laugh, Santa, but I
really think you ought to bring me a bag of golf clubs.

True, I've never swung a metal stick in anger, and I've often made fun of those
who do, but everybody keeps telling me that I need some normality in my life,
and I have a feeling that golfing might provide it. Why, I might even join a
country club. Or would they, like a lot of book reviewers, discriminate against
me because I'm an extraterrestrial?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of authors

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodian Refugees Seem Overlooked

BYLINE: By David M. Fitzgerald; David M. Fitzgerald, who served in the Navy and
was one of the last Americans to leave Cambodia in 1975, is a political and
public affairs consultant in Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For all the talk here about refugees in Afghanistan, Africa and elsewhere,
official Washington seems to have a bureaucratic blind spot for the plight of
more than 230,000 homeless refugees from Cambodia living in impoverished border
refugee camps in Thailand.

To be sure, the United States has been a credible provider of aid to the
refugees, contributing the bulk of the $12 million to $15 million given annually
to both the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations's border relief operation.

But what's at issue is not simply another demand that we throw money at an
emotional problem that happens to be the ill-begotten legacy of a weak-kneed
Congress whose moral collapse effectively handed Cambodia to the Khmer Rouge.
Nor is it the recent House approval of $5 million in military aid and economic
assistance for the two non-Communist factions of Cambodia's tripartite
Government.

Let's keep it simple. This Administration needs to reaffirm the central role the
United States must play in caring for the fate of the refugees.

Since 1975, an estimated 104,000 Cambodians have found a new home here. And
since 1983, all those who fled the destructive Pol Pot regime or who refuse to
work with the new regime have been eligible for admission to the United States.
But bureaucratic intransigence has subverted the system.

Last May, Congressional pressure forced a review of 15,000 to 17,000
applications that had been rejected because of the refugees' alleged association
with the barbarous Khmer Rouge. Only when confronted with persuasive evidence to
the contrary - sworn testimony from relatives living in the United States - was
the decision reversed. The initial rejection was but the latest example of an
official myopia that forces thousands to wait indefinitely for approval of
emigration applications. Some have waited in these squalid camps for three
years. For others, the camps may become their permanent home.

Vietnam's last successful offensive swelled the ranks of those seeking sanctuary
in Thailand. The Thais have not yet chosen to accept these tattered people as
refugees, but the technical classification assigned to them - ''temporarily
displaced persons'' - is hardly appropriate to a people who have left behind a
ravaged wasteland of human bones and Communist brutality and have no obvious
wish to return. And the sad truth of the matter is that many who wish to escape
to a new life will be forced to return - particularly if Thai troops continue to
tighten the frontiers in order to ''pre-screen'' refugees at the border.

The message here becomes increasingly clear: The West, and perhaps the
democratic nations of Asia as well, have tired of an issue that refuses to
resolve itself conveniently. And this, too, is sad. For while we are prepared to
join with China and other Asian nations to resist Vietnam's ambitions in
Cambodia, the real victims of Marxism are themselves ignored.

When one reviews Cambodia's tragedy, there is only room for compassion, not
petty politics. If ever an issue called for bipartisan support, it is the plight
of the refugees. I do not mean to argue for an open-ended immigration policy.
But it is plainly the duty of Congress and the executive to insure that all
those with legitimate qualifications are admitted to this country as quickly as
possible. For the rest, we must intensify our efforts to provide adequate aid,
especially food, shelter and medical care.

They not only need our help but deserve it. The responsibility for Cambodia's
tragedy must be shared by many, including a repentant Congress. After all, had
it not been for Congressional pusillanimity, the United States would never have
been forced to abandon so ignobly a friend and ally. Friendship cannot be
forgotten, or moral obligations ignored. If we will not take the lead for
overseeing refugee relief, who will?

This summer, Americans pledged $70 million in one day to assist Africa's famine
relief. Let this spirit be an inspiration to those who have turned away from
Cambodia's people. Compassion is not a finite commodity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEATH OF EX-JUSTICE STEWART IS LAID TO EFFECTS OF STROKE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 511 words

DATELINE: HANOVER, N.H., Dec. 8


Former Associate Justice Potter Stewart of the Supreme Court died of
complications of a stroke that included pneumonia, a hospital spokesman said
today.

The spokesman, Mike Nobel, said pathologists did not cite any other
complications. Justice Stewart died at 3:20 P.M. Saturday, five days after
suffering a stroke at his daughter's home in Putney, Vt. His wife, two sons and
daughter were at his bedside in Upper Connecticut River Valley Hospital.

Services were scheduled at the National Cathedral in Washington on Wednesday,
with burial at Arlington National Cemetery.

Praise From Others

Justice Stewart's retirement in July 1981 left a vacancy that was filled by
Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman to sit on the Court. ''I am particularly
aware of the strong role played by Justice Stewart because I occupy the seat on
the Court which he vacated in 1981,'' Justice O'Connor said Saturday. ''He
devoted his life to public service and used his exceptional intellect for the
enhancement of the quality of life for all citizens of this country.''

Justice Stewart also drew praise from President Reagan, Vice President Bush and
his former colleagues on the Court.

Chief Justice Warren E. Burger cited Justice Stewart's ''dedicated and
distinguished service to our country, first on the Court of Appeals and then on
the Supreme Court.''

Mr. Reagan said, ''It is as a patriot and a good lawyer - indeed a brilliant man
of the law - that we remember Justice Potter Stewart.''

Vice President Bush described his longtime friend as ''truly an outstanding
man.''

''The symbol of decency and honor, he served on our highest court with
objectivity,'' said Mr. Bush, who twice took the Vice-Presidential oath of
office from him.

Other Justices' Remarks

Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun said Justice Stewart had added ''basic
centrist vision'' to the High Court.

Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. praised him as a ''jurist of great
distinction.''

Associate Justice Byron R. White called him a ''great and extremely enjoyable
colleague.''

Associate Justice John Paul Stevens said he had been ''a true source of
inspiration.''

Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr. said Justice Stewart had been a ''very
great and distinguished Justice.''

Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist called him a ''first-rate judge.''

Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall said, ''He always put his country ahead of
everything else.'' ----He Opposed Vietnam War By The Associated Press CBS News
reported Saturday that Justice Stewart had opposed the Vietnam War as
unconsitutional and had tried to persuade the Supreme Court to declare it so.

In an interview in 1979 with CBS News that he requested be held until after his
death, Justice Stewart said: ''The Constitution clearly provides that only
Congress can declare war, and Congress had never declared war.

''Well, this country was in enough controversy, and it seems to me there are
times when it's up to the Court to perform its function and to provide what
leadership it can and often has provided.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 11, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ELECTS SWISS TO HEAD REFUGEE AGENCY

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 10


The General Assembly today unanimously elected a 47-year-old Swiss national,
Jean-Pierre Hocke, to the post of United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Mr. Hocke succeeds Poul Hartling, the former Danish Prime Minister, in the
$120,000-a-year position on Jan. 1. Mr. Hartling, who has served since 1978,
retired.

Mr. Hocke, who is director of operational activities for the International
Committee of the Red Cross, was nominated earlier in the day by Secretary
General Javier Perez de Cuellar.

Mr. Hocke's appointment for a three-year term follows months of intense, often
bitter, political campaigning not seen at the United Nations since the last time
members chose a Secretary General.

The reason for the fierce competition is that the agency, which cares for 10
million refugees throughout the world and has twice won the Nobel Peace Prize,
brings with it high visibility at home and prestige abroad. In the last eight
years, the organization's budget has grown tenfold, from $50 million to $500
million, with a staff of 1,600 in 90 offices around the globe.

'No Room for Gloom'

Mr. Hocke is a former junior manager with a car-importing company in Nigeria who
later taught economics and company law at a business school in his native
Lausanne in Switzerland. He joined the Geneva-based International Committee of
the Red Cross in 1968, heading field delegations in Nigeria, Lebanon, Jordan and
Vietnam before becoming head of operations in 1973.

''There is no room for gloom if one is determined to act,'' Mr. Hocke said in a
recent interview with a Swiss newspaper. He added of the refugee problem, ''I
have good reason to believe that this problem can be defused, and that in the
long run it can be fought even at its roots.''

Four career diplomats competed against Mr. Hocke: Egypt's Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, Butros Ghali; Norway's chief delegate to the United Nations,
Tom Vraalsen; a former Swedish Defense Minister, Anders Thunborg, and the
Netherlands' chief delegate to the United Nations, Max van der Stoel.

When the race began more than a year ago, it was assumed that the post would go
to a Scandinavian candidate, but after the Swedes and the Norwegians could not
agree on a candidate, the race was thrown wide open.

Foreign ministry officials visited key diplomats in various home capitals to
drum up support. The Dutch brought a former Ambassador to Washington out of
retirement to work as campaign manager for their candidate.

Candidates Visit Camps

Mr. Perez de Cuellar was subjected to an endless stream of visitors, telephone
calls, letters, advice and cajolement, a process that intensified in recent
weeks. Candidates even visited refugee camps to prove familiarity with the
issues.

The Swiss, who are not members of the United Nations but maintain an observer
mission here, followed instructions from home ''to push as much as we could''
for Mr. Hocke's candidacy, according to one Swiss official. They entertained so
much that one of their competitors accused them of ''eating and drinking their
way through the developing world.''

The United States, which provides 25 percent of the agency's budget, lobbied
strongly for Mr. Hocke. American officials let it be known that at a time of
decreasing international financing for refugee programs and increasing
Congressional concern over the effectiveness of the organization, a strong
administrator like Mr. Hocke was preferable to a career diplomat, according to
diplomats and United Nations officials.

In budget committee meetings this fall, the United States strongly criticized
the administration of the refugee agency, charging it with ''severe deficiencies
in the areas of budget control, cash management, accounting control, travel
costs, procurement and project activities.''

American officials denied charges by some Western and third world diplomats that
they had threatened to withdraw financial support from the refugee agency if Mr.
Hocke was not chosen. ''We absolutely deny it,'' said Richard C. Hottelet,
spokesman for the United States Mission. ''It sounds like sour grapes to us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 11, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN TEMPERS HIS VIEW ON SOVIET

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10


President Reagan said today that Soviet-American relations would continue to
feel the impact of human rights issues. But in his annual speech marking
International Human Rights Day, he abandoned the harsh tone with which he has
previously denounced rights violations by the Soviet Union.

''Make no mistake about it,'' he said. ''Human rights will continue to have a
profound effect on the United States-Soviet relationship as a whole because they
are fundamental to our vision of an enduring peace.''

But he avoided mentioning particular dissidents, obstacles to Jewish emigration
or other specific problems, as he has in the past. He adopted an approach that
reflected his new strategy of pressing Soviet leaders privately and quietly on
these issues in the hope, Administration officials said, that Moscow will not
feel it has to resist because it is being publicly bludgeoned.

Last month in Geneva, the President was reported to have spent more than an hour
on the subject with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.

'Americans Will Be Watching'

''I made it very clear to him that human rights are an abiding concern of the
American people,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''We had a long and confidential discussion.
And at the conclusion of our meetings, we declared in a joint statement that
humanitarian issues would be resolved in as humanitarian spirit. Americans will
be watching hopefully to see whether that pledge is observed.''

The President spoke in the Executive Office Building, adjacent to the White
House, to a group of about 85 invited guests from various ethnic and religious
organizations active in human rights causes.

His strongest criticism of the Soviet Union was reserved for the war in
Afghanistan, where, he said, 120,000 Soviet troops remain six years after the
intervention.

''They have slaughtered innocent women and children,'' the President said.
''They have employed poison gas. And they have loaded toys with small explosives
in an attempt to demoralize people by crippling Afghan children.''

Mr. Reagan condemned rights violations in Cambodia, where ''the Communist rulers
of Vietnam have launched vicious attacks upon Cambodian refugees,'' he said.

''In Ethiopia,'' he said, ''a Marxist Government has used famine to punish large
segments of its own population.''

Criticizes Eastern Bloc

He denounced Poland's continued ban on the independent trade union, Solidarity;
Rumania's religious persecution, which he said ''includes the destruction of
Bibles,'' and Bulgaria's ''repression of the Turkish minority and the Islamic
faith.''

He called Cuba the Western Hemisphere's worst example of ''the country where
institutionalized totalitarianism has consistently violated the rights of the
citizens.'' And he added, ''Unfortunately, the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua
seems determined to embark on the same course.''

Although most of his complaints were directed against Communist governments, he
said that ''in Chile and the Philippines, too, we have shown our strong concern
with our friends who deviate from a strongly established democratic tradition.''

He denounced South Africa as well. ''The inhuman policy of apartheid
continues,'' he said, citing the granting of ''essentially unlimited powers'' to
the police and the arrest of thousands of South Africans who have been ''denied
even elementary judicial protection.''

Mr. Reagan expressed impatience with the South African Government. ''I have said
that apartheid is abhorrent,'' he said. ''It is time that the Government of
South Africa took steps to end it and to reach out for compromise and
reconciliation to end the turmoil in that strife-torn land.''

The President gave special attention to what he called Iran's ''rampant
religious persecution'' of Bahais, members of a religion founded in the 19th
century and dedicated to the concept of the unity of all religions and all
mankind. ''Since 1979,'' he said, ''198 Bahais have been put to death. Seven
hundred sixty-seven are in prison, some 10,000 made homeless, and over 25,000
forced to flee their country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 11, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'KIM PHUC' AND 'SANCTUARY' IN DOUBLE BILL

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


MANY a movie maker with a message has succumbed to the notion that a virtuous
cause can pardon esthetic sins. Two variations on this agitprop fallacy open
today as a double bill at Film Forum.

''Kim Phuc'' is the story of a little girl whose picture, as she ran along a
road in Vietnam in June 1972 after having been burned by napalm in an air raid
by the South Vietnamese, moved people throughout the world. Eleven years later,
a Dutch director, Manus van de Kamp, tracked her down and made this 25-minute
documentary about her harrowing experience and what has happened to her since.

Kim Phuc has grown into a lovely and brave 20 year old. She still bears the
scars of her injury and requires treatment. It is impossible not to be touched
by her account of her sufferings and by her spirit, which Fred Brinkman's camera
captures vividly.

But Mr. van de Kamp has something more on his mind than Kim Phuc. He uses her
story as a way of replaying America's role in Vietnam. The powerful pictures of
the litle girl running in pain and panic are shown over and over. They are
offered as representing the sufferings of the Vietnamese people - and the blame,
we are given to understand, is all America's.

Mr. van de Kamp gets in digs at the United States wherever he can. Referring to
the difficulty in obtaining drugs to treat the girl, the narrator tells us,
''The family has spent a lot of money in the black market buying ineffective
medicines that are dumped unscrupulously in the third world by Western
pharmaceutical concerns.''

Kim Phuc herself says despite the misery America brought her, ''I feel sympathy,
because it was the American doctors who saved me at the time I was almost
dead.'' Mr. van de Kamp couldn't leave it at that. His narrator comments
sarcastically that the girl's treatment was publicized as a ''showcase of
American care.'' Such exploitation, if it did occur, is of course shameful, but
so is the way Kim Phuc's story has been exploited for this tendentious work.

The subjects of ''Sanctuary'' are moving in more ways than one. This incoherent
hour film is a pulp-fiction treatment of the experiences of refugees in various
parts of the world. It begins with some peasants, apparently in Central America,
who come upon a squad of soldiers shooting down civilians. The peasants are
saved by a band of guerrillas, and one family decides to flee the country before
the government takes revenge. Although this portion of the movie was made in
Nicaragua, I don't think we are meant to infer that the cruel soldiers are
Sandinistas and the handsome rebels are supported by the Central Intelligence
Agency.

As the peasants are passing a checkpoint, they are suddenly replaced by an
African family, making a harsh trek to a refugee camp, where they find they have
still not escaped hunger and disease. They in turn are replaced by a family in a
camp somewhere in the Middle East. Its members speak of a ''homeland'' they can
see but may not enter.

The intention of James Becket, a former United Nations film maker, who produced,
directed and wrote this movie, is to demonstrate that the tragedy of refugees
cuts across national boundaries. The technique of switching families is
interesting, and the scenes in the camps, although heavy handed in their use of
beautiful children and sorrowing adults, seem authentic. But are the problems of
the Central Americans, the Africans and the Palestinians really as similar as
suggested here?

About halfway through, the script makes a bewildering shift, and we are watching
assorted refugees trying to gain admission to a Western country suspiciously
like the United States. Among them now are some Russian Jews and an Asian
family. (The latter could be Vietnamese boat people. if so, somebody should
bring them to the attention of Mr. van de Kamp.) They all run into difficulties
with officials, including one particularly unpleasant man who turns down every
application except for a case where the refugees might serve as cheap domestic
workers for some friends of his. The acting is execrable.

Then, as abruptly as a television commercial, the screen is taken up by a church
group led by a pastor who wants to open his doors to an illegal alien on the run
from a couple of hardboiled plainclothesmen. It's a commercial for the
''sanctuary'' movement. What this has to do with those Palestinians or Africans
is fuzzy, but the main thing is that the church members finally stand together,
hand on one another's shoulder, protecting the fugitive from the police. The
pose might have been drawn from post office murals of the 1930's.

This muddle is sponsored by the World Council of Churches.

War and Flight KIM PHUC, directed by Manus van de Kamp; photographed by Fred
Brinkman; both films distributed by Icarus Films. Running time: 25 minutes.
SANCTUARY, produced, directed and written (in Spanish, Ugandan dialect, Arabic,
Russian and Laotian with English voice-over) by James Becket; photographed by
Michael Anderson; a World Council of Churches film. Running time: 59 minutes.
Both films are unrated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 12, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

YALE, ITS HOUSE PUT IN ORDER, GETS READY TO SET NEW GOALS

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1693 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, Dec. 10


A. Bartlett Giamatti, who is in his eighth and final year as president of Yale
University, sat in a stiff armchair in his Woodbridge Hall office one recent
morning and considered his legacy to the 284-year old institution.

''Call me Bart the Refurbisher,'' he suggested. ''I've spent $20 million on
deferred maintenance and will only be remembered by people who like to go
through steam tunnels. If my name goes on anything, it will be the Giamatti
Memorial Wiring System.''

Eight years ago Mr. Giamatti, then a popular professor of English and
comparative literature and an expert on Dante, Spenser and the Boston Red Sox,
was selected to succeed Kingman Brewster Jr. as the 19th president of Yale
University.

He took over an institution that, by all accounts, was experiencing serious
internal problems. Among them were budget deficits, a floundering capital-fund
drive, crumbling buildings, an uncertain academic mission and a disgruntled body
of alumni.

''When Bart took office,'' recalled John A. Wilkinson, the university secretary,
''there was a real sense of malaise.''

On Tuesday the 16-member Yale Corporation, the university governing board,
announced that Mr. Giamatti would be succeeded July 1 by Benno C. Schmidt Jr.,
the 43-year-old dean of the Columbia University Law School.

It is generally agreed that Mr. Schmidt, a renowned constitutional-law scholar
who is an expert on the First Amendment, race relations and the New York
Rangers, will be assuming control of a much happier institution.

The finances are in order, the physical plant is on its way to restoration and,
despite inconsistent performances by the football team, Old Blues are once again
enthusiastic about their alma mater.

''The Giamatti era,'' said William Kessen, a professor of psychology, ''was one
of preserving and protecting, an absolutely necessary time of healing some
wounds.''

As president of the country's third oldest institution of higher education, Mr.
Schmidt will confront a new set of issues, beginning with the subtle and complex
task of defining academic priorities for an institution that, for all its
academic and financial muscle, must nevertheless make some hard decisions about
what it can afford to do well.

''The time of turning back on ourselves is over,'' said Cyrus R. Vance, the
former Secretary of State and the chairman of the presidential search committee.
''It's time to define a new set of academic priorities.''

High on the list of concerns are the natural sciences, which at Yale have
labored in the shadows of English, history, political science, economics and
other areas where the university has been a national force.

There is widespread agreement among faculty members and others that, to remain
competitive with its peers, Yale must take steps to improve its science
offerings, especially in the physical sciences.

''Any university that claims to give a liberal education today must have strong
science, if only because of the values and philosophical issues inherent in the
way human beings use science,'' said the Episcopal Bishop, Paul Moore Jr., a
senior member of the corporation.

Another problem is engineering, which Yale virtually abandoned in the 1960's
only to see it emerge in recent years as a key academic area in an increasingly
technological society.

Mr. Giamatti expresses a certain irritation about such talk. ''I'm tired of
reading that science is weak at Yale,'' he said. ''This has been a major focus
of efforts.''

Loss of Academic Stars

Perhaps most fundamentally, the new president faces a task that Mr. Vance
described as ''replenishing great strengths.''

During Mr. Giamatti's tenure a significant number of academic stars reached, or
approached, retirement age - giants such as Edmund Morgan and John Blum in
history, Louis Martz in English and Robert Dahl in political science. Finding
replacements will be a big priority.

''Actually, you never replace a great scholar who retires,'' said Guido
Calabresi, the Yale Law School dean. ''If you try to do that, you end up with
burnt-out volcanoes. Instead, you look for the giants of the future -like a chef
getting the two-star restaurant before it becomes three-star.''

Some academics at other institutions have questioned whether, given the
increased competition from public universities, Yale can continue to maintain
its preeminence in the humanities. Mr. Calabresi, though, expressed confidence
that it could.

''A great institution always thinks that its Golden Age has just passed and that
it just has to do a few things to restore it,'' he said. ''You always have to be
losing great people. Otherwise, you never had them.''

Mr. Giamatti's first instructions from the corporation when he assumed the
presidency in July 1978 was to get control of the finances of an institution
that had run up more than $10 million in cumulative deficits in the previous
three years.

The new president brought in Jerald L. Stevens, a former Secretary for Human
Services in Massachusetts, and they worked their way through virtually every
item in the budget.

Changes included downgrading water polo from a sport to a club activity, phasing
out 40 senior faculty positions, establishing energy-reduction programs and
adopting a new billing system under which students had to pay tuition earlier in
the year.

After two years Yale reached what Mr. Giamatti described as ''financial
equilibrium.''

The president also addressed the income side of the equation, injecting vigor
into a languishing capital-fund drive that, after being extended for a year,
finally closed its books in 1979 with $374 million.

During Mr. Giamatti's tenure the size of the endowment has risen from $545
million to $1.35 billion.

Portraits of Two Presidents

Kingman Brewster, Mr. Giamatti's predecessor, presided over Yale during a period
of turbulence and expansion. He was handsome and urbane, occasionally
phlegmatic, and combined a patrician manner with a relish for involvement in the
political and social issues of the day. Many alumni thought he went too far in
trying to understand - and in making compromises with - students angered about
the Vietnam War and racial injustice.

Bart Giamatti has been first and foremost a teacher, and in his public and
private utterances he has seemed to exude what makes Yale distinctive. He has
talked with passion about undergraduate education, the importance of humanities
and the virtues of learning for its own sake.

Mr. Giamatti brought a high level of wit to his position. That has served him
well in what, other than finances, has probably been the most urgent item on his
agenda: improving relations with Yale's more than 100,000 alumni.

In addition to disaffection over Mr. Brewster's handling of student protesters,
many Old Blues were angered by Yale's efforts to broaden its student body by
admitting more disadvantaged and minority students, in some cases to the
explicit exclusion of sons of alumni. The decision to begin admitting women to
Yale College in the fall of 1979 was also an emotional, if temporary, source of
controversy.

Mr. Giamatti made a dozen trips a year to meet alumni groups, carrying the
message that alumni made up a valued constituency. By all accounts his efforts
paid off. Contributions rose from the $9.6 million given by 34,000 alumni during
his first year to $26.4 million from 45,000 last year.

His most trying moments involved labor relations, most conspicuously a 10-week
strike in the fall of 1984 by Local 35, the newly formed union of clerical and
technical workers. The walkout produced antagonism between striking and
nonstriking employees that persists in many Yale offices to this day.

In his academic policies Mr. Giamatti pushed undergraduate writing, providing
funds for a new set of ''writing intensive'' courses that now reach 95 percent
of all students, and he successfully urged the faculty to reinstitute a
foreign-language requirement.

Mr. Giamatti also intentionally encouraged a trend that was already under way
when he became president: more interdisciplinary majors and programs of study.
Yale now has 14 such programs, including those in Renaissance and film studies.

Such policies reinforced his goal of a leaner, more versatile institution. ''My
goal has been to encourage jointness, to push people to think of affiliations
rather than to operate as solo entrepreneurs.'' he said.

One major academic change that occurred during the Giamatti era involved
engineering. In the early 1960's, largely out of a calculation that engineering
was edging closer to applied physics and chemistry, Yale abolished its
century-old School of Engineering, folding it into the arts and sciences.

Sensing that the absence of a strong engineering presence had become a
significant liability in recruiting able students and faculty members, the Yale
faculty recently voted to reconstitute three branches of engineering - chemical,
electrical and mechanical - as full departments offering undergraduate and
graduate degrees.

In addition, Mr. Giamatti put significant resources into the department of
chemistry, a field where Yale was also weak.

Despite these improvements, the corporation has made it known that it views the
natural sciences, particularly the physical sciences, as an important priority
for Mr. Schmidt.

But improving sciences raises serious problems, such as the enormous cost
involved and the difficulty in attracting top scientists to an institution whose
main mission is teaching undergraduates. Some faculty members also argue that
''big science'' requires alliances with industry that threaten academic
independence.

The investment that Mr. Giamatti made in chemistry represented only a fraction
of the $20 million that he spent on the restoration of Yale's physical plant,
much of which was built half a century ago and needed considerable attention.

The corporation gave the restoration work high priority and Mr. Giamatti
accepted it as a major theme of his administration.

''My ego is less wrapped up in creating new edifices than in restoring existing
ones,'' he said. ''My motto has been: get your ducts in a row.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 12, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Politics;
Whither Charles S. Robb?

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


Eight years ago, when Charles S. Robb moved to Richmond to serve first as
Lieutenant Governor of Virginia, then as Governor, he was best known as Lyndon
B. Johnson's son-in-law, a former Marine captain who had married the President's
daughter, Lynda Bird, then gone off to the war in Vietnam.

Next January, when he leaves the Governor's office and moves back to the
Washington area, to his house in McLean, Va., next door to Senator Edward M.
Kennedy Jr. of Massachusetts, Mr. Robb will be an important political figure in
his own right.

His prominence is such that last month, when he had a cataract removed, The
Washington Post carried two articles on the eye surgery in as many days,
combining medical details with speculation about Mr. Robb's future in national
politics.

He tries to dispel such speculation with comments such as ''I have no present
agenda for national politics'' or ''I have no present intention of seeking any
other office.'' But when pressed, he will add, ''I don't absolutely rule out
anything.''

A Major Spokesman for Centrist Forces

Mr. Robb, who is 46 years old, was unable to seek a second term as Governor
under Virginia law, but the credit he has been given for reversing the political
fortunes of Democrats in that state has propelled him into the forefront of
Democratic politics as a major spokesman for the party's centrist forces and has
set off considerable speculation in his home state that he might be eyeing a run
for the Senate in a couple of years or so.

Candidates on this year's winning Democratic ticket in Virginia tied themselves
closely to Mr. Robb's personal popularity and to his record of fiscal
conservatism and initiatives in such areas as education and minority
appointments.

Mr. Kennedy, who is considering a bid for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, no doubt views Mr. Robb as more than just a neighbor these days. The
Senator's political strategists have mentioned the Governor as one of several
Southern Democrats who would be high on Mr. Kennedy's list of possible
running-mates.

But Mr. Robb, at a breakfast meeting with reporters here today, indicated that
he would use whatever influence he has gained to assist some of the party's
lesser-known and more moderate Presidential and Vice-Presidential hopefuls. He
mentioned, among others, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Gov.
Bruce Babbitt of Arizona and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia.

''I will be working with several potential candidates whose ideas I would like
to see get more national exposure,'' said Mr. Robb, who supported Senator John
Glenn of Ohio for the party's Presidential nomination in 1984.

Some of Mr. Robb's own views on foreign and domestic issues could make it
difficult for him to run on a ticket headed by a more liberal Democrat. He said
he supports ''the concept'' of providing aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents and
favors proceeding with the research phase of President Reagan's proposal for a
space-based missile defense system.

Mr. Robb also said he supports a tax increase if spending reductions alone
cannot eliminate Federal budget deficits. And in cutting the budget, he said
only interest on the national debt should be exempted. Asked if he was including
Social Security, he said he was.

The Governor suggested that Mr. Kennedy had yet to establish his credibility
with party moderates, especially in the South, which is expected to be a major
campaign battlefield in 1988.

''At this point,'' said Mr. Robb, who was born in Arizona, ''I think it's fair
to say the South wouldn't be his most fertile area.'' He added: ''Personally, I
have a fine relation with Ted Kennedy. We're neighbors. But philosophically he
and I are not normally mentioned in the same breath. I'm identified with a
fiscally responsible approach to spending, and I think he's identified with
social issues more than I am.''

But Mr. Robb said that if Mr. Kennedy could ''craft for himself an agenda that
seems to appeal to the national interest, an approach we're comfortable with,''
then Southern Democrats ''could be more enthusiastic in supporting him.''

Not a Flip Remark

At one point in his session with reporters, Mr. Robb, commenting on his new
political prominence, said off-handedly, ''I'm getting the most political
attention I'm likely to get unless I take a wrong turn on a bridge.'' He
immediately caught himself and insisted that he was not making a flip remark
about Mr. Kennedy's automobile accident at Chappaquiddick, in which a young
woman in the car was killed.

In January Mr. Robb plans to join the 300-member law firm of Hunton & Williams,
with offices in Washington and Richmond. Noting that the firm's clients include
some major utility companies, Mr. Robb joked that he had asked to represent
''Iowa Power and Light, and New Hampshire Edison.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles S. Robb

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CANDIDATES STUDY RACE IN SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 12


The resignation of Mayor Roger Hedgecock of San Diego leaves the biggest state's
second-largest city with a field of possible successors.

Mr. Hedgecock resigned Tuesday, minutes before a judge gave him a three-year
suspended sentence, including one year in county custody, in connection with
$360,000 in illegal campaign contributions.

Mr. Hedgecock, a 39-year-old environmentalist, is a moderate Republican in a
heavily Republican area. Because there are no obvious candidates with this
combination of credentials, a change in San Diego's political direction is
considered likely no matter who replaces him.

Decision on Election

The City Council has 30 days to decide whether to call a special election or
appoint someone to fill out the rest of Mr. Hedgecock's term, which runs until
December 1988. The Council, which is to take up the matter Monday, was expected
to favor a special election.

If the Council chooses an election, it must be held within five months unless
the voters approve an extension. If no candidate wins a majority in a
nonpartisan primary, the two top contenders, regardless of party affiliation,
will compete in a runoff.

Meanwhile, Mr. Hedgecock has appealed his sentence and officials said Wednesday
that it would be a year or more before his appeal was concluded. The Sheriff
must decide whether Mr. Hedgecock must serve his time in county custody in jail.


Leading Contenders

There are five leading contenders to replace him:

Maureen O'Connor, a Democrat, a former San Diego Port Commissioner who lost to
Mr. Hedgecock in a close race two years ago. She has been a close political ally
of Senator Pete Wilson, a Republican, despite their party differences. Mr.
Wilson was Mr. Hedgecock's predecessor as Mayor but he has not been active in
local politics recently.

William Cleator, a leading conservative on the City Council. Mr. Cleator, a
Republican, is part-owner of a family's furniture business and has close ties to
the city's business leaders. He served as Acting Mayor from January 1983, when
Mr. Wilson left City Hall, to May 1983, when he lost to Mr. Hedgecock in the
mayoral race.

Deputy Mayor Ed Struiksma, a Marine veteran of the Vietnam War who is serving a
second term on the Council. Last week the Council chose Mr. Struiksma, a
Republican, as Deputy Mayor. He became Acting Mayor automatically after Mr.
Hedgecock stepped down.

Police Chief William Kolender, a Republican, who achieved widespread recognition
last year when a gunman killed several people and injured others in a shootout
at a McDonald's restaurant.

Michael Gotch, a Democrat on the Council whose views are considered most like
those of Mr. Hedgecock, whose program centered on limiting San Diego's growth.

Future of Development Limit

Mr. Hedgecock contended that growth should be managed so that partly developed
areas absorbed new construction before the city's spacious canyons and mesas
were opened to development.

This fall a voter-initiated referendum won approval for banning development in
certain areas of the city unless it is approved by a referendum. Voters will be
watching how Mr. Hedgecock's successor enforces the measure, which passed by a
wide margin. Many see it as part of a Hedgecock political legacy.

Mr. Gotch supported Mr. Hedgecock on this and other matters, but he is viewed as
lacking Mr. Hedgecock's broad appeal across party lines.

''Gotch is often seen as the heir apparent to Roger,'' said David Lewis, a
Republican political consultant in San Diego.''But that's misleading to a
degree. Roger was a charismatic leader who attracted a strong, solid core of
volunteers. Although Gotch is pretty much down the line with Roger, that doesn't
mean all those people will convert.''

If one of the two Democrats runs, there will be heavy pressure on the other to
step aside so as to avoid splitting the Democratic vote. Democrats hold only 68
of more than 770 elective offices in San Diego County.

Supporters Are Bitter

Another factor that will come into play is a San Diego law that limits
individuals, corporations and political action committees to contributions of no
more than $250 for any candidate for city office. The law makes fund-raising
more difficult in San Diego than in many cities.

Some of Mr. Hedgecock's supporters spoke bitterly about Mr. Hedgecock's legal
troubles.

''Inclusionary politics was the hallmark of Roger's administration,'' said Jay
Powell, a Hedgecock ally who is an official of the Sierra Club. ''Neighborhood
groups, other groups, he put them on an equal footing with the downtown
establishment. I think the good ol' boys didn't like that. I can't say whether
there was a political vendetta going here, but I think there was an element of
that in the prosecution of his case.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 14, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING;
AFTER THE GAMES, A REAL BATTLEFIELD

BYLINE: By Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 49, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


International sports competitions routinely produce intense feelings of rivalry,
but at the Southeast Asian Games, which got under way in Bangkok, Thailand, this
week, the most intense rivalry is not among the various national teams but among
the members of a single team - a disparate group of athletes representing the
divided nation of Cambodia.

Like the coalition that is fighting to depose the Vietnam-installed Government
in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian team is made up of people drawn from the three
major anti-Hanoi factions: the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, another
non-Communist group led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Communist Khmer
Rouge. During the three years in the late 1970's when the Khmer Rouge held
power, they killed millions of other Cambodians, and among the 17 Cambodian
athletes at the Bangkok games are Khmer Rouge guerrillas on the one hand and, on
the other, some of those whose relatives were victims of the mass slayings.

Still, like other coalition athletes at the games, Pou Sothirak, a badminton
player who works as a Boeing Company engineer in Seattle, says that the common
effort against Vietnam takes precedence over his feelings against the Khmer
Rouge, who, he says, killed his mother, two brothers and two sisters. ''Right
now,'' he says, ''we must be united.''

The athlete-insurgents cannot really use the games as a substitute battlefield
in a direct war against Hanoi, because both Laos and Vietnam are boycotting the
competition to protest the organizers' acceptance of coalition athletes to
represent Cambodia. When the games are over, however, some of the athletes will
find the real fighting at hand once more. All six members of the Cambodian
shooting team are Khmer Rouge guerrillas who will return to jungle warfare when
the competition ends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS PREDICTS HAVOC IF HELOSES VOTE

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Dec. 14


President Ferdinand E. Marcos today accused his election opponent, Corazon
Aquino, of being influenced by both Communist ''reds'' and American ''whites,''
and he warned that 10 years of bloodshed would follow an Aquino victory.

At a speech and a news conference that opened his campaign for re-election, Mr.
Marcos accused his opponent of weakness and ignorance of affairs of state. ''You
cannot discharge the presidency with smiles or tears,'' he said.

At the same time, he publicly acknowledged for the first time that the
elections, which are scheduled for Feb. 7, might not be held because of a
constitutional flaw in the way he has structured them. Next Tuesday, the Supreme
Court is scheduled to hear 11 challenges to the constitutionality of the
elections because the President has not stepped down to create a vacancy.

If the court upholds these objections, he said, ''we would first seek a
reconsideration, of course.''

If that fails, he said, the vote would have to wait 15 more months, until the
statutory date set for elections in 1987.

Harsh Tone

In his speech, Mr. Marcos took the same harsh tone with which he accepted his
nomination on Wednesday. He warned that there would be vengeance and war if Mrs.
Aquino and her running mate, Salvador H. Laurel, defeat him.

Responding to a statement by Mrs. Aquino that she might put Mr. Marcos on trial
if she wins, he said: ''If she talks like this, my followers will go to war with
hers. A vengeful candidate is not a good candidate.''

If Mrs. Aquino wins, he said, ''we are due for perhaps 10 years of instability
in the Philippines that may be worse than the present kind of bloodshed.''

Speaking in the town of Lipa, 50 miles south of Manila, he struck an
anti-American note, warning that his opponents would sell out the country to
foreign influence. He repeatedly hinted that the Central Intelligence Agency had
become involved in the campaign.

''I tell the opposition that we should not submit to the whites who are
everywhere in our land, allegedly to witness the elections,'' he said. ''Is the
C.I.A. fielding flying voters?''

In past elections, Mr. Marcos's party has been accused of employing ''flying
voters'' who vote at several polling places.

'Lust for Power'

Mr. Marcos said the opposition was ''deliberately, openly'' courting foreign
help and that, if elected, ''is going to sell the country down the river.''

He sometimes mixed his references to the different influences, saying at one
point, ''I tell the whites to leave us alone.''

He added: ''Don't let the reds run our Government. Let us not allow foreigners
to interfere.''

He made light of the fact that his opponent is a woman, saying his father had
taught him two things: never to argue with or to strike a woman, because ''in
both cases you lose.''

Of his opponents, he said: ''They're like children without experience Are you
going to entrust to them the future of your family? No, because you're going to
trust one who is strong and firm, not one who is inexperienced.''

Vietnam Cited

''If we can't consolidate power,'' he said, ''we might have a repeat of bloody
events in Vietnam, Cuba, Nicaragua, El Salvador and others.''

In the past, Mr. Marcos has fended off Western criticism of his Government,
saying, ''This is not another Vietnam.''

While he vilified Mrs. Aquino, Mr. Marcos took another approach to Mr. Laurel,
whose public image has suffered because he supported Mr. Marcos throughout nine
years of martial law and because his family has links to that of the President.

''I would never say anything bad about the Laurels because I owe them my life,''
Mr. Marcos said. ''If they attack me, I will close my eyes to what they say.''

Mr. Laurel's father, Jose Laurel Sr., was a Supreme Court justice who acquitted
the young Mr. Marcos of murdering a man who had defeated his father in an
election.

''I won't forget that,'' the President said, ''so you won't see me say anything
bad about the Laurels.''

Advice for Laurel

He then added, ''In fact, I have advised Doy Laurel to stay away from the reds
as well as the whites.'' Doy is Mr. Laurel's nickname.

Mr. Marcos's own vice presidential candidate, Arturo M. Tolentino, an
Assemblyman and former Foreign Minister, joined him at the rally and said he
continuted to hold his previously stated belief that the election is
unconstitutional.

Because of unorthodox views such as these, the choice of Mr. Tolentino from
among the President's many loyal supporters was a surprise. Mr. Tolentino, like
Mr. Marcos, said he would accept the decision of the Supreme Court.

The President appeared to bridle at the suggestion that he was in a position to
dictate an opinion to the Supreme Court and to use it to call off an election if
he was not certain of winning.

''I consider that offensive,'' he said. ''I cannot conceive of the Supreme Court
being used by anyone, even the President.''

The President's Wife

Another possibility that has been discussed widely in Manila is that Mr. Marcos
or his vice presidential candidate could step aside during the campaign and use
a loophole in the election law that would allow them to substitute the
President's wife, Imelda, as a candidate.

''Why should I let the First Lady take over?'' Mr. Marcos replied to a question.
''Because of my health? Because of the fact that she would be able to continue
for the next six years? Well, I can tell you I don't intend to die in the next
six years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

APARTHEID ADDED AS A SCHOOL TOPIC

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 72, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


Public school students in social-studies classes throughout the city
participated in a ''teach-in'' on apartheid last week, part of a new, long-term
effort by the Board of Education to add course material on racism in South
Africa to the social-studies curriculum.

Schools Chancellor Nathan Quinones said he thought the teach-in, which began
Tuesday and continued through the week, was the first ever in the city's
schools.

As part of the effort, students from the 3d through the 12th grades discussed
and analyzed books, news stories, documentary films and videotapes on South
Africa. The program on apartheid, as South Africa's rigid system of racial
separation is known, was led by teachers, but outside experts also took part in
some classrooms.

At Intermediate School 195, 625 West 133th Street in Harlem, Mr. Quinones and
Mayor Koch joined a seventh-grade class for a question and answer session on
Tuesday. Mr. Koch asked the students to identify key figures in the struggle
against apartheid, then fielded questions on city and Federal Government
policies toward South Africa.

Mr. Koch told the students the teach-in was ''reminiscent of discussions held in
classrooms during the Vietnam War,'' and urged them to make their opposition to
apartheid known to the Reagan Administration and South Africa's white minority
Government.

''We have got to bring back the teach-ins, not just in the classrooms, but in
the large halls,'' the Mayor said.

Mr. Quinones compared apartheid to the persecution of Jews in Nazi Germany,
noting that the school system ''did not do a thing'' at that time. If educators
do not make apartheid ''an issue of conscience'' now, he said, ''we would be
guilty of what took place in the 1930's.''

The director of the social-studies department of the board's curriculum and
instruction division, Elliot Salow, said material for the teach-in had been
prepared in consultation with community and advocacy groups and the teachers and
supervisors unions. More than 400 instructors attended a special training
session last month, he said.

Tuesday was chosen as the start of the apartheid teach-in because it was United
Nations Human Rights Day. But board officials said they planned to make material
on apartheid a permanent part of the curriculum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nathan Quinones and students at Intermediate School 195 in
Harlem (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'86 HOPES UP FOR PENNSYLVANIA G.O.P.

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 62, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Dec. 14


With a United States Senate seat at stake and a new governor guaranteed,
Pennsylvania faces a big political year in 1986. But three of the biggest
developments have come in 1985, one of them this week, and all three appear to
offer strong encouragement to the state's historically moderate, pragmatic
Republican Party.

On Thursday in Harrisburg, Gov. Dick Thornburgh ended weeks of speculation by
announcing that he would not run in next May's Republican primary against
Senator Arlen Specter of Philadelphia.

Mr. Thornburgh, who must step down as Governor after two terms, might have won a
Senate primary contest, according to polls taken by Senator Specter. But
politicians and political analysts say a Thornburgh-Specter race probably would
have become a costly battle that would have crippled the survivor in next
November's general election.

Mr. Thornburgh said he wanted to avoid such blood-letting for the sake of the
party, for the sake of his and Senator Specter's mutual friends, and for the
sake of Lieut. Gov. William Scranton Jr. Mr. Scranton, the 38-year-old son of a
former Governor and Presidential candidate, is generally considered most likely
to get the Republican nomination for governor next year. So far, he is unopposed
for the nomination.

Backing by Possible Rival

Mr. Scranton's path apparently was cleared two months ago when Drew Lewis, the
former Secretary of Transportation, who had been considered a possible contender
for the Pennsylvania governorship, said he would support rather than challenge
the Lieutenant Governor. The two men are close friends.

And earlier, in September, Mayor Richard Caligiuri of Pittsburgh formally took
himself out of the race for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination. Mr.
Caligiuri, the most powerful Democratic politician in heavily Democratic Western
Pennsylvania, had been widely considered the most formidable potential opponent
for Mr. Scranton.

The Thornburgh, Lewis and Caligiuri developments appear to have put the
Republicans in a strong position to extend their long dominance. Since 1962 they
have captured Pennsylvania's highest offices most of the time, though often
narrowly in the face of superior Democratic voter registration.

Mr. Thornburgh's decision ''certainly gives us a united party to go into 1986,''
said Rick Robb, Mr. Scranton's campaign manager. ''Both of the Republican
candidates, Specter and Scranton, have very high name identification and very
high positive-to-negative approval ratings, and they have well-financed
campaigns off the ground.''

Lively Democratic Contests

By contrast, the Democrats face a lively primary fight among a number of
candidates for both the Senate seat and the governorship, and no clear
front-runner has emerged in either case.

The fate of Senator Specter, elected in 1980 in the Reagan landslide,is
considered central to Republican hopes for retaining control of the Senate. No
primary challenger appears on the horizon for the Senator, a 54-year-old former
Philadelphia District Attorney who is considered a moderate Republican.

So far, two Democrats are seeking to oppose Mr. Specter next November.
Representative Bob Edgar, a 42-year-old Methodist minister who is a six-term
Congressman from Delaware County in the Philadelphia suburbs, has announced his
candidacy.

Vietnam Factor Emerging

Expected to challenge Mr. Edgar in the primary is Don Bailey, 40, the state
auditor general, a former two-term Congressman from western Pennsylvania. he is
a former University of Michigan football star and paratrooper who volunteered
for duty in Vietnam and was decorated four times for bravery. He describes
himself as strong on national defense but liberal on social issues.

An Edgar candidacy might be a further test of an emerging Vietnam factor in
Pennsylvania politics. One Vietnam veteran, Ronald D. Castille, was an upset
victor for the Republicans in last month's election for Philadelphia District
Attorney; another, David Wentzel, defeated an incumbent Democratic mayor in
Scranton.

Other Democratic names mentioned in connection with the Senate race are former
Mayor Peter Flaherty of Pittsburgh, who has previously lost three campaigns for
statewide office, and former Mayor William J. Green of Philadelphia, who lost a
1976 national contest to Senator H. John Heinz 3d. #3 Democratic Contenders In
the Democratic primary for governor, at least three candidates have emerged.

Edward G. Rendell, 41 years old, is the Philadelphia District Attorney. Both Mr.
Thornburgh and Senator Specter went to higher office from prosecutors'
platforms, and Mr. Rendell is hoping to follow. He has said he will announce his
candidacy early next year.

Robert P. Casey, 53 years old, is a Scranton lawyer and former auditor general
who has run unsuccessfully for governor three times. His loss in one race was
attributed by some in political circles to confusion with a candidate with the
same name. His campaign committee this year is known as ''The Real Bob Casey
Committee.''

Jules Patt, a 42-year-old, millionaire real-estate developer from Altoona, was a
delegate pledged to Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts at the 1980
Democratic National Convention. He has never run for office.

Possible Added Starter

A fourth possible candidate is State Representative Allen Kukovich of
Westmoreland County in western Pennsylvania, a 37-year-old liberal who has said
he will decide soon whether to run.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

A CASE STUDY: TEXACO INC;
IS THERE A WAY OUT OF McKINLEY'S NIGHTMARE

BYLINE: By STEVEN E. PROKESCH

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2835 words


The case-study method of teaching business requires students to study a
corporation and suggest ways to solve its problems. This article takes the same
approach, but with a twist: The subject is Texaco, and the ''students'' are
businessmen, lawyers and other outsiders with ideas on what Texaco should do
next. WITH his craggy looks and southern drawl, John K. McKinley, Texaco Inc.'s
chief executive, has often been compared to the late President Lyndon B.
Johnson. These days, the comparison goes well beyond their looks.

Many believe that Mr. Johnson might have been remembered primarily as the
President who engineered a renaissance of social policy in the United States,
but that possibility was shattered by the bitterness of the Vietnam War. As
recently as last month, John McKinley, 65, might have secured a spot in
corporate history as the man who engineered a renaissance of sorts at stodgy
Texaco, the nation's third-largest oil company.

But now the bold stroke that looked like Mr. McKinley's crowning achievement -
last year's $10.1 billion acquisition of the Getty Oil Company - is threatening
to become his Vietnam. On Nov. 19, a jury in Houston decided that the Pennzoil
Company's informal agreement to buy Getty was binding, and that Texaco had
illegally interfered with it. Then last week, a Texas judge stunned everyone by
upholding the jury's award of $10.53 billion, plus interest - a total of $11.1
billion. It was the largest award by far in the history of the United States
civil justice system.

For Mr. McKinley, the situation is a true dream-turned-nightmare. A chemical
engineer who joined Texaco in 1941 and became chief executive in 1980, Mr.
McKinley struggled to revitalize the company. He spent billions on exploration,
closed a dozen refineries and a huge number of service stations, and slashed
thousands of people from the payroll. And the acquisition of Getty, which in one
swoop enabled Texaco to double its domestic oil reserves at a relatively cheap
price of $4 to $5 per barrel, seemed the answer to Texaco's critical problem of
sliding domestic reserves - until last week.

What Mr. McKinley does now will determine whether Texaco emerges from its battle
with Pennzoil just bruised or badly crippled. He could appeal the court
decision, and he has indicated that he will. But a prolonged legal battle could
cause major disruptions to Texaco's businesses, which already have plenty to
worry about as oil prices fall in the wake of OPEC's decision to abandon its
price structure.

Moreover, under Texas law, Texaco would have to post an $11.1 billion bond
before it could appeal. With a long-term debt of about $9.6 billion, a net worth
of $13.5 billion, and a recently downgraded credit rating, it is uncertain
whether Texaco could post that bond. Instead, it might seek protection from its
creditors under Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings - a step it has already
threatened to take.

Thus, many experts say Texaco would be best going for a negotiated settlement. A
key reason: During the jury trial, Texaco failed to present much evidence to
support its claim that Pennzoil would be entitled, at most, to $500 million in
damages. If an appellate court decided that Pennzoil did have a contract to buy
Getty, it could let the full amount of damages stick.

Currently, Texaco is keeping its options open. ''We certainly will pursue an
appeal, and we certainly will attempt to resolve the case out of court if that's
possible in a reasonable way,'' said David Boies of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, a
New York law firm brought in by Texaco after the jury verdict. Texaco's trial
defense was handled principally by two Houston firms, Miller, Keeton, Bristow &
Brown and Fulbright & Jaworski.

Until the Pennzoil case is resolved, Texaco must somehow prevent all of its
various contituencies - from shareholders, creditors and employees to suppliers,
customers and joint venture partners -from panicking. That is not easy, as the
performance of Texaco's stock last week clearly demonstrated. Before the jury's
verdict was announced, the stock was trading at $39.375, but it closed last week
at $29.75, meaning that Texaco's market value has plummeted by $2.28 billion in
less than a month. Fearful that its lower stock price would make it vulnerable
to a takeover, Texaco's board enacted ''poison pill'' measures to ward off
unwanted suitors by giving Texaco shareholders the right to buy Texaco's or the
acquiring company's stock at low prices.

Creditors and joint venture partners also became jittery. Texaco was forced to
suspend sales of its commercial paper, and the Nippon Oil Company of Japan
announced that it would postpone a planned exploration of some of Texaco's oil
fields in the United States.

The worries and ramifications have filtered down to the extreme reaches of the
Texaco organization: its gas station franchisees. When Texaco recently raised
its gasoline prices, Joe Martin, owner of a Texaco station in New Rochelle,
N.Y., immediately put the worst face on it. ''They may have raised prices so
they can come up with the money'' to settle with Pennzoil, he fretted. And he
added: ''I'm having trouble competing.''

ADVICE FROM OUTSIDERS

Alan R. Bromberg Professor, Southern Methodist University Law School; counsel to
Jenkins & Gilchrist, Dallas law firm.

MY strategy would be tough fighting in the courthouse and tough negotiating at
the bargaining table. From the legal point of view, the strategy is pretty
clear, which is to push ahead every step of the way, starting with a motion for
a new trial.

Some of Texaco's grounds could be errors in the judge's instructions to the
jury, the framing of the issues submitted to the jury, the sufficiency of the
evidence to support the verdict and particularly the amount of damages. That's
the gut issue here.

I would try to raise all the Federal questions I could, with an eye to going
into Federal court. I might even try for a ruling that the state court judgment
violated due process because the damages are grossly excessive.

I'd also raise antitrust issues. In effect, the $11 billion judgment is a
takeover of Texaco by Pennzoil. I would argue that it interferes with the tender
offer system established in the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 and is,
therefore, invalid because Federal law is supreme.

The major management concern now ought to be to keep Texaco a going concern,
which means a lot of talking with creditors, suppliers and people that they have
joint venture deals with to make sure they will continue doing business with
Texaco. If that fails to any extent, that may dictate a Chapter 11 bankruptcy
filing.

It's a little like a run on the bank: At some point, there may be such a lack of
confidence that people may back away and that can destroy a business very
quickly. One of the ways you keep all those interests with you is to pursue the
legal and bargaining strategies vigorously.

By shouting disaster in the courts, Texaco must be making creditors and
suppliers very, very nervous. One of the things I'd do is to tone down the
public relations. I'd take the position that we're pursuing all our legal
remedies but it is also business as usual and one way or another we're going to
work this thing out and let's not panic and run for the exit.

Another reason I'd tone down the public relations is it may boomerang in court,
hurting Texaco's credibility. And it's conceivable that continuing to shout
disaster will in some subtle way hurt Texaco's appeal. Courts don't like to feel
outside pressure.

The other thing that would trigger filing for Chapter 11 is if Pennzoil tries to
record its judgment and get liens on Texaco's assets. I would not expect to rush
into bankruptcy at this point, but I do consider Chapter 11 one of the major
tactical alternatives available to Texaco. Texaco would get a lot of leverage in
negotiations with Pennzoil if it threatened to treat Pennzoil as an unsecured
creditor in a bankruptcy reorganization.

It is possible at this stage because the bankruptcy law permits setting aside of
liens that have been obtained shortly before bankruptcy. Pennzoil would make
some concessions to keep Texaco out of bankruptcy.

Ralph Nader

Lawyer and Consumer Advocate THE first thing John McKinley should do is to
retire the trial lawyers that represented Texaco in this debacle. These defense
lawyers continue to be a plaintiff's dream.

It was one of the worst trial performances I have ever seen. They did not
vigorously object to the transfer of the trial to Houston, Pennzoil's hometown
and one of the highest jury-award towns in the world. They did not introduce
what their view of the proper measure of damages should have been for the jury
to use. They also brought in witnesses thought to be arrogant by the jury. They
gambled for a total win and suffered a total defeat.

The second thing I would do is offer Pennzoil a $500 million to $750 million
cash settlement, because Pennzoil did have an oral agreement to buy Getty, which
was snatched away from them. The $500 million to $750 million is a fair measure
of damages. That is a good-faith settlement.

If that does not work, Texaco should offer to transfer to Pennzoil assets that
are more valuable to Pennzoil than to Texaco. Being a worldwide company, Texaco
must have certain physical assets that would be of greater value to Pennzoil.

If that fails, then Mr. McKinley could offer the sale, at a discount price, of
the 1 billion barrels of Getty Oil reserves that Pennzoil had wanted to buy from
Getty in the first place.

If that is rejected, then Texaco should go up on appeal. Trying to take over
Pennzoil, given Pennzoil's anti-takeover defenses, would produce long delays and
legal complications, neither of which Texaco could afford.

The main problem Texaco has is business uncertainty, and the passing of valuable
time without the resolution of this conflict can affect its operations. Even if
it wins a full reversal of the judgment a year from now, Texaco would suffer
considerable financial damage from the higher interest rates it would have to
pay on its commercial paper and the uncertainty of its status within its
community of creditors, suppliers, stockholders and customers.

Seeking Chapter 11 would be a misuse of the bankruptcy laws. Texaco has assets
to cover the $11 billion bond it might have to post. It could make a good case
in the courts for a reduction of that bond.

Speaking as Ralph Nader and not John McKinley, I would point out that continuous
takeover battles between oil companies are drawing media attention from the most
important issue: Why, with crude oil prices dropping in a period of a global oil
glut, are not gasoline and heating oil prices similarly dropping? Indeed,
heating oil prices have been going up.

Alan L. Edgar

Director of Energy Services, Schneider, Bernet & Hickman, Dallas investment
bankers. BOTH Texaco and Pennzoil would benefit from an out-of-court settlement.

Pennzoil has the upper hand now, but may not want to risk a protracted legal
battle that could end up with the decision being reversed. Texaco needs
desperately to get this monkey off its back; the company has lost more than $2
billion in its stock value in the last two weeks. They need to restore
confidence.

This is how they do it. Texaco allows Pennzoil to buy the Getty assets that it
had a partial lock on in early 1984: the equivalent of one billion barrels of
oil and gas. Last year, Pennzoil was willing to pay $3.5 billion for these
assets - a fire sale price estimated to be $2 billion below current market
value. Let them have it at that bargain price and count the $2 billion loss as
little enough to pay to settle the court case.

Texaco takes the $3.5 billion and reduces its long-term debt of $10 billion to
$6.5 billion. Or, even better, it embarks on a share-repurchase program
involving perhaps 100 million shares, or 40 percent of its capitalization.

The buyback is what Texaco needs to restore shareholder confidence and increase
the reserves behind each share, which currently stand at 20 barrels. That would
fall to 16 barrels per share upon surrendering the one billion barrels to
Pennzoil, but would bounce back to 27 barrels with the stock repurchase.

Under my proposed settlement, Pennzoil would increase its reserves per share
from 7 barrels to 31 barrels.

As an alternative, Texaco would take over Pennzoil for a substantial premium -
maybe $1 billion above its appraised value of $4 billion. But this is not a
realistic scenario because Pennzoil would have a heavy tax bite and because of
potential chemistry problems between McKinley and Liedtke. My first proposal
would not be a taxable deal.

Walter B. Wriston

Citicorp's ex-chairman THE options are those Texaco is taking. The only thing
you can do is appeal, while at the same time pursuing a parallel track toward a
negotiated settlement.

I don't have preconceived ideas of what a settlement should include, but while
one is being pursued, Texaco should press the legal battle, not only for its own
sake, but from the point of view of the whole business community. From a general
business point of view, I'd do everything I could to get it overturned legally.

I also think that the business community should organize a national campaign to
stop the litigation explosion, which is showing signs of inhibiting the
productive growth of our society. One simple way to stop these frivolous suits
would be to adopt the British system in which the loser of the suit would have
to pay the expenses of the other party.

The Business Roundtable, the National League of Cities, the American Hospital
Association - everybody should participate in this campaign because the business
community is under attack. If I were McKinley and somebody came to me with the
proposal to establish such a campaign, I would have a very keen interest in
seeing it go forward.

One way for Texaco to possibly avoid having to post a bond while it fights to
reverse the $11 billion judgment would be to try to accelerate the appeal
process. It's conceivable to me that the legal system watching this bizarre
situation would say, 'Let's accelerate this process and have the appeal
tomorrow, the same way that major cases like the Pentagon Papers were
accelerated.'

If Texaco goes to the very end of the line and its appeal is lost and the amount
of the judgment is not reduced, then Texaco would have to decide what is in the
best interests of the shareholders. Chapter 11 is a possible option, in my
opinion. If Texaco were forced into Chapter 11, such a dramatic step would
certainly be an extraordinarily strong reason to get moving on building a
national consensus to confine the litigation explosion. T. Boone Pickens Jr.
Chairman, Mesa Petroleum Company TO me, the No. 1 alternative is to work out
some kind of settlement with Pennzoil and not fight it to the bitter end in the
courts. You've got to start some kind of dialogue between McKinley and Liedtke.

The No. 1 option that I would push for would be Texaco buying Pennzoil in a
stock-swap deal in which Texaco would pay three or four shares for each share of
Pennzoil stock. On the face of it, Texaco, which has an appraised worth of $23
billion, would be overpaying for Pennzoil. The stock swap, costing Texaco
roughly $9 billion, would include a premium of $5 billion. But that would make
it worth Pennzoil's while to settle the suit, given Pennzoil's current appraised
worth of about $4 billion.

The merger should be carried out as quickly as possible. With oil prices
dropping, there is just too much uncertainty. Where are we going to be in the
summer of 1986 if the price of crude oil is $20 a barrel?

Once the merger is done, I would announce a substantial share buyback program
and buy over a period of time maybe as much as 100 million Texaco shares, which
could cost $4 billion. If Texaco had done a buyback in the first place - instead
of spending so much on Getty - then its stock would be selling today for between
$40 and $50 a share.

Above all, Texaco should not get involved in a court fight. Already, Texaco's
leaders are totally preoccupied with the lawsuit, which means no operating
decisions are being made at the top. Because of that factor and because of
general concern by employees about their future, productivity and morale
throughout the company have to be at the lowest level of any major corporation
in America. The company must be grinding to a halt pretty fast.

I would never consider Chapter 11. I just can't believe an executive would
threaten Chapter 11, as Texaco's president, Al DeCrane, has done. That is
devastating to stockholders and employees.

The poison pill that Texaco has adopted is unnecessary and is something they
should not be preoccupying themselves with. I wouldn't think anybody would see
Texaco as a takeover prospect as long as Texaco has hanging over its head the
uncertainty of an $11 billion judgment. That would scare anybody away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article last week about Texaco misstated the time that the law firm of
Fulbright & Jaworski joined the Texaco defense in the Pennzoil suit. Fulbright &
Jaworski joined after the jury verdict this month.

GRAPHIC: Texaco logo; Photo of John K. McKinley; Photos of Alan R. Bromberg,
Ralph Nader, Alan L. Edgar, Walter B. Wriston and T. Boone Pickens; Graph of
market reaction to Texaco-Pennzoil suit; Texaco at-a-glance box

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
BUSH'S VOODOO POLITICS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Of all the horses at the starting gate for the l988 Presidential race, Vice
President Bush probably has the best track record. But he may be jumping the
gun.  None of them can match his experience in the White House, in the Congress,
in business, in diplomacy as Ambassador to China and the United Nations, or in
the subterranean world where he worked as head of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

He has roots at Yale and in New Hampshire, which have few electoral votes, but
now makes his home in Texas and that has more than a few. By birth, education
and tradition, he is part of that remarkable company of progressive Republicans
from Teddy Roosevelt to Ike Eisenhower.

George Bush has been loyal to President Reagan, almost invisible as Vice
President. But recently he has come out of hiding and is beginning to run openly
for the Republican nomination, and wondering where he's going and who's going
with him.

He showed up here the other night as the principal speaker at a dinner in honor
of the Manchester Union Leader's former editor, the late William Loeb, an
outrageous, bigoted man who had denounced him in the last Presidential election
as a ''hypocrite'' for condemning Ronald Reagan's voodoo economics, as an
''incompetent'' and as a ''spoon-fed little rich kid'' who was ''unfit to be
President.''

But Mr. Bush praised him anyway. That's the way it is in ''the rough and tumble
of politics'' he said, and concluded that Mr. Loeb was ''triumphantly right
about the fact that Ronald Reagan is one of the greatest Presidents in our
history.'' The tribute was worse than a disgrace. It was an embarrassment.

This tells us something about the corruption of ambition. George Bush is a good
man in a big hurry. By stoking up the race so soon, he's probably not helping
the President, who has three hard years to go, or himself.

He's not helping himself with the moderates who believe in him, or persuading
the conservative extremists, who, whatever he says, will never believe him or
nominate him unless President Reagan doesn't live out his second term.

Obviously, he has a problem. To be nominated in a Republican convention
dominated by the conservative wing of his party, he needs the support of the
President, the conservative delegates and the television preachers. But to win
the election, if nominated, he needs the support of the moderates of both
parties, all regions and factions. This is the dilemma the Vice President hasn't
yet resolved. George Bush is no bush leaguer. He has been in the big leagues for
a long time, but clearly he hasn't yet decided on his strategy. Maybe there are
ways for him to make peace with the right wing of the Republican Party, but
honoring William Loeb is almost like honoring Joe McCarthy.

The conservatives won't thank him for it, and the moderates will doubt him for
being faithful to everything but himself.

He got in trouble with this in the last Presidential election when he put on the
mucker pose and forgot his manners - ''kicked a little ass,'' as he said about
dealing with Geraldine Ferraro - for he was out of character, as he was in
praising William Loeb.

He was dead honest in the 1980 campaign when he condemned Ronald Reagan's
''voodoo economics'' - the present record budget and trade deficits seem to
prove his point - but now he seems to be following Mr. Reagan's voodoo politics:
defending everything he opposed in the past, arguing for the Reagan policy of
borrow and borrow, spend and spend, and hoping that he will inherit the Reagan
mantle and be nominated in the process.

The guess here is that this won't work for George Bush. Ronald Reagan, like
Eisenhower, didn't have an election with the American people but a love affair.
Mr. Bush cannot carry on Mr. Reagan's failed economic and foreign policies, but
later on - not now - has to come forward and be seen as his own man.

George Bush, in a way, has the same problem Hubert Humphrey had as Lyndon
Johnson's Vice President. Comparisons are treacherous, but Mr. Humphrey probably
lost the Presidency because he went along with President Johnson's disastrous
policy in Vietnam when he didn't believe in it; and he was rejected by the
voters in the end because they thought he had no vision of the future but was
merely following the policies of the past.

George Bush is now in that same pickle: how to be faithful to the President
without having any serious policy of his own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NAVY'S BRASH LEADER

BYLINE: By Bill Keller; Bill Keller covers the Pentagon for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5399 words


ZIPPERED INTO AN orange flight suit, John F. Lehman Jr. struts the flight deck
of the aircraft carrier Coral Sea with a proprietary air. Already, the visiting
Navy Secretary has interrogated the vessel's officers on the state of its aging
bulwarks and boilers. He has gone on the ship's closed-circuit television to
solicit reaction to his latest initiatives, a Navy-wide order commanding that
paperwork be cut in half and a message shortening the time sailors and pilots
spend at sea. He has made the rounds of the pilots' ready rooms, like a
politician working a favorite precinct, bantering knowledgeably about the status
of pay bonuses, training programs and new weapons, and curling his lip
contemptuously at the ''petty bureaucrats'' on Capitol Hill and ''lounge lizards
in the Pentagon'' who make his job difficult.

Lehman has hoisted his compact, rower's body into the navigator's seat of an
A-6E Intruder and catapulted off for a practice bombing run over the highland
pastures of Sardinia. Now, with a jaunty thumbs-up, he takes the controls of a
helicopter to visit the nearby guided-missile cruiser Yorktown and praise its
crew for their supporting role in the October aerial interception of four
Palestinian hijackers of the Achille Lauro.

As usual, he will leave behind no doubt whatever about who runs the United
States Navy.

For five years, John Lehman has been the Navy's chief strategist, salesman,
personnel manager and purchasing agent. To the annoyance of some senior Pentagon
officials, he sometimes seems to be an unguided torpedo. He came early to the
inner circle of Reagan Administration defense policy makers; maintains his own,
independent ties to the White House and Capitol Hill, and frequently upstages
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, who appears to regard his 43-year-old
Navy Secretary as a prodigy with delinquent tendencies.

In November, Weinberger publicly rebuked the Navy Secretary for denouncing a
Justice Department plea bargain in the Walker-family espionage case. The Navy
spy John A. Walker Jr. had promised to cooperate with authorities in assessing
the damage he had caused in exchange for a more lenient sentence for his son.
Lehman, although aware that Weinberger had endorsed the deal, said it sent the
troops a message that espionage was ''just another white-collar crime.''

Lehman is characteristically unrepentent on that matter, and the men of the
Coral Sea seem to be with him. Scrawled on the message board behind him as he
addresses a squadron of F/A-18 pilots is this mini-survey: ''Shoot Walker? Yes -
13, No - 1 (shooting too good).''

Enormously self-assured, relentlessly competitive and politically adept, John
Lehman can boast that in five contentious years he has helped make the Navy the
most favored and most visible among the military services.

In the Reagan military buildup, the Army and Air Force have modernized, but only
the Navy has undergone a major expansion. Under Lehman, the Navy has dispersed
its fleet in a global show of muscle, and declared an aggressive maritime
fighting strategy that envisions a quick, bold thrust into Soviet ports and air
bases at the outbreak of a war.

To carry out its expanded role, the Navy has slowed the retirement of older
vessels, reactivated battleships and signed contracts for dozens of big new
warships. Pentagon plans call for the Navy's share of the military budget to
grow over the next five years at the expense, critics say, of the other
services.

More than any service secretary in recent times, Lehman has intervened
personally in the promotion of admirals, the pricing of aircraft, the discussion
of combat tactics, even the eligibility of the Naval Academy's star running
back, Napoleon McCallum, to play an extra season of football.

''There is no question, John Lehman has been the most influential Secretary of
the Navy since James V. Forrestal in the Roosevelt Administration,'' says the
naval analyst and author Norman Polmar. Although detractors consider Lehman
ruthless and headstrong, his name comes up as a future cabinet member or
candidate for political office in his native Pennsylvania or in Virginia, his
adopted state.

''I have to think the sky's the limit for John Lehman,'' says Edwin J. Feulner
Jr., Lehman's Georgetown roommate in the late 1960's and now president of the
Heritage Foundation, a conservative research organization.

Lehman says he plans to finish out President Reagan's second term at the helm of
the Navy. Then he expects to write a book on his experiences and probably go
into business for a while before contemplating re-entry into the realm of
government.

Whatever his future, Lehman faces a busy agenda in his present job. Sailing into
a period of constricted military budgets, when many experts feel the Pentagon
will do well to stay a short jump ahead of inflation, the Navy may be strapped
to pay both for the completion of its ambitious shipbuilding program and for the
costs of manning and operating its expanded fleet. Will it scale back the size
of the 600-ship fleet that has become the Administration's benchmark of naval
supremacy, or scrimp on the crews and equipment needed to keep the ships at peak
readiness? Neither, Lehman insists.  But already the Navy has begun to trim and
squeeze. Planned purchases of new high-technology cruisers and destroyers have
been slowed to accommodate budget cuts. Navy efforts to crack down on military
contractors are becoming more intense. In October, a Navy-wide order went out to
reduce the operational tempo of the fleet, to give the crews more time at home
and to cut costs.

Last month, Lehman's plan to spread the Navy's largesse to new home ports in
Staten Island and 14 other locations - a precaution against attacks by either
Soviet submarines or Congressional budget-cutters - began to run into opposition
on Capitol Hill from representatives of existing port cities who fear the
competition for shrinking budgets.

Even some admirers now wonder if the Navy's resurgence will outlast Lehman's
tenure.

''Lehman has given the Navy a rationale, whether you agree with it or not, and
he has got them enough resources to keep all the Navy fraternities happy,'' says
Norman Friedman, a Navy consultant and supporter of Lehman's policies. ''But I
worry that when he goes, it all falls apart.'' JOHN LEHMAN IS NOT THE FIRST
CIVILIAN NAVY leader to rock boats. Theodore Roosevelt used his post as
Assistant Navy Secretary to agitate for war against Spain, and Franklin D.
Roosevelt rankled his superiors in the same job. Recent Navy Secretaries include
two Senators, the president of Amtrak, former Texas Governor John B. Connally
and President Reagan's arms control adviser, Paul H. Nitze. But even the most
capable Navy Secretaries are little remembered for what they did in that job.
Since the Eisenhower Administration, civilian control of the military has
gradually coalesced in the office of the Defense Secretary, leaving most Navy
Secretaries little to do but christen ships and read testimony to Congressional
subcommittees.

Lehman arrived at a propitious time to break that tradition. Military budgets
were about to boom. The new Secretary of Defense was philosophically committed
to giving the services wide latitude in deciding how to spend the money. And
Lehman came to the job unusually well-equipped and well-connected to take
advantage of these opportunities.

John Lehman was the second of five children of a Philadelphia family with roots
going back to the founding of the colony. One ancestor was William Penn's
business agent. (In an early manifestation of the Lehman knack for annoying
superiors, Philip Lehman was reprimanded for slave-trading on the side.) John
Lehman Sr. was the captain of an amphibious ship in World War II and was
decorated for his role in the Marine landing at Okinawa. Around the Lehman
household, the children were summoned to ''chow'' and exhorted to ''shape up or
ship out.'' On his mother's side, the family included a Pulitzer prize-winning
playwright named George Kelly and a royal cousin, Grace Kelly.

Lehman showed a precocious interest in conservative politics.

In 1964, while a senior at St. Joseph's College in Philadelphia, he dragged his
brother Christopher, then an eighth-grader, out to distribute leaflets for Barry
Goldwater's Presidential campaign. In the early mornings, Lehman rowed on the
Schuylkill River, and he won the national championship in intermediate double
sculls. After graduation, he departed for Cambridge University to study
international law and diplomacy.

Lehman's mentors were devout conservatives with a dark view of the Soviet Union.
At the University of Pennsylvania's Foreign Policy Research Institute, which he
attended after Cambridge, he came under the tutelage of Robert Strausz-Hupe and
William R. Kintner, strong advocates of a more assertive American foreign
policy. Arleigh A. Burke, the retired Chief of Naval Operations and
then-director of the fledgling Center for Strategic and International Studies at
Georgetown University, befriended Lehman and arranged his commission in the
Naval Reserves, where he qualified as an attack plane bombardier and as a
helicopter pilot. (His reserve status exempted him from active duty in Vietnam,
although he later flew occasional combat missions while on fact-finding missions
for the National Security Council.) Richard V. Allen, who would become President
Reagan's first national security adviser, hired the young postgraduate as a
teaching assistant and, in 1969, brought him to the National Security Council.
Lehman became Henry Kissinger's liaison to Congress, where he was a favorite of
hawks like Senators Henry M. Jackson and John Tower. While at the White House,
Lehman was instrumental in a methodical housecleaning of doves at the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, a process that continued when, in 1975, he was
appointed Deputy Director of the arms-control agency.

David L. Aaron, a former National Security Council staff member, recalled
Lehman's actions as ''brutal,'' saying his personnel moves at the arms-control
agency amounted to a ''purge.''

Allen says, however, that ''They didn't purge. They just removed people from
positions of power and moved them into long-range studies.''

And Lehman says the changes he forced at the agency were less wrenching than
those carried out later on against his appointees by the Carter Administration.

When Jimmy Carter came to power, Lehman organized a lucrative consulting
business that studied markets for weapons-makers. One of his partners was
Senator Jackson's military adviser, Richard N. Perle, now Caspar Weinberger's
top assistant on arms control. (The two friends later had a falling out over how
to divide the assets of the company when they returned to government, and today
they barely speak.) During the Carter Administration, Lehman remained active in
what he calls ''the defense government in exile,'' chairing an advisory
committee on defense at the Republican National Committee and lobbying in
Congress against ratification of the SALT II arms treaty and in support of a new
aircraft carrier.

In 1980, Lehman helped write the Republican Party platform that committed the
Republicans to a 600-ship Navy, and after the election was assigned to the
transition team. By then, he had begun an intensive campaign for the Navy job.
Some of the President's advisers said Lehman was too young, at 38, and too
abrasive. But with help from Allen and friends in the Senate, he won the job
over Robert D. Nesen, a California automobile dealer and a friend of Mr.
Reagan's Kitchen Cabinet, who was appointed Ambassador to Australia.

Lehman has the face of an aging altar boy and an irreverent, sometimes derisive
sense of humor. In November he appeared, resplendent in a scarlet cummerbund and
Mickey Mouse suspenders, to uphold the Reagan Administration's honor at the
venerable debating society of Oxford University. He confessed that he had gone
to Cambridge after being turned down at Oxford. But as the Oxford student
audience applauded this self-effacing candor, he brought them up short: ''You
see, my parents were married.''

Lehman himself has been married since 1975 to the former Barbara Wieland, whom
he met on a ski vacation in Switzerland. They live with their three children in
McLean, Va.

Friends say Lehman is fiercely loyal and generous. Stuart F. Glasby, a Naval
Reserve friend from Philadelphia, recalls that after the fall of Saigon Lehman
shared his large Georgetown apartment with nine Vietnamese helicopter pilots,
borrowing money to enroll the refugees in flight training so they could get jobs
here. Lehman can also be charming. He has maintained a running personal
diplomacy with the Chinese Navy, for example, opening the way for military
sales.

Others say he has a roughshod style. ''John has an unfortunate urge to the
pejorative,'' says Robert W. Komer, Under Secretary of Defense in the Carter
Administration and a frequent target of Lehman's barbs. ''He flings these things
around, and they irritate. They're meant to irritate, and they succeed.''

''John makes lasting friends,'' John Lehman Sr. says of his son. ''And probably,
lasting enemies.'' IN SEPTEMBER, LEHMAN RETURNED FROM A naval exercise in the
Norwegian Sea, talking excitedly about an extraordinary maneuver. During war
games there, the aircraft carrier America had steamed deep into the canyon of
Vest Fjord along the coast of Norway. Bombers mined the fjord mouth against
pursuers, and the America, using the sheer cliffs as shelter from enemy radar,
dispatched fighter planes to attack the opposing forces. According to Lehman,
the Navy is now considering the possibility of sending several aircraft carrier
flotillas into the Norwegian fjords should war break out in Europe.

To Lehman, the game of hide-and-seek was the latest twist on a provocative
doctrine: That in wartime, the Navy can and should operate within striking
distance of the Soviet Union. This strategy has set off the most intense debate
in 40 years over the role of the United States Navy.

In modern times, the Navy has been seen as serving three principal purposes. One
is maintaining the least vulnerable portion of the American nuclear force, in
the form of submarine-launched ballistic missiles and cruise missiles. Another
is projecting mobile military power into the Grenadas and Lebanons of the world,
trouble spots inconvenient to land bases. The third is controlling traffic on
the high seas, to assure that the military can transport weapons, soldiers and
supplies in case of the Big War, which is generally assumed to be a land war in
Central Europe. At the outbreak of such a conflict, the Navy would bottle up the
Soviet fleet by shutting off strategic straits, and its warships and submarines
would provide armed escort for transoceanic convoys.

In Lehman's view, this concept of naval power was an excuse for relegating the
Navy to a sort of courier service. By the time he took office, Navy brass, like
Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Thomas B. Hayward, had begun advancing a more
assertive role, and Lehman embraced it enthusiastically.

Lehman argues that, in a land war, allied armies, heavily outnumbered along the
European front, would be faced early on with an unacceptable choice between
defeat or escalation to nuclear weapons.

''If it is over in a short time, we lose,'' Lehman says, over coffee aboard a
Navy passenger plane en route to Sardinia for his rendezvous with the Coral Sea.
''But what if the war goes on beyond 30 days? And what if what happens in
Central Europe does not determine what happens everywhere else in the world?''

The Navy's role, according to the new ''forward'' strategy, would be to prolong
the war by moving quickly to assert complete command of the seas.

At the outbreak of war, Lehman says, the Navy would move aggressively into the
Norwegian Sea, first with submarines and then with several aircraft carriers.
They would roll back the Soviet fleet and attack its home bastions, striking
ports and any airfields within reach of the carriers' attack planes. The
admirals did not at first take kindly to having combat strategy dictated by a
Commander in the Naval Reserves. Even Lehman's Chief of Naval Operations, Adm.
James D. Watkins, questioned early in the Administration about Lehman's
aggressive scenario, snapped that the Navy Secretary ''does not set strategy for
forces in the field.'' Admiral Watkins, who says his remarks were misconstrued,
now says that he and the Navy Secretary are ''very much in harmony on
strategy.''

Critics, including in private a number of serving admirals, say that charging
into Soviet strongholds would expose expensive carrier battle groups to
squadrons of formidable Soviet land-based Backfire bombers, capable of firing
long-range missiles from well outside the range of carriers' anti-aircraft guns.

Lehman replies that ''The obligation to defend Norway requires us facing up to
the difficulty of the threat to that defense. Naval forces, particularly
operating with the mountainous protection of the Norwegian coastline and fjords,
are far less vulnerable to Soviet aircraft than the essential NATO fixed land
bases in Norway.''

Some critics of Lehman's strategy also contend that by focusing on large carrier
battle groups to fight the Soviet Union, Lehman has missed an opportunity for
more creative approaches to naval power - smaller carriers, unmanned weapons or
a greater emphasis on submarines and antisubmarine warfare, including cheaper
diesel-power submarines that the Navy has long resisted as a threat to the
nuclear submarine program. The Russians, who as yet have no carriers capable of
launching high-performance aircraft, have stressed underwater warfare in their
navy.

Harlan K. Ullman, director of political-military programs at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies, says: ''I think naval expansion was
essential, but it would have been tempting to see if some of those resources
could have been applied to go even further with new and different approaches.''

Perhaps more alarming, some critics warn, the offensive strategy Lehman espouses
would risk igniting a nuclear war. Whether by design or accident, they contend,
the initial assault would quite possibly destroy Soviet nuclear missile
submarines (SSBN's), which are indistinguishable from conventional attack
submarines. This might be read by the Soviet Union as the opening gambit of a
nuclear attack.

''You have to understand something the Navy doesn't want to come clean on,''
said Barry R. Posen, a Princeton University professor and former Council of
Foreign Relations Fellow attached to the Pentagon. ''To threaten the Soviet SSBN
force is to wage nuclear war. It is very escalatory.''

Lehman says these are the misgivings of ''parlor Pershings'' and ''armchair
strategists.''

It is ''not necessarily'' United States policy to attack Soviet nuclear missile
submarines, he says, but in any case he expects the Soviet Union would try to
hide its nuclear submarines away from the contested areas, perhaps under the
polar ice.

''If they don't, they have to expect losses,'' Lehman says. ''They know that. It
would be logical to assume they understand what they're risking.''

Whatever its military merits, the offensive strategy has provided Lehman with an
additional selling point for building the Navy he wants to build.

S OON AFTER MOVING INTO the Navy Secretary's suite, Lehman applied to the
Congress just the sort of pre-emptive strategy he has in mind for the Soviet
port of Murmansk.

''I knew that in every new Administration you have a honeymoon period where the
President basically gets the program he wants,'' Lehman mused in an interview.
''So I wanted the debate to go on during that two-year period. I wanted to get
it up on the table.''

In a maneuver he described as ''front-loading,'' Lehman says, he and Defense
Secretary Weinberger agreed that the Navy would forgo some budget increases
later on in exchange for large increases in the first two years. In the Navy's
most successful year, 1982, the Administration persuaded Congress to authorize
$6.8 billion for a pair of new Nimitz-class nuclear- powered aircraft carriers,
as well as three billion-dollar cruisers, and the money to recommission the
battleship Iowa. By the time Congressional ardor for military spending had begun
to cool, many of Lehman's ships were already rising in the dry docks.

By 1983, Lehman was encountering firm resistance from Deputy Defense Secretary
W. Paul Thayer and Under Secretary Richard D. DeLauer. Both had been successful
defense-industry executives, and both were Navy men, Thayer a decorated fighter
pilot and DeLauer an aeronautical engineer. But they felt the Army and Air Force
had been shortchanged to build up the Navy. When they challenged the need and
the cost estimates for the 600-ship Navy, Lehman overwhelmed them with
statistics.

The Navy Secretary has a rare talent for mastering the dazzling intricacies of
weapons, the argot of the military fraternity, the details of budget documents,
and marshaling them for political ends.

''If you know what an over-the-horizon radar does and can explain it in simple
terms and respond to criticisms, if you know the performance of an Aegis system,
you understand what dipping sonar does, you understand what a laser-guided
projectile can do and what it can't do, that is what carries the day here,''
Lehman says.  While Army Secretary John Marsh and the just-retired Air Force
Secretary Verne Orr have deferred in budget meetings to accompanying generals,
Lehman holds the floor.

When the budget did not make room for all of the ships and planes he wanted,
Lehman estimated their costs downward. When a program was cut in one meeting, he
would appeal it to Weinberger. On the rare occasions when he lost there, he
would sometimes quietly call friends on Capitol Hill.

In the midst of a debate with Thayer in August 1983 over the need for 600 ships,
the Navy Secretary called the White House, where his friend Robert C. McFarlane
was national security adviser and his brother, Christopher Lehman, was a senior
staff member. A few days later, President Reagan issued a statement calling on
Americans to ''dedicate ourselves to achieving the requisite naval superiority
we need today by building a 15-carrier, 600-ship Navy.'' (According to a
spokesman for Lehman, 600 represents ''in round numbers'' how many ships the
Navy needs ''to be, in concert with our allies, in all the places it needs to
be.'') Asked about his wars with Thayer and DeLauer, Lehman caustically
dismisses the two men as ''near-retirement business executives'' who were ''not
willing to learn new tricks'' and ''seemed to have a strong prejudice against
the Navy.'' Thayer resigned in 1984, facing indictment on charges of insider
stock trading unrelated to his Defense Department job. Today, he is serving a
prison term. DeLauer left last year and is now president of an international
aerospace consulting group.

To keep his 600 warships on track, Lehman has repeatedly offered to cut nuclear
weapons programs that are favorites of Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
but that contribute nothing to the Navy's role in conventional warfare. Inside
the Pentagon, he has attempted to cut from the Navy's budget funding for new
Trident nuclear missile submarines and for the E-6A communications planes
designed to transmit messages to submarines in a crisis. Overruled by Weinberger
and Deputy Secretary William Howard Taft 4th, he made the same appeal,
unsuccessfully, to members of Congress.

''Weinberger and Taft have called him on it repeatedly, and yet he goes on his
merry way,'' says one member of the House Armed Services Committee who has been
on the receiving end of these entreaties.

Lehman has also consolidated his control within his service. He quickly eased
out Adm. Hyman G. Rickover, the powerful octogenarian champion of the nuclear
submariners, and promoted his own loyalists to key jobs. In Navy circles,
Lehman's personal intervention in the careers of officers is considered a key to
his mastery of the service, although there are many complaints that he has
dead-ended the careers of talented officers because he suspected their political
loyalties. Lehman retorts that the complaints come from ''the time-servers and
non-risk-takers who in earlier times could expect to be carried along.''

''I know my admirals,'' he says. ''If you don't, then you're a figurehead.''

The murmurs of unhappy admirals have generally been muted by their gratitude for
the money and status he has won for the Navy. ''He's got a ready, fire, aim
approach to everything,'' says one retired rear admiral. ''But he's done more
for the Navy than the last six or eight secretaries put together.''

''Perhaps he breaks china excessively,'' says Admiral Watkins. ''But to me the
pluses so outweigh the negatives as to make the negatives irrelevant.''

More than any recent service secretary, Lehman has grasped the value of public
relations, frequently stealing the limelight from Defense Secretary Weinberger.
When Weinberger announced, after the Walker spy case, that he was cutting back
security clearances by 10 percent, Lehman said the Navy would cut them in half.
After Navy pilots successfully intercepted a plane carrying the hijackers of the
cruise ship Achille Lauro, Lehman was quick to exploit the episode for political
mileage, proclaiming to the television cameras that this capture of a civilian
airliner had laid to rest any doubts about the value of the military buildup.

While other Pentagon officials were still huffing defensively at stories about
overpriced wrenches, Lehman aligned himself with the champions of reform. He
appointed a senior officer full-time to demand more competition in Navy
procurement -the other services followed suit the next year - and he has created
career rewards for officers who choose to be business managers and procurement
specialists instead of warriors. (When General Dynamics, one of two prospective
builders of four nuclear-powered attack submarines, was indicted earlier this
month on charges of fraud in Army contracts and suspended from receiving new
Government contracts, the Navy moved quickly to ''extend indefinitely'' the
deadline for bids on the submarines. This keeps the bidding competitive until
the charges against General Dynamics are settled.) To streamline Navy
purchasing, he has abolished the centralized Navy Material Command and given
field commanders more responsibility to determine what they need.

Some of his success at driving down weapons costs has stemmed from a major
depression in the domestic shipbuilding industry that has made contractors more
docile, and some of his changes have been cosmetic. But his campaign has
produced measurable savings on ships and aircraft, and won him hearty applause
from Congress. His efforts have been imitated in the other services.

One aspect of the reform movement he has not en-dorsed is the move to reorganize
the Pentagon, giving the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs greater authority to
referee the competing demands of the services. Advocates of this change often
cite the high-handed ways of the Navy as reason to assert more central control
over the nation's military priorities. Lehman, who shares President Reagan's
gift for talking as though he were not really part of the Federal Government,
decries the proposal as a move toward bureaucratic bloat and a guarantee of
stodgy thinking. ALTHOUGH JOHN LEHMAN rightly says the Navy will hit its goals
of 600 ships and 15 aircraft carriers by the end of the decade - the 14th
carrier, the Theodore Roosevelt, was launched last year and enters full service
next October - it will not be quite the fleet he originally had in mind.

According to an August report by Ronald O'Rourke, the Congressional Research
Service's naval affairs analyst, the Navy will fall 25 ships short of its target
for new cruisers and destroyers even under its own optimistic budget plans.
Lehman concedes this, but says the Navy can make do with less-capable ships. The
Congressional Budget Office has calculated that the Navy has also failed to
earmark enough money for aircraft.

Congress has frozen the military budget for the current fiscal year at last
year's level, and members of Congress say a proposed amendment to balance the
budget, if it passes, will threaten the military with drastic cuts in the years
to come. Barring an arms-control agreement, the Navy's share of the budget faces
increasing competition from nuclear weapons and President Reagan's Strategic
Defense Initiative, which one Navy supporter nervously describes as ''an open
mouth waiting to be fed.''

Moreover, because the Navy has slowed the pace of retiring older ships like the
World War II vintage Coral Sea, the service may soon find itself the owner of a
geriatric fleet, meaning increased maintenance costs in the short run and costly
replacements soon after.

''There's a widespread perception that we're buying a lot more ships,'' says
Peter T. Tarpgaard, author of a September study by the Congressional Budget
Office. ''That's not really true. The thing that's causing the ship count to go
up is the number of ships retired has gone down.''

In his report for the Congressional Budget Office, Tarpgaard estimated that Navy
budgets will have to keep growing as much as 5 percent faster than inflation to
pay for and operate the fleet Lehman has in mind. If Congress only allows the
Navy's budget to keep pace with inflation, the Navy will fall short by about
$250 billion over the next 10 years. Lehman and Admiral Watkins reject
Tarpgaard's analysis as alarmist. By getting tough with contractors and
eliminating waste, they contend, the Navy can make do on budgets growing 3
percent faster than inflation for the next five years - budgets they insist
Congress will approve. Watkins says that in the 1990's the Navy can sustain its
600 ships on annual increases of 1 percent, a claim many experts consider wildly
optimistic.

At the end of October, the Navy gave the first serious clue of how it hopes to
cope with the tighter budgets ahead. Watkins, with Lehman's backing, issued an
order, effective Jan. 1, sharply cutting back the time ships spend at sea.
Rather than retrench on the size of the fleet, the Navy's choice is to keep
building but to use its forces more sparingly in peacetime.

Under the Navy's plan, the size of battle groups on patrol will be reduced and
some routine operations will be curtailed. Instead of maintaining a continuous
carrier presence in the Indian Ocean, for example, the Navy hopes to get by with
periodic patrols. Since ship deployments are under the direct control of
regional commanders, who answer to the Defense Secretary and the White House
rather than the Navy, it is not clear whether the directive can be enforced. Nor
is it clear that the savings will be nearly enough to ward off cuts in
shipbuilding.

Critics worry that in its insistence on maintaining the carriers, the Navy will
cut into its own future - frigates and aircraft designed for antisubmarine
warfare, research programs, amphibious ships to deliver Marines to trouble spots
- or that manpower and maintenance will be sacrificed to the extent that the
fleet is not prepared to move quickly into combat.

Lehman says any cuts will be ''balanced'' to avoid a return to the days of
under-trained crewmen and poorly maintained aircraft. But his priority is clear:
''The last ship we give up is the carrier.''

The signs of the stress on John Lehman's Navy are evident, even during his
generally upbeat visit to the Coral Sea. The engineering crew that keeps the 12
boilers of the ''Ageless Warrior'' going has dwindled from 820 to 650 as the
Navy stretches to man its expanding fleet. The ship's hull is beginning to show
the punishment of more than 40 years at sea.

In the ready rooms, the pilots speculate about the coming budget cuts and what
they will mean for precious flying time, for promised new weapons, for spare
parts to keep their planes in the air.

''We've seen the service growing, and we've seen everybody getting what they
need,'' says Jim Ellis, commander of an F/A-18 squadron. ''But we also know that
when you're out front, you become the target.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of christening of aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt (Judy
Sloan/Gamma-Liaison); Photo of Lehman in Navy helicopter (Harold J. Gerwien);
Photo of Lehman with Chinese sailors on 1984 visit to China (Bill Jones) (Page
32); Photo of guided missile cruiser Yorktown (David Hathcox/IDI) (Page 35)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
YOUNG ADULTS MUST ORGANIZE FOR STRENGTH

BYLINE: By GERARD COULOMBE; Gerard Coulombe lives in Fairfield.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 30, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


IF I were young and had a cause, it would be to organize those between the ages
of 18 and 27.

They make up a large group of adults who are presently unorganized and thus lack
a strong political voice.

In a way, they are discounted by nearly all politicians and other parts of
society for the simple reason that they fail to vote in sufficient numbers to be
counted a force. At the same time, they have no spokesman.

They have every reason to be disappointed and disinterested when it comes to the
functioning of government. In the minds of many older citizens, the young are
neither capable of making good decisions for themselves nor trustworthy enough
to sustain interest in the critical issues of the day. Yet, in another
generation, the young helped bring about a major change in government and the
end of the Vietnam War.

If they wanted to, the young could exert a considerable force in the political
arena. But, although they are courted by Madison Avenue and seen as a special
market by many entrepreneurs, they are all but ignored by politicians, who
prefer to tell them what to do or to represent them as if they know not what to
do.

Every year, the young who reach the age of majority join a larger group, ages 18
to 27, who know nothing of political action committees and who do not bother to
vote so that it matters to those seeking election. Once past the age of 27, more
or less, things seem to happen less as if one were in the suspended animation of
extended adolescence and more as if one were part of the whole fabric of
society, bound by all its advantages and limitations.

Belonging to this group of young people is a large subgroup for whom the future
holds little promise. They were born into poverty and, black or white, no longer
hang on to the dream, if there ever was one instilled in their souls. Yet the
message goes out to all that big, better and best are available to all for a
price that only a few can really afford. One could easily be convinced that the
young are all right because of what they buy. But to fail to see beyond the
facade of the good times is to miss the signals of a developing tragedy.

If this is a bleak picture, then one ought to understand that being young in
America no longer holds the kind of promise it did for those who were young in
the years following World War II. Then, there was everything to gain and very
little to lose. One took a chance and expected to succeed. So many did. Not so
today.

In debt to the banks and to the Federal Government for educational loans, many
struggle to repay, and many more welch and are damned for their failure. Never
mind that it is the Federal and local governments that have failed to insure
opportunity.

Insurance companies would rather not have the young around than have to insure
them at a reasonable cost. The policies that are written are ridiculously
overpriced, on the grounds that the insurees are too high a risk. Many young
people are forced to drive without insurance or to rely upon their parents.

Obtaining loans from banks is another problem. It might be argued that obtaining
a first-time loan has always been a problem. Developing a line of credit when
you are unemployed or marginally employed is extremely difficult. It is hard to
admit that you have no regular job or no reasonable opportunity for gainful
employment.

''Gainful'' takes on a new connotation in this context, because everything is so
expensive it is difficult and impossible at times to halt the backward slide
into poverty. Still, when you do not make very much money, it is extremely
difficult to find a co-signer, and one is almost always needed until one
establishes a line of credit. But where a young person could be self-reliant 20
or more years ago, it is no longer the case, given the state of the economy and
the assurances that banks want before they will lend to the young adult whose
prospects remain questionable.

A great many have employment difficulties; it is far worse, of course, for those
who are undereducated. For those who are educated, the promise means a struggle.
Some would say that this is as it has always been; but that is not exactly true
because many are unfortunately overeducated for the kinds of jobs that are
available and meaningful to them.

If there is a shame in all of this, it is difficult to ascribe it to anyone. I
continue to believe that opportunity knocks at every door, and that all that one
needs to do to succeed is to put in the effort and the results will speak for
themselves.

When I consider that most of Fairfield County is beyond the means of our
children and therefore beyond the means of those who reside in the rest of the
state, then I say there is something wrong. When employment means that one has
no more security than that granted to those who are unemployed, then there is
something wrong.

It is time that young adults organize themselves in some political caucus. It is
time to develop an American Association of Young Americans. Somehow, the young
have to negotiate, for themselves and their own children, a better deal.

Something tells me this not possible in this country. The militant young adults
are nowhere to be found. But one need not adopt radical views to radicalize the
young. Those in power need to remember, at least, that they exist. The voice of
the young is to be found somewhere beyond the rhetoric of raising the drinking
age, even beyond the battle of trying to save themselves from drugs, depression
and even suicide. We have to talk about fairness in health and insurance,
fairness in housing and employment, for their future will increasingly become
the burden of generations to come if we do not recognize their problems now and
start doing something about them.

Is it going to be a better job corps? A national insurance program for the
young? New housing earmarked especially for them? The chances are slim of those
things ever happening, because the high cost of living that accompanies the
present state of the economy acts against young adults organizing. Gerard
Coulombe lives in Fairfield.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DINING OUT;
A THAI OUTPOST ON THE DELAWARE

BYLINE: By VALERIE SINCLAIR

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 39, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


FOR many people, the names Siam and Thailand conjure up different images. The
old Siam (the ancient name for Thailand) brings visions of an exotic and elegant
way of life, typified by sinuous, graceful dancers, gentle people and a whole
fairytale world of ''Anna and the King of Siam.'' But for those who were once
stationed in the East, Thailand's capital city of Bangkok was often the site for
''R and R'' - ''rest and rehabilitation'' - and all that the term implies.

But whether you are a romantic who likes to cling to the idea of Siam's past
glories, or a modern realist who got to know the people of Thailand on a more
basic level, Siam, a Thai restaurant on a side street in Lambertville, is worth
a visit.

The food of Thailand is reminiscent of many countries - Indonesia, India, China
and Vietnam - yet it is really unlike any of them. The predominant flavors are a
pungent, slightly sour herb called lemon grass, fresh ginger, garlic, fresh
coriander, chilis and a fish sauce called nam pla. Coconut and tamarind water
also are used, as is Thai basil, which has a very sweet flavor. Sugar is used
quite often, imparting an unexpected sweetness to many dishes.

Lambertville's Siam restaurant is owned by Thai-born Timmy Tangtakul and his
American-born wife, Dency. Mr. Tangtakul is chef at the Hotel du Village, a
restaurant in nearby New Hope, Pa.

The simple, almost stark dining room at the Siam has a few Thai artifacts on the
walls, and that's about it so far as decorations go. All the chefs are from
Thailand, but the waitresses are American, which makes it easier when
explanations concerning some of the dishes are required.

Portions are small and the menu is a la carte. Therefore, not only do the
vegetables and rice have to be ordered separately, but without them there may
not be enough to eat.

Dishes listed as appetizers include skewered pork or beef satays with peanut
sauce, chicken wings stuffed with mildly spiced ground chicken (and then deep
fried) and thick slices of lukewarm char-broiled beef with sliced onions,
cilantro and lettuce. Mee krob, a mound of slightly sweet crisp rice vermicelli
with tiny bits of chicken, pork and shrimp, was wonderful, but needed more
shrimp.

There were also sweet and tender spareribs, squid with lime juice and hot pepper
and two resilient, but tasty, fish cakes served with a spicy dipping sauce and a
soothing cucumber salad.

There are six soups. Some are clear, with a lemon grass and cilantro flavor;
others have a base of coconut milk. Most are recommended.

Main dishes, of which there are 33, are divided into chicken, seafood, pork and
beef. But many preparatons are identical; only the main ingredient changes.

Steamed pork curry, which resembled a giant meatball, was made with ground
spiced pork nesting in a spicy milky liquid. Subtle flavors of ginger,
mushrooms, scallions and bits of ground pork enhanced the steamed whole porgy,
while three-flavored fish, also cooked whole, was deep fried until crisp down to
the bones. This had to be eaten with the fingers, and it was addictive, like a
giant fish-flavored potato chip.

Other recommended main dishes include shrimp baked in a pot with ginger,
scallions and garlic, spicy shrimp with pepper paste sauce and stir-fried pork
with broccoli.

Chunks of roast duck in a thin, dark sauce were slightly charred, and the
chicken with ginger, scallions and honey tasted too one-dimensional. Far better
were the coconut-flavored chicken Thai curry with turmeric, and the even spicier
Thai curried beef.

Tender strips of beef with sweet Thai basil, garlic and hot pepper were
excellent, as was beef in a mild, creamy curry sauce with tamarind water. Beef
stir-fried with garlic and black pepper also was good.

Fried rice with either meat or vegetables is recommended, as are the stringy but
tasty stir-fried watercress, the stir-fried broccoli and stir-fried mixed
vegetables.

Better to end the meal with fruit or ice cream because the Thais are not known
for their desserts. The Siam does not have a liquor license, but customers may
bring their own. Siam

*

* 61 North Main Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-8128. Atmosphere: Stark and
simple.  Recommended Dishes: Char-broiled beef, Mee karob, stuffed chicken
wings, fish cakes, barbecue spareribs, beef or port satays, most soups,
stir-fried beef with garlic and black pepper, stir-fried beef with basil, Thai
curried beef, beef with tamarind water, steamed pork curry, stir-fried pork with
broccoli, Thai curried chicken, shrimp with ginger, scallions and garlic,
steamed whole fish, three-flavored fish and stir-fried vegetables.

Price Range: Soups and appetizers are $2.25 to $4.25, main courses are $4.25 to
$7.25 and desserts $1.50 to $1.75.

Hours: Open daily for dinner (Sunday through Thursday from 6 to 9 P.M. and
Friday and Saturday from 6 to 10:30 P.M.). Credit Cards: No cards are accepted.
Reservations: Recommended. Dress Code: None.  What the stars mean: (None)Poor to
fair

* Good

*

* Very good

*

*

* Excellent

*

*

*

* Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and
price in relation to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


THE traffic is stop-and-creep on the rain-wet Long Island Expressway, but for
once I don't mind. For one thing, I am not behind the wheel. For another, I am
of two minds about the evening that lies ahead, and one of those minds would
just as soon not arrive. And for a third, I am poring over my high school
yearbook, getting in the mood for my 20-year class reunion.

It is a long way back, even after Tom gets out of the jams and up to what he
considers highway speed. I have time to study every snapshot from the class play
(''The Music Man,'') the prom (''Midnight and Roses'') and the graduation
ceremonies (untitled). I look at all 279 portraits of slick-haired youths (with
nicknames like Turtle, Boo Boo and Stick) and fluffy-haired girls.

I carefully do not look at my own portrait, which did not show my braces because
I ignored all the photographer's urgings to ''give me a big smile,'' but did
show my glasses and a generally nerdy demeanor.

I know how I have changed, and I hardly expect to recognize anyone from these
20-year-old pictures. At least, I think, my study will bring the names out of
deep storage; I have seen only one or two of these people since the hot June day
we all graduated and I wore high heels for the first time.

I remember how scared I was that I would make a fool of myself by tripping over
the gown or the shoes as I filed up for my diploma. I have learned to walk and
even dance on high heels. What is making me nervous now is going amongst all the
people who remember me when I couldn't.

But we do arrive, prompt on the cocktail hour. The woman at the table with the
name tags is no one I've ever seen before. Then she tilts her head and laughs at
someone; it is as if she suddenly came into focus. ''Sharon?'' I say, and it is
Sharon, the cheerleaders' captain and Honor Society member, transmuted into
mother of two boys, racquetball player and jobholder.

It is like that all night. A few women look almost exactly as they did in high
school, but most evoke recognition only after a double-take; sometimes I don't
realize who they are until I have already walked by with a social smile. And the
men! Bearded or balding or both, substantially thicker, they mostly look like
strangers even after I check their tags.

My tag is embarrassing, bearing as it does that yearbook picture I didn't want
to look at. I notice that quite a few of the men have tucked the picture under
the lapels of their jackets, and do the same with mine. But people will insist
on peering at it and exclaiming how I've changed, and after a while my
self-consciousness is gone.

All of us have metamorphosed. As the class treasurer, now an international
flight attendant, tells us before dinner: ''We've all gotten grown up. We're
almost middle-aged.''

The girl who played ''Queen of the Fathoms'' in the Aquacade is assistant to the
chancellor of the University of Maryland. The editor of the high school paper is
a tax lawyer and no longer lanky. The queen of the prom teaches grade school and
has two children, but is slim and pretty as ever. One member of her court is a
nurse in Atlanta; another works with computers in Florida. The class president,
who sang ''Trouble in River City'' with such verve, is an architect in
Manhattan; his suit is tailored and his hair going gray.

I learn most of the occupational details not from the classmates' mouths but
from a wonderful booklet Sharon hands me at the door, listing all our spouses
and addresses and jobs and hobbies. I read it avidly: Judy is an accountant! Don
a veterinarian! Ken, for goodness' sake, a dentist! My heavens, Gary, the hero
of the football field, a florist! Who would have thought! Conversation is more
difficult. ''Don't you want some whole wheat bread?'' the best friend of high
school days teases at dinner. I look blank. ''How about an apple with peanut
butter and raisins on it?''

At that I make the connection, and wince. My mother was years ahead of her time
with the health-food number, and lunchtime was a penance: I was just about the
only one to carry my lunch to school, and the food in the brown bag (I
intentionally busted the Roy Rogers lunch box) was nothing like what anybody
else ever ate. When I had dreams about being publicly nude, for years afterward,
the scene was that cafeteria. Another encounter: ''Oh, Martha, I'm glad you
could come.'' ''Ummm - Eleanor? How are you?'' ''Fine, fine. I see you're living
in New York, that must be so exciting!''

''Ummm - sometimes. What are you doing?'' ''Well, we have four children.''
''Keeping busy, then.''

''Yeah. Well, and three are adopted, and the youngest, he's only 5, is
hyperactive.''

I want to say, ''My God,'' but don't. I say, ''Very busy.'' Then I say, ''You're
braver than I am.''

''Oh, well,'' she says. ''You don't have children?'' ''No.'' We look at each
other across a 20-year gulf of unshared experiences, and smile, with some regret
for the six years we sat alphabetically close, and drift apart in the crowd.

It is a crowd. The women living in Hawaii and England have not come, nor the
high school sweethearts who married and moved to Utah and then separated,
apparently, since they have different addresses there. The several who have
died, at least one in Vietnam, are spoken of.

Then the D.J. puts on ''Wake Up, Little Susie,'' and a whole lot of people get
up to dance, Tom and I included.

It is a good party, considering that everyone's reason for being there is 20
years old. I'm happy to know what happened to all those people I grew up with,
and to get back in touch with the few I loved. And I'm happy to know I can dance
all night in high heels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Sore Winners

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Few intellectual movements in this country have won so much political influence
so fast. The neoconservatives, the sect of one-time liberals who turned right,
see their ideas on the march in American foreign and military policy. Their
views proliferate in the journals. The President of the United States says they
inspire him.

The strange thing is that the neoconservatives seem to get so little joy from
their success. The dominant tones in their writing are gloom and bitterness.
They sound as if they were a hunted minority and the hated left were taking over
the country.

The phenomenon struck me again the other day when I read a piece in The New York
Times by a principal neoconservative figure, Midge Decter. The piece attacked a
new organization, Accuracy in Academia, which is getting college students to
monitor their professors for ''liberal bias.''

Spying on teachers is a repellent notion, reminiscent of totalitarian regimes
telling children to report on their parents. Many conservatives have properly
criticized the idea, and Miss Decter did a fine job of marshaling the arguments
against it.

But she did not leave the matter there. She asserted that in fact there was a
dangerous political problem in American colleges and universities: leftist
influence that has put them ''in a deplorable condition.''

Miss Decter traced the problem to the 1960's, with its Vietnam protests. ''The
country's colleges and universities . . . ,'' she said, ''simply sloughed off
the burden of their proper authority'' and ''became a veritable hotbed of
reckless, mindless anti-Americanism.''

The radical grip is still on the universities, Miss Decter said. The authority
that should inhere in the teacher-pupil relationship is perverted. If the U.S.
Government considered a foreign policy initiative, ''as if by magic, from one
end of the country to the other, the campuses will be instantly inundated by
lectures, rallies and propaganda films'' arguing that the U.S. is once again
going to ''play the role of international malefactor.''

Reading all that, I wondered what country Miss Decter was in - what century.
American university students today are more conservative than they have been in
many years, and anyone who has any contact with universities knows that. Student
concern is with careers, not ideology. In what political activity there is,
conservative influence is stronger than it has been in memory.

The Economist of London drew the picture accurately in a recent issue.
Conservatives are doing most of the political pushing on American campuses, it
said - and ''students, worried about their own job prospects rather than good
causes, have been going that way anyway. . . . Conservative groups are pouring
millions into proselytizing among young voters.''

A group called College Republicans gets $100,000 from the Republican National
Committee and raises another $200,000 for its activities. College Democrats has
an annual budget of $1,000.

In college publications, too, conservatives are the aggressive force. There are
many new conservative magazines and newspapers on campus. They get more than
$150,000 a year, The Economist says, from the Institute for Educational Affairs,
set up by neoconservative Irving Kristol.

Miss Decter says it is wrong to speak of ''liberal bias'' in the United States
because no one means ''liberal'' anymore - ''the word has simply become a
euphemism for 'leftist.' '' Again, one rubs one's eyes and wonders whether she
is living in a different country.

America today has its most ideological conservative President. It is the only
democracy without a substantial socialist party. Financial support for
conservative politics is overwhelming. Conservative views dominate the opinion
pages of the country's newspapers and magazines, working even into once-liberal
journals.

George McGovern had it right recently when he said in replying to a similar
neoconservative comment about left-wing influence: ''The 'left' is so small in
the United States that one has difficulty finding it.'' But Miss Decter is
alarmed by the few lingering signs of traditional student radicalism on our
largely inert campuses.

Midge Decter said many wise things in her piece about the danger of persecuting
opinions that differ from one's own. ''The only way to deal with words and ideas
and teachings one deplores,'' she said, ''is to offer better words and ideas and
teachings.''

That is indeed the American belief - the Madisonian belief. How I wish that she
and her fellow neoconservatives would adopt that reflective tone generally,
instead of seeing all life as a zero-sum game in which the good guys are
desperately behind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Quickly: Save 623,000 Jobs

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


In the waning minutes of the session, Congress needs to turn its attention
briefly but quickly to the targeted jobs tax credit, which otherwise will expire
on Dec. 31, needlessly killing the jobs of 623,000 disadvantaged Americans.

This tax credit was created in 1978 to ease unemployment among certain groups,
like poor youths, Vietnam veterans, handicapped persons, former criminals and
welfare recipients. A business hiring one of these workers can claim a tax
credit of $4,500 on the first $12,000 in wages paid during the first two years.

That's particularly attractive to small and medium-sized businesses, where most
new jobs are created. Such businesses receive a substantial tax saving with
little governmental involvement. Eligible workers are usually referred and
certified by community-based organizations and the paperwork is minimal. The
credit is also cost efficient. This year, it has produced savings in welfare
alone of $418 million, according to the Committee for Employment Opportunities,
while costing $365 million. It also gives hard-to-employ persons real work
experience, which, in turn, helps them get better jobs.

Congress thinks the program is worthwhile. The House has agreed to a three-month
extension, based on the one-year, maximum $2,400 credit included in its tax
reform package. And the Senate Finance Committee has agreed to extend the credit
in its present form until August 1986, buying time for action on the Senate's
tax reform bill. But unless the differences in the measures are resolved before
the law expires Dec. 31, the jobs will expire, too.

If Congress goes home without providing an extension, it would be worse than a
shame. For many individuals and communities, it would be a needless tragedy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Capital's Michelangelo Tackles George Meany

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


The Washington area will soon get its ninth piece of public sculpture by the
Long Island artist Robert Berks, a distinction perhaps never achieved by any
other person, almost certainly by no other living artist.

Mr. Berks is best known here for a huge head of John F. Kennedy at the Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts and for a triple-size full-length sculpture of
Albert Einstein at the National Academy of Sciences.

The new piece will be of George Meany, the longtime chief of the A.F.L.-C.I.O..
And the piece, like others by Mr. Berks, will shake up the traditionalists, of
which Mr. Meany certainly was one.

The piece uses the sculpture theory of ''data compression,'' the artist said
from his Orient, L.I., studio. ''It shows,'' he explained, ''the essentials that
you can evoke the whole image from.''

Of Mass and a Cigar

The piece, now in a large model form, will be 7 feet tall when completed,
including a head 2 feet tall. ''I suspend the head from a hollow plane in his
back,'' Mr. Berks said.  The hands are not connected to the torso with arms.
Instead, they rest on a block of travertine. ''One hand gesticulates, the other
holds a cigar,'' Mr. Berks said. ''The whole mass of the monument is implied.''

However the Meany work is received, Mr. Berks's bust of John F. Kennedy is so
popular that it is almost continually illuminated by brief bursts of camera
flashes from the people who make a sort of pilgrimage to it, many of them
foreign visitors. The Einstein sculpture, depicting the physicist as melancholy
and benign, is a resting place for many of the millions who visit the nearby
Vietnam War memorial and are shaken by the reminder of that war and its losses.

Photographs of the Kennedy and Einstein pieces helped illustrate the 1985
calendar distributed by members of Congress, making Mr. Berks the only artist
represented twice in the calendar. It is not likely the Meany work will enjoy
the following of the others, since it will be placed away from downtown, just
across the city line in the suburb of Silver Spring, Md., at the George Meany
Center for Labor Studies.

The center's library has all the records of the old American Federation of Labor
(the records of the Congress of Industrial Organizations are in New York), plus
the records of the merged A.F.L.-C.I.O. and Mr. Meany's personal records, back
to his days as a leader of the plumbers union in the Bronx.

Mr. Berks's past works have their admirers and detractors as well. Referring to
Mr. Berks's technique of using a very rough, almost mottled, surface, a critic
for The Washington Post said that it reminded one of the chewing gum under movie
theater seats.

John Wilmerding, deputy director of the National Gallery of Art, said, when
asked for his assessment: ''In a city where monuments often have a sameness,
Berks's pieces have a capacity to provoke, even irritate, in their assertive
size and technique. He is a curious phenomenon, both confirming and deforming
traditional realism.''

Criticism, either journalistic or scholarly, does not bother Mr. Berks. He is
unshaken in his conviction that he is right and that his critics will be long
forgotten while his work endures.

The Einstein statue is set on a base that depicts the stars in the heavens the
day the statue was dedicated. If life should die out in the United States, as it
did in the Mayan civilization, Mr. Berks said, people will come across the
Einstein piece thousands of years from now and will be able to infer from the
star chart that an advanced civilization existed in Washington.

The Meany work, Mr. Berks said, represents an advance in his sculpture.

''I am able to get the essence of the man,'' he said. ''I imply a business suit
but don't show it. I imply stoutness.

''The hand that is holding the cigar is not at rest. His successor, Lane
Kirkland, said that when you saw his hand like that when he was playing
pinochle, watch out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Berks

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WITH MINI-SERIES, VIDAL RETURNS TO TV WRITING

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 18


Gore Vidal, writing for television for the first time in 25 years, has produced
the script for a four-hour mini-series, ''Dress Gray,'' based on the
best-selling novel by Lucian K. Truscott 4th about homosexuality, corruption and
murder at West Point during the Vietnam era. The film, which stars Alec Baldwin,
Hal Holbrook, Lloyd Bridges and Eddie Albert, will be broadcast by NBC in March.

''Suddenly a lot is happening for me in show-biz land,'' Mr. Vidal said with
some bemusement in a recent interview at his home in the Hollywood Hills. ''Here
I thought I was strictly emeritus.'' A feature film script that Mr. Vidal has
written about Libby Holman looks as if it is about to be filmed. ABC plans a
six-hour adaptation of his 1973 novel ''Burr,'' and CBS has announced a
three-hour version of his recently published ''Lincoln.''

Mr. Vidal observed: ''A friend said to me, 'Ernest Kinoy does Lincoln,' Robert
Bolt does 'Burr,' and you do Truscott. I don't understand.' I said, 'I'm no
longer big enough in the business to do me.' ''

Rituals of Military Education

Mr. Vidal originally adapted ''Dress Gray'' in 1979. It was planned then as a
feature film starring William Hurt, but it never got off the ground. ''West
Point took a dim view of it,'' Mr. Vidal said. ''That was rather surprising to
me, because it's a very ambiguous script and can be read as a pro-Academy piece
at one level. But I thought that was the end of that.''

Last year, however, Warner Brothers, which owned the film script, turned the
project over to its television division and asked Mr. Vidal if he would like to
expand it for a two-part mini-series. A few changes had to be made. First, the
language was toned down. ''But they bit the bullet on the big thing, the
homosexual rape of the cadet,'' Mr. Vidal said. ''If you don't accept that,
there is no story. They didn't blink an eye on that one. Then I made up an
imaginary military academy since West Point was still being a little petulant
about the script. We call it the U.S. Grant Military Academy.''

Even with this change, Mr. Vidal seized the opportunity to explore his own mixed
feelings about the rituals of military education. ''To say that I am ambivalent
about it is to riot in understatement,'' Mr. Vidal said. ''I was born at West
Point. During the Second World War my father, my uncle and my two step-brothers
were all there. So I'm very much a part of it. I'm using material that I never
thought I'd use. I never had the opportunity before now. But Truscott's book is
like switching on a light. I began to think about what all this means - the male
bonding, the power plays in the military establishment. Commentary about the war
in Vietnam is also there for those who want to see it.''

Television's Golden Age

From the mid-50's to the mid-60's, Mr. Vidal was exclusively a dramatic writer.
He wrote several plays, worked on a number of film scripts (including ''Suddenly
Last Summer,'' ''Ben-Hur'' and an adaptation of his play ''The Best Man''), and
wrote almost 100 plays for such live television shows as ''Studio One,''
''Omnibus,'' ''Philco Television Playhouse'' and ''Goodyear Playhouse.''

''The great thing about the so-called golden age of television,'' Mr. Vidal
recalled, ''was that the morning after your show was on the air, you'd walk down
the street and everybody would be talking about your play. I really began to
feel what the Globe Theater or the Theater of Dionysus must have been like.
Television held the country together in a funny way, and you really felt that
you had a role to play.''

With the demise of live television and the dramatic anthology series Mr. Vidal
lost interest in the medium. And he drifted away from movie writing because of
the growing power of the director. ''The auteur thing came along and wrecked
writing,'' he contended. ''A real auteur director has only one thing in mind
when he has a good script and that is to hijack it and confuse the credits. I
watched this so many times and decided not to bother with it anymore.''

Weighing Other TV Projects

He found ''Dress Gray'' to be a different kind of collaboration. ''Working with
a director like Glenn Jordan took me back to the old days when directors were
there to direct scripts and not to be auteurs,'' Mr. Vidal said. ''Glenn told
the actors there was to be no paraphrasing. Suddenly I felt as though I were in
the theater again, or back in live television. I've grown interested in
television again, because it is a writer's medium.''

Now he is considering other television projects. He and David Puttnam, the
English producer of ''Chariots of Fire'' and ''The Killing Fields,'' have been
discussing a six-hour mini-series about Thomas Jefferson. Mr. Vidal has also
proposed to Warner Brothers a four-hour television movie of one of his old
scripts, ''The Death of Billy the Kid,'' which was done for television in the
50's and then made into a feature film, ''The Left-Handed Gun.'' It starred Paul
Newman and was directed by Arthur Penn. ''It was an auteur film,'' Mr. Vidal
said. ''I say no more. Now we're talking about redoing my original script.
They're reading this 30-year-old script. It's like a Dead Sea scroll.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gore Vidal

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Bloc Accord

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 18


The Soviet Union and nine Communist allies today began a 15-year cooperative
program to upgrade their economies in a bid to close the technology gap with the
West. Prime ministers of the 10-nation trade bloc Comecon signed the accord.
Soviet scientists said the program focused on five areas: electronics,
automation, atomic energy, new industrial materials and biotechnology. The other
Comecon nations are Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland,
Rumania, Mongolia, Cuba and Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DOHR IS REJECTED BY A BAR PANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 314 words


Bernardine Dohrn, the 43-year-old former leader of the Weather Underground, has
been rejected for admission to the New York bar, her lawyer said yesterday.

''There is no doubt she was turned down for now,'' said the lawyer, Harold R.
Tyler Jr., ''which I hope holds, by implication, the promise that next year she
can reapply.

''They feel her record since she came back into normal society has not convinced
them entirely that she's really committed to the practice of law,'' he said.
''She is disappointed. She continues to think she is now qualified and that she
presented a good record.''

He said Miss Dohrn ''continues in her effort to be a New York lawyer.''

Last year, the Committee on Character and Fitness of Applicants for Admission to
the Bar of the First Judicial Department, covering Manhattan and the Bronx,
recommended about 2,000 applicants for admission to the bar. The Appellate
Division of the State Supreme Court appoints the committee.

Less than 1 percent of the applications had raised problems that, like Miss
Dohrn's, were deemed serious enough to lead to hearings by the committee, which
weighs whether or not the problem was an isolated one, the time that has elapsed
since and the applicant's record during that period.

Miss Dohrn, who is now married and has three children, passed the New York State
bar examination last year and has been assisting lawyers in the Manhattan office
of a Chicago-based law firm. She graduated from the University of Chicago Law
School in 1967.

After 11 years as a fugitive, she surfaced in 1980 and pleaded guilty to
aggravated battery and bail-jumping charges stemming from Vietnam War protests
in 1969. She was fined $1,500 and put on three years' probation. In 1982, she
was jailed for seven months for refusing to cooperate with a grand jury
investigating the 1981 Brink's robbery and murders in Rockland County.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR REBELS TRYING TO UNIFY IN MARXIST PARTY

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words

DATELINE: SAN JUAN EL SITIO, El Salvador


The top military leaders of the Salvadoran guerrilla movement say that they are
trying to unite in a single Marxist-Leninist political party.

The decision to try to form a Marxist-Leninist party represents the first time
the rebel military Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front has publicly
defined itself as a Marxist movement.

The shift appears to reflect an ideological hardening among the rebels, as well
as a narrowing of their public appeal and of the political forces that they once
hoped would support them.

The decision is one of the strongest indications yet of the growing distance
between the five factions that make up the rebel military front and the handful
of small social democratic parties that have been allied to them for five years
under the banner of the Democratic Revolutionary Front.

The social democratic parties have had an increasingly troubled relationship
with the armed guerrilla groups. The Democratic Revolutionary Front has
consistently defined itself as a supporter of political pluralism, and its
senior officials say they will not join the Marxist-Leninist party the rebels
hope to form.

The guerrillas' plans could have wide implications for the future of the
Salvadoran war and seem to show that the rebels recognize that they have
stumbled and must now regroup and rethink their strategy.

Senior officials of the rebel faction called the Popular Liberation Forces spoke
of the guerrillas' plans during two recent trips by a reporter to guerrilla
areas in northeastern Chalatenango Province. The trip included a weeklong tour
of rebel territory under a guerrilla escort.

A senior Salvadoran official said the Government welcomed the guerrillas'
declaration that they are Marxists.

''We think they're taking off their mask,'' he said. ''We've never believed they
were democrats interested in standing in elections.''

A United States diplomat cautioned that it would not be easy for the rebels to
form one party.

''I'm skeptical that they can paper over the personal and political differences
that have divided them into five groups,'' he said.

See a Long War Ahead

In a document summarizing their new strategy that they showed to a reporter, the
guerrillas said the long war they believe lies ahead was to be ''led by a
vanguard that is trying to construct one Marxist-Leninist party.''

That party will possess ''a clear anti-imperialist character,'' the document
says, ''and its direction is toward socialism, expressing the thought of the
vanguard.'' Victory, it continues, will come only with ''the liquidation of the
capitalist system.''

The concept of a Leninist party is based on Lenin's methods of taking power in
Russia in 1917 through a single party professing to represent the working class.

The rebel document is titled ''Strategic Appreciation of the Situation.'' It is
dated September 1985 and is issued in the name of the Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Front, but not the Democratic Revolutionary Front. The document was
distributed after a meeting of the top leaders of the military front's five
factions in the northern town of Perquin in June and July.

Past Strategy Criticized

According to rebel officials, the meeting brought out sweeping criticisms of
past rebel strategy. Specifically, the guerrillas faulted themselves for not
developing greater public support and for concentrating too much on military
matters.

Referring to mistakes, the rebel document says, ''The first and of greatest
importance consisted in having forgotten the incorporation of the people in the
revolutionary war as the principal weapon of our revolution.

''We need to regain confidence and expectations, nationally and internationally,
of victory for the F.M.L.N.,'' it says, using the initials for the rebel
movement in Spanish.

The document has been issued as a booklet to be studied by local commanders.

Rebel officials said they had chosen to form a single Marxist party at this time
so as to wage a ''prolonged popular war'' against the United States and the
Salvadoran Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, whom they treat as a
major threat to their national and international standing.

''Duarte has to be convinced that the F.M.L.N. will never give up its guns,''
Leonel Gonzalez, the head of the Popular Liberation Forces and one of the five
top rebel leaders, said in an interview.

Plan More Attacks in Capital

Mr. Gonzalez added that the rebels would step up kidnappings and attacks in the
capital as part of the new strategy. He said the kidnapping in September of Mr.
Duarte's daughter, who was later released, and the abduction of several village
mayors were part of the new strategy. He defended the rebel killing of four
United States marines six months ago and said American officials were legitimate
targets.

Asked to explain the nature of the single Marxist-Leninist party that the rebels
want to create, a member of the central committee of the Popular Liberation
Forces, who gave his name as Elias, said, ''It is the most advanced part of the
working class that conducts the revolution to a new stage.

''All groups of the F.M.L.N. agree on the construction of one Marxist-Leninist
party - to create one organic political structure,'' he added.

The attempt to form a new party, as well as other decisions that appear to have
been made at the rebel command meeting in Perquin, seem to mark an effort to
resolve a long and at times violent debate within the movement over the emphasis
to be given to political, rather than military, activities.

Ties With Peasants Stressed

The Popular Liberation Forces, which controls this village and the valleys
around it, has long emphasized close ties with local peasants and has seldom
enforced its will by killing civilians. But the People's Revolutionary Army,
which is the second largest rebel group, has concentrated almost entirely on
military actions.

The People's Revolutionary Army appears to have little backing among peasants in
the east of the country where it operates and has killed several peasants who
refused to support it. Some of the killings were reported by relief officials in
the last few weeks.

The rebel strategy document appears especially to criticize such overemphasis on
military measures.

The document says the rebels erred in creating purely military units instead of
small guerrilla and local militia patrols. The formation of large military units
separated the rebels from the population and allowed the Salvadoran Air Force to
inflict heavy losses on them, the document states.

The rebels also fired too much ammunition and were forced to have too many men
in combat, the document says, apparently alluding to difficulties in finding new
recruits in the last year.

U.S. Seen in a Decisive Role

In a review of their current standing, the document says the guerrillas face a
new situation in which the United States has become a decisive influence in the
war and the Salvadoran Army has grown in size. The army's chief goal, according
to the document, is to separate the rebels from their civilian supporters.

In addition, the rebels face a ''puppet Government'' led by President Duarte and
supported by both the Reagan Administration and the United States Congress, the
document says.

To reply to these new circumstances, it calls for ''a more integral scheme of
people's war.'' The rebels will rely on local support among peasants and try to
wear down the army with a minimum of casualties for themselves.

They have broken into small units, according to rebel officials, not only to
avoid air force attacks but also to have greater contact with the people and to
carry out propaganda work across the country.

No More Factions

As a sign of their intention to unify, all rebels will now define themselves as
members of the rebel front and not as members of individual factions, Mr.
Gonzalez said.

It is not clear what the guerrillas think they will gain by forming an
apparently orthodox Marxist party. But in recent propaganda broadcasts, they
have defined their fight as an ''anti-imperialist'' war against the United
States that will last for decades.

In the past they had pointed to the Nicaraguan revolution in 1979 as a possible
model, seeking to form a similar alliance with the Salvadoran middle class and
hoping for neutrality from the United States. But they now speak of Vietnam as
the revolutionary precedent that has the most to teach them.

The new rebel slogan, seen and heard throughout rebel areas, is, ''One party,
one army, until the taking of power.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a member of central committee of the Popular Liberation Forces
talking on a radio in San Juan el Sitio, El Salvador (NYT/James LeMoyne)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THIS TIME, SHULTZ HAS THE LAST WORD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


GEORGE P. SHULTZ demonstrated again last week that on matters of principle, the
normally easygoing Secretary of State can turn into an implacable adversary. In
Belgrade, at the end of a nine-day European trip that included Hungary and
Rumania, Mr. Shultz erupted in anger at a joint news conference with the
Yugoslav Foreign Minister, Raif Dizdarevic.

Pounding a table after the minister suggested that the Palestinian hijackers of
the Achille Lauro had a just cause, Mr. Shultz exclaimed that terrorism ''is
wrong!'' He called on the international community to deal with the problem
''unequivocally, firmly, definitively.'' Then he calmed down, telling Mr.
Dizdarevic, ''You probably feel the same way.''

But once back in Washington, Mr. Shultz showed that his anger was not yet spent.
He startled not only the White House but his own aides in the State Department
by telling reporters that he would resign if ever asked to take a polygraph
test. The White House had said the week before that as part of a new get-tough
policy on espionage senior officials, even Cabinet officers, might have to take
lie-detector tests.

''The minute in this Government I am told that I'm not trusted is the day that I
leave,'' he said.

This was the first time in memory that a Secretary of State had publicly thrown
down the gauntlet and said he would quit over principle. Cyrus R. Vance resigned
over the attempted rescue operation in Iran in 1980, but he kept his
disagreement secret until the aborted operation became public. In some
adminstrations, such a challenge to a Presidential directive would be met with
defiance in the White House. But this President, who genuinely dislikes dissent
among his advisers, sought conciliation rather than confrontation.

On Friday, President Reagan and his spokesmen seemed to reverse their polygraph
policy by saying there had been a misunderstanding about what the
counterespionage directive was all about. Larry Speakes, the White House
spokesman, insisted that only officials actually suspected of espionage would be
subject to such tests, that the guidelines for such examinations would not be
drafted for a month and that Mr. Shultz could determine what procedures to
follow in the State Department anyway. And Mr. Reagan, smiling, told reporters
that neither he nor Mr. Shultz would have to take a lie-detector test. Mr.
Shultz, delighted at having swayed the President, flew off to California for a
holiday.

The whole affair demonstrated the sometimes peculiar ways in which this
Administration is run, or not run. The President issued a directive, presumably
after hearing the advice of key national security advisers. But no sooner than
it became known, it was revised. In this case, Mr. Shultz, who evidently lost
the initial round when the directive was being drawn up, was able to make his
case by challenging it on principle. In Mr. Shultz's view, not only is a
lie-detector test demeaning to a man of honor, but it is ineffective.

Mr. Shultz prides himself on being a team player who makes his arguments
privately and supports the final decision, whether or not he did so originally.
But when the question is one of principle, Mr. Shultz has made it known that he
has higher loyalties.

In the 1960's, when he was dean of the University of Chicago business school,
Mr. Shultz threatened to quit if the university bent to the demands of anti-
Vietnam protestors and prohibited Dow Chemical recruiters on campus. It was not
that Mr. Shultz supported napalm bombs, which were made by the company, or was
arguing the merits of the war. Rather, as he explained, he would not remain in a
university that allowed the mob to make policy. In the end, university officials
went along with Mr. Shultz.

A decade later, when he was Secretary of the Treasury for Richard M. Nixon, he
refused a White House request to have the Internal Revenue Service audit the tax
returns of Nixon foes. Mr. Nixon did not take the opposition graciously.

Administration Tensions

The polygraph crisis exposed the tensions between Mr. Shultz on one side and
William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, and Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger on the other. Both Mr. Casey and Mr. Weinberger, whose
agencies, unlike the State Department, routinely administer polygraph tests to
employees, strongly favor the use of such exams to deter would-be spies. Before
Mr. Shultz's outburst, Mr. Weinberger said that taking the polygraph test
''wouldn't bother me a bit,'' and a spokesman for Mr. Casey emphasized the
importance of setting an example to insure that secrets are kept and those who
divulge them are found out.

Mr. Shultz has other disagreements with Mr. Casey and Mr. Weinberger,
principally over how to deal with the Russians. For the last three years, Mr.
Shultz has battled for a dual carrot-and-stick policy not unlike those of his
predecessors, while Mr. Casey and Mr. Weinberger have seen little value in
offering incentives to the Russians. It has been a frustrating time for many
officials in the State Department, who have seen Administration policies waver,
reflecting the divisions in the Government.

Whether Mr. Shultz has the stomach for further internal debate remains to be
seen. But at the end of the week, most of his aides seemed convinced that he
would stay on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George P. Shultz (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Decline and Fall Of Teaching History

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


In secondary schools, the history curriculum is its own self-destruct mechanism.
In one year, students in their early teens are expected to know the cultural and
political history of India, Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Soviet Union;
the causes and effects of the Renaissance, Reformation, Industrial Revolution,
Imperialism, Colonialism, and World Wars I and II, Korea, Vietnam and concepts
such as detente, cold war, balance of power, spheres of influence.

In American history, they are bombarded with all the wars and the 13 colonies,
the Federalists, the era of good feelings, Reconstruction, progressivism,
Populism, the Depression and the New Deal.

No self-respecting institution of higher learning would teach history with this
''shotgun'' approach. A college history major will take a specific course,
designed to focus the energies of both student and educator on a particular
field, i.e., the American Depression, the Renaissance, the Vietnam War.

It is clearly frustrating when a teacher feels no sense of accomplishment or
purpose in trying to teach everything, thereby teaching nothing. PETER DREW
Teacher of History Benjamin N. Cardozo High School Bayside, Queens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ALIENATING AFFECTIONS

BYLINE: By David Watt; David Watt, the director of the Royal Institute of
International Affairs in London from 1978 to 1984, is writing a history of
American foreign policy since World War II.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1552 words


ESTRANGEMENT America and the World. Edited by Sanford J. Ungar. 347 pp. New
York: A Carnegie Endowment Book/ Oxford University Press. $19.95.

THE theme of this collection of essays, by authors who are predominantly
American and liberal, is blazoned in the title. The word ''estrangement'' is a
pregnant one, implying both that close and relatively harmonious links existed
between two partners in the past and also that the parties are no longer in what
the French call bon accord. The editor, Sanford J. Ungar, a senior associate at
the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, sums up this theme at the
outset. The United States, he says, is ''separate, aloof, more alone than even
the most cynical or pessimistic observers might have predicted in the heyday of
American postwar power.''

A Western European commentator, such as myself, is likely to agree by instinct
with this proposition. It is painfully obvious to Western Europeans, who have
been the chief beneficiaries of a close relationship with the United States
since World War II and have a lot of experience on which to base comparisons,
that America's external relations have been under strain during the last five
years. The Reagan Administration's strong tendency to go in for the so-called
quick domestic fix, and only consider the international repercussions of its
actions afterward, has caused its closest allies more than the usual amount of
irritation and embarrassment. But how much deeper than that does the trouble go?
Is this a temporary blip on the screen, or has there been a permanent shift in
the way in which Americans see the world and the world sees America?

A pragmatic supporter of the President could make several quite plausible
answers to the alarmists. In the first place, he might challenge the whole
factual basis of their case. Take, for instance, the particular examples of
estrangement that Mr. Ungar produces to illustrate his case - trade friction
with Japan, antinuclear sentiment in Western Europe, anticonservative leanings
in Central America and black disillusionment in South Africa. These are no doubt
evidence that at a particular moment, 1985, one of the superpowers has aroused
the defensive hostility or suspicion of other nations, but where is the evidence
to show that these are either serious or long-lived difficulties? Surely this is
a rather flimsy foundation on which to rest a whole theory of alienation.

Another line of defense would be to ask, What is so new in alienation anyhow?
For far the greater part of its existence, the United States has maintained a
carefully standoffish view of the outside world. This has not necessarily
entailed isolationism, merely (as George Washington implied in his Farewell
Address) a prudent concern that inflexibility and overextension should not
prevent a policy that follows the changing patterns of American interest. There
is nothing abso-lutely wrong with alliances or even foreign wars, as such, but
they should be regarded as no more than short-term expedients.

According to this thesis, American postwar relationships, especially in the
third world, have been a bit of an aberration - necessary, up to a point, for
the purpose of protecting United States interests against the encroachments of
the Soviet Union, but carried to excessive lengths and made ends in themselves.
Now, thank Heaven, American foreign policy under President Reagan is reverting,
in a modernized version, to the more flexible and self-interested tradition.

It is common ground among the book's essayists that the first of these defenses
is inadequate - in other words, that something really significant and probably
permanent has indeed changed, at least in American attitudes, if the present is
compared with, say, 1965. What the change actually consists of is not quite so
clear, but the contributors' consensus on this point really amounts to a charge
that America is having a prolonged fit of the sulks. The world is neither as
malleable nor as grateful as it ought to be. As Robert Dallek, the author of
''Franklin Roosevelt and American Foreign Policy'' and other books, points out,
the prevalent American notion immediately after the war was that the rest of the
world, including the Soviet Union and China, was becoming more like the United
States and that it would therefore be possible to construct a truly cooperative
international system on American terms. When the Russians refused to go along
with this one-world vision, the Truman Administration tried, as a second best,
to draw the boundaries round a so-called free world modeled according to
American prescriptions.

This has been a more manageable and therefore more durable enterprise; and it
has been underpinned, as Lester C. Thurow, the author of ''The Zero-Sum
Society,'' notes, by the overwhelming strength of the American economy. But this
idea too has collapsed in the end, essentially because the emerging third world
nations have not been willing to accept the limiting definitions of loyalty and
freedom that the American psychology has felt it necessary to impose on them. At
the end of this process - after Vietnam and Iran and a host of lesser rebuffs -
there is not much left but to accept one or the other of most unwelcome
alternatives: either some form of defensive disengagement or the humiliating
idea that America must come to terms with the world as it is, rather than as it
ought to be. If, as seems pretty clear has happened, the United States has
preferred the former option, we should not be surprised.

But how permanent is this choice? Is it a brief oddity, or does it, as my
imagined apologist for Mr. Reagan would argue, represent a reversion to the
permanent pattern? What is the American style in foreign policy, and can it
realistically be applied today? The three most interesting essays in
''Estrangement'' deal with the first part of this question and apparently point
to rather different conclusions. Philip L. Geyelin, a syndicated columnist,
exploits the Washingtonian tradition and quotes John Quincy Adams to very good
effect: ''Wherever the standard of freedom and Independence has been or shall be
unfurled, there will her [America's] heart, her benedictions and her prayers be.
But she goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy. . . . She is the
champion and vindicator only of her own.'' In Mr. Geyelin's view, Adams was thus
''making the case against the Central Intelligence Agency's secret war in
Nicaragua, not to mention the U.S. presence in Lebanon in the 1980s.''

On the other hand, James Chace, the author of ''Endless War'' and an editor of
The Book Review, emphasizes the long interventionist strain in American policy,
which he attributes to the search for invulnerability. His quarrel with Mr.
Reagan and some of his predecessors is that by indiscriminately extending the
definition of vital American interests, they have undermined public support for
the deployment of American power.

More speculatively still, Frances FitzGerald, the author of ''Fire in the
Lake,'' maintains that vagaries of current foreign policy have little to do with
the history of American foreign policy before World War II and a lot to do with
the 19th-century millennial theology she believes painted the map of the world
that the American public still has in its mind. Her attempt to equate much of
the postwar debate on foreign policy with rival heresies - the Manichaean
(paranoid and pessimistic) and the Gnostic (revivalist and optimistic) - is a
bit farfetched. It also leaves her without much possibility of prescription for
the future. But it is the most entertaining as well as the most suggestive essay
in the book. F ROM such a variety of analyses it is not easy to draw
conclusions. What is clear is that anybody who tries to devise a rational
strategy for American foreign policy must work within two sets of limitations.
The psychological limits are on the one hand America's missionary sense of
uniqueness and virtue and on the other the American public's unwillingness,
which Henry Kissinger has noted so bitterly, to engage in ''permanent exertion''
outside its own borders. On the practical plane, one limit is marked by the fact
that the security of the United States cannot be achieved, in the modern world,
by isolationism; at the other end is the fact that no amount of American power
is sufficient to achieve the country's security by way of a world dominated by
the United States.

To America's European allies, these boundaries seem almost self-evident - and
not only because they coincide with the self-interested feeling that Europe
needs permanent American protection but not United States suzerainty or
unpredictable bursts of missionary zeal. They do not yet seem to be so evident
to the people of the United States or to the present Administration, whose
dreams of invulnerability and outbreaks of self-righteous passion constantly
display the psychological, and transgress the practical, aspects of those
boundaries. ''Estrangement'' will hardly cause President Reagan to adjust ideals
to reality or to sell the new adjustment to the American people when his recent
predecessors have failed to do so. But it is a heartening sign that thoughtful,
moderate and erudite American minds are still at work on the problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEAR RICH-AND-FAMOUS

BYLINE: By Warren F. Kimball; Warren F. Kimball is a professor of history at
Rutgers University. His most recent publication is the three-volume collection
''Churchill & Roosevelt: The Complete Correspondence.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2542 words


PUBLIC PHILOSOPHER Selected Letters of Walter Lippmann. Edited by John Morton
Blum. 652 pp. New York: Ticknor & Fields. $29.95.

WHY should anyone bother to read over 600 pages of letters written by the same
person, even so prominent a pundit as Walter Lippmann? In one sense, the answer
is simple. In 1913, Walter Lippmann published his first book, ''A Preface to
Politics.'' From then until 1971, almost four years before his death, through a
steady stream of books and news columns, he acted as a learned and respected
observer of governance and policy in America. Leaders often disagreed with
Lippmann, but they almost always read him, as these letters demonstrate.

''Public Philosopher'' is a chronological selection from the more than 20,000
letters in the Walter Lippmann papers at Yale University. The letters help us
get beneath the vagueness and some of the detachment of his published books and
columns, although detachment was a calculated part of the Lippmann style. Almost
all the selections seem important. In part, that is because Lippmann rarely
corresponded with any but the rich and famous - at least not in this sampling -
and there is a certain fascination in that world of movers and shakers. In
larger part, however, the significance of the letters is a tribute to Walter
Lippmann's mind and John Morton Blum's hard work.

There are things this volume is not. It does not offer a new, revisionist or
complete view of Walter Lippmann, although Mr. Blum, a Yale historian, has
provided an erudite and most readable introduction that is itself a contribution
to our knowledge of the man. The collection is not a history of the era. In
fact, despite some explanatory footnotes, it is a book for the informed reader,
for those with a good understanding of 20th-century history. I found myself
constantly tempted to reach for Ronald Steel's 1980 biography of Lippmann for
the background and context I needed to appreciate a letter. It does not offer
alternative points of view; the selections are limited to letters written by
Lippmann. Nor does it allow us to assess his influence on others. It is not a
narrative one can follow; issues appear once, never to be glimpsed again. Nor is
it easy reading (al-though neither were Lippmann's newspaper columns), despite
an array of trenchant, usable quotations. The editor finds the letters have
''the casual quality of good conversations''; I find them all too often like
lectures.

This collection, and Walter Lippmann for that matter, must be read in the light
of his elitism. His vaunted realism masked an impractical ideal as old as
Plato's -a belief in a priesthood of wise realists, aided by technocrats, who
would replace traditional leaders. Somehow, these superior men would suppress
their personal impulses and be responsible to society without giving way to
transient emotions. Only occasionally did Lippmann confront the difficulty of
reconciling the ideal and the practical worlds, and then his letters indicated
frustration with reform-in-the-trenches. Working in 1912 for a recently elected
Socialist mayor, he complained: ''Being in Schenectady isn't as inspiring as it
sounds. I don't mean for a minute that I'm bothered at all by being away out
here in a city which is a mere adjunct to two factories. What appalls me is the
smallness of our power. . . . I'm becoming more and more sure that political
victories are comparatively insignificant.'' Lippmann's combination of elitism
and utilitarianism led to a militant avoidance of principle for principle's
sake. The result was a number of curious and troubling positions. In both world
wars, he accepted the need for news management and propaganda. In 1942 and again
in 1968, he defended the forced internment of Japanese-Americans living on the
West Coast during World War II. In 1922, Harvard University was struggling over
the issue of admission quotas for Jews. Lippmann recommended against such quotas
but then suggested that the ''Jewish leadership . . . persuade Jewish boys to
scatter,'' a sort of gentlemen's agreement like that arranged to limit Japanese
immigration by his early political hero, Theodore Roosevelt. During the cold war
era, Lippmann's meetings at home and abroad with foreign diplomats seem to have
been regularly followed by a report he sent to some high-level C.I.A. official.
He consistently opposed any kind of firm Federal action against segregation in
the South. In 1926 he wrote Senator William Borah, Republican of Idaho, that any
attempt to enforce the 15th Amendment, which was designed to give to ''the negro
broad voting privileges,'' would ''breed disorders'' and threaten ''the peace
and tranquillity of the United States,'' sentiments he repeated, in gentler
form, in 1957 after Federal troops enforced the Brown v. Board of Education
decision in the Supreme Court.

Reading this entire collection leaves an impressionistic image of the man and
his thinking. For Lippmann, the real issues of the World War I era were
British-American collaboration and the League of Nations. He favored helping the
Allies, ostensibly because only a British victory could bring a stable peace.
But he condemned President Wilson's attempt to preserve that peace with a League
of Nations, precisely for the same reasons of practicality. As Lippmann saw it,
the League was built on three fallacies: ''First, that the movement towards
industrial democracy can be crushed. Second, that French diplomacy can be
trusted with the mastery of the continent. Third, that the power of America can
be employed to maintain in status quo the impossible relationships created by
the first two fallacies.'' Besides, how could such a system work, he asked, if
Germany and Russia lay outside it? D URING the 20's and early 30's, Lippmann
seemed to flounder, a great mind looking for a great issue. He worried about
politics, supported Al Smith for the Presidency and continued to condemn
Wilsonians for putting vague, universal peacekeeping ahead of a rational
international arrangement. The only thing that seemed to excite him was the
fight against Prohibition. What is striking about his letters in that era is the
growing number sent to wealthy businessman-politicians, a pattern that would
continue. He saw Franklin Roosevelt as ''a kind of amiable boy scout,'' and
criticized that portion of New Deal thinking that threatened to create a
coercive and unworkable collectivism.

It was not until the mid-30's that foreign affairs again provided Lippmann with
the issues that best engaged his mind. As Germany and Japan became more
belligerent, Lippmann restated his belief that America's interests were best
served by working with the Western Europeans: best in the sense of real economic
and military benefits, best in the sense of the limits of American power. His
program was two-thirds of the old Alfred Thayer Mahan-Theodore Roosevelt
prescription for United States foreign policy - dominance in the Americas,
cooperation in the Pacific. But Lippmann changed the third leg of that stool,
abstention from Europe, into association and even alliance with Britain. He told
Secretary of State Cordell Hull in 1935 that to strengthen the chances of peace
in Europe, we had to pacify Japan and make that country ''a defender of the
existing international order.'' Ruefully cognizant of the new diplomacy that
went with literacy and increased public awareness, Lippmann cautioned against
the kind of public moral crusade being conducted against Japan in the mid-30's
and suggested that it would be ''better to do a good job under the methods of
the old diplomacy.'' That crusade, as much as anything else, drew him to
conclude that Franklin Roosevelt could not ''remain master of the situation,''
and that perhaps a Republican had to be elected in 1936.

Despite his belief that F.D.R. was ''not a strong, competent man'' - Lippmann
always found someone better suited - he happily predicted in April 1941 that
Americans would follow the President when he said something (that is,
intervention in Europe) was ''necessary and feasible.'' But Lippmann's greatest
compliment to Roosevelt was unintended. In 1943, the columnist turned to the
great question of ordering the postwar world. In a penetrating letter to the
philosopher Jacques Maritain, Lippmann observed that using power ''for the
attainment of ultimate ends . . . could lead only . . . to a new version of
Kipling and the white man's burden.'' A few weeks later he condemned the
Wilsonian notion of any organization, ''more or less led by the Big Four
[America, Russia, China and Britain], committed to suppressing aggression, no
matter by whom.'' He believed that such an organization, ''directed against
everybody in general and nobody in particular, would quickly develop a pro and
anti-Russian alignment.'' Taken with his (and F.D.R.'s) belief that the American
people would not commit the United States to the defense of Europe, you have the
same vague concept of regional leadership that Roosevelt seemed to propose with
his four world policemen. L IPPMANN'S analysis of the effect of the two world
wars on the game of nations displayed his broad political insight. As he wrote
Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal in 1945, no World War I settlement could
have worked without Germany's remaining ''the leading great nation of the
European continent.'' But World War II produced a dramatically different
situation, for the Red Army had empowered Russia to displace Germany in that
''first power'' rank. That led Lippmann to argue strenuously against two aspects
of American cold war policy, militarization and globalism. He had no quarrel
with the diplomat George Kennan's dislike of and distaste for the Soviet system,
but since the Red Army and the atomic bomb negated each other, Lippmann
advocated concentrating on Europe, using nonmilitary alliance diplomacy to
contain the Russians (similar to what Mr. Kennan later claimed he had meant in
his 1947 article in Foreign Affairs, signed ''X,'' which called for a policy of
containment of the Soviet Union). As Lippmann wrote, glumly, in 1948, ''it was
not the unexpected aggressiveness of the Soviet Union, but the unexpected
weakness and defaults of the British which caused the present postwar situation.
But for the British weakness . . . Russia would have been ipso facto
contained.''

For a brief moment in 1948 after the Czechoslovak coup, Lippmann feared a Soviet
invasion of Europe. But those fears soon subsided. Nevertheless, he supported
liberation but within the limits of his European world. As he told his fellow
columnist Dorothy Thompson in September of that year, ''the objective we must
aim at is the expulsion of the Russians from Europe,'' since mere containment
would not work. One cannot help wondering what Clausewitz would have said about
Lippmann's insistence that propaganda and diplomatic pressure, not ultimatums
and military force, would do the trick. Perhaps most revealing of all is
Lippmann's main reason for wanting to avoid force - the chaos that followed war
would guarantee leftist revolutions. A FTER the late 40's, the letters somehow
lose their spark. Tired, distracted or even confused, Lippmann seems to have
lost his intensity. He was generally supportive of President Eisenhower and
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. His only criticisms of Britain during the
1956 Suez crisis, when Britain and France sent troops into Egypt to assure
control of the Suez Canal, were of its refusing to work through the United
Nations, its ''failing to make a convincing case for intervention'' and its
military ineptitude. As the Vietnam involvement grew, he warned against making
it ''an American war,'' but without the emotion (a word he would have rejected)
of his exhortations about Japan in the 30's.

In 1933, while defending the experimentalism of the early New Deal, Lippmann
indulged in a rare piece of self-analysis: ''Personally, being by temperament a
skeptic and having very little faith in the power of any formula to encompass
the enormous variety of real things I am an incurable eclectic.'' Perhaps we
must take him on his own terms. Instead of praising Walter Lippmann, praise that
part of Walter Lippmann that works. Despite his efforts to define a public
philosophy and to create what John Morton Blum calls a ''secular natural law,''
Lippmann's definition of evil boiled down to one thing - disorder, whether
caused by Hitler, Soviet expansion, the overextension of American power, civil
rights or popular emotion.

Some of his predictions were remarkably accurate. His warnings about the limits
of American power, his assessment of Soviet-American confrontations, his
forebodings about Vietnam and his belief that President Johnson lacked the
''moral courage which it takes to liquidate an unprofitable war'' are but a few
examples among many. But those must be balanced by the miscalculations and
so-called realism that brought him to fear civil rights, to support for too long
the maintenance of colonial empires and often to view international relations
from a perspective much like that of someone playing the board game Diplomacy.
NO FIRST TERM To Newton D. Baker [Secretary of War, 1916-21] November 24, 1931
Dear Newton:

I hear from a good source that your views on the present Governor of New York
are rather more favorable than some of us here think the facts justify. I was an
enthusiastic Roosevelt man up to the week of his first inauguration as Governor.
. . . In those days I was hearing from him pretty constantly. . . . I am now
satisfied . . . that he just doesn't happen to have a very good mind, that he
never really comes to grips with a problem which has any large dimensions, and
that above all the controlling element in almost every case is political
advantage. . . . He has never by one phrase expressed disapproval of the gross
corruption and even greater squalor of half of the party of which he is a
titular leader. . . . On the other hand, he has done everything that he could,
from the day that he took office to destroy the political power of [former
Governor Al] Smith, and I am told that until their luncheon the other day he
never consulted Smith on one single problem of the State government. When you
consider that Roosevelt had been out of state politics for fifteen years before
he was elected Governor, and that Smith is the greatest expert on New York State
government living, I think it's an ominous performance, and certainly would
cause me to distrust Roosevelt's willingness, if elected President, to sink his
personal jealousies and select the ablest man. I am convinced that he has never
thought much, or understood much, about the great subjects which must concern
the next president, about such matters as the tariff, foreign policy, taxation,
currency and banking. He is best on certain questions of social welfare, old age
pensions, and that kind of remedial legislation, but on the real problems of
statesmanship, my impression, from many long talks in the last few years, is
that he is a kind of amiable boy scout. I consider it extremely important that
he shouldn't be the Democratic candidate for president. - From ''Public
Philosopher: Selected Letters of Walter Lippmann.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of Walter Lippmann; Photo of Franklin D. Roosevelt

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRESPONDENT'S CHOICE;
IN GERMANY, HALLS DECKED ROYALLY

BYLINE: By R. W. Apple Jr.; R. W. APPLE Jr. is chief Washington correspondent
for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 15, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1441 words


I have spent Christmas at home and Christmas abroad: exuberant boyhood holidays
in Ohio, subdued wartime holidays in Vietnam and Nigeria, gala grown-up holidays
in Sicily and Devon and the South of France. But I have never had quite as
perfect a Christmas as the one my wife and I spent last year in an obscure
corner of Germany.

Many American Christmas traditions come from that country, either by way of
England (which adopted such German symbols as Santa Claus and the decorated tree
only after 1840, when Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha married Queen Victoria)
or by way of German immigrants, who brought with them such carols as ''Silent
Night'' and ''Away in a Manger.'' But it was not mere familiarity that made our
Christmas so memorable, or even my own Teutonic roots; it was the Hotel
Friedrichsruhe that did that, with a bit of help from heaven.

The hotel (or, to give it its full, resounding title, the Wald- und
Schlosshotel, or forest and castle hotel) is secreted on a wooded plateau in
Swabia, four miles north of the little town of Ohringen, which is itself about
45 miles north of Stuttgart, home of the Mercedes and Porsche factories. The
plateau is called the Hohenlohe, a name adopted eight centuries ago by one of
the great German princely families. The family produced political and military
leaders, including a 19th-century chancellor, and covered this rural region with
castles and hunting lodges.

Between 1712 and 1717, Prince Johann Friedrich of the Ohringen branch of the
family built a hunting lodge - a long, three-storied beige building with a
typically Baroque central gable and an orange tile roof -and built it big enough
and fine enough to house a shooting party of imperial proportions. That, today,
is one of the two buildings that make up the hotel, still faintly rustic with
brass beds and voluminous down comforters, but with all modern conveniences as
well, of course. (Great piles of thick towels and big jugs of fresh orange juice
were brought to the room twice a day.) A three-minute walk away sits the second
building, new in 1953 but built, in part, to look much older; it houses more
bedrooms, two restaurants, saunas and an indoor swimming pool, and tennis courts
and an outdoor pool are nearby.

Most of the good German spa hotels are either big or stuffy or both. The
Friedrichs-ruhe, whose name means ''Frederick's refuge,'' is neither; full to
overflowing, as it usually is at Christmas and New Year's, it accommodates only
86 guests in its 48 rooms, and the people who run it never forget that it is in
the country, not in Berlin.

Lothar Eiermann, the hotel-keeping prodigy who made the place what it is, was
trained as a chef and still regards the Friedrichsruhe as a restaurant with
rooms. He presides in the kitchens but still manages, between services, to
mingle with the guests and see to their whims. (On Christmas Eve, he somehow
came up with a bottle of Sauerkirsch, a rare and refined schnapps, for my wife
to give to me as a present the next day.) He was only 28 years old, working at
the Erbprinz in Ettlingen after training in Scotland and London, when the
current Hohenlohe-Ohringen prince, who owns the hotel, asked him in 1973 to lift
it out of the doldrums.

''They like to work,'' says Mr. Eiermann of his 80 staff members. ''They see
that I work.''

In the main dining room, all red walls and stiff white damask and brass
chandeliers and sconces, with the twin black lions of the Hohenlohes on the
service plates, Mr. Eiermann practices the modern cooking that has swept Germany
in the last decade. He has a light hand, as demonstrated in two of his
specialties, fresh tuna with an herb vinaigrette and lamb medallions in puff
pastry. For Christmas Eve, he laid out a bountiful, 30-foot-long buffet that
included immaculately fresh lobsters and oysters hundreds of miles from the sea,
whole boned baby quails in aspic, fresh foie gras, a dozen kinds of hot and cold
meats - a table, in short, fit for a kaiser's wedding reception.

In the more informal stube, he produces cooking in keeping with its markedly
regional decor - forest-green tablecloths with white ones on top, chairs with
heart shapes cut out of their backs, antlers on the walls, an old porcelain
stove in one corner. For Christmas lunch, we decided to eat there. To start, we
cheated a bit and asked for caviar, which appeared without cavil, served on a
plate atop a linen doily atop another plate, with a silver-and-bone knife at the
side. (No charge for seconds.) Then a traditional main course: roast goose, its
dark skin crisp and its meat juicy, with savoy cabbage and red cabbage and a
dumpling as light as a souffle. In both rooms, the choice in drink is vast; you
might sample the estate's own dry white, which is cheap and snappy, or you might
choose a glorious 1971 La Tache from the Domaine de la Romanee-Conti, at a mere
$140.

As much as we liked the food, however, it was the mood and spirit of the place
that completely won us over. Without a false gesture or a trace of hype, Mr.
Eiermann, his wife, Carla, and their accomplished staff turned a hotel into a
hearthside. We returned from a drive through the countryside late on the
afternoon of the 24th to find a lovely, sparsely decorated tree outside the main
dining room and, in our own room, freshly cut pine boughs, a bottle of Champagne
and a paper plate of homemade Christmas cookies. (In Germany, for reasons I have
never been able to discover, Christmas cookies are always served on paper
plates.) Knowing that we were Anglo-Saxons, someone had tied a piece of
mistletoe to our chandelier. Before dinner, the Eiermanns gave a cocktail party
for their guests and friends - not with a string quartet or an orchestra, as
some hoteliers might have done, but with their daughter, Alexa, playing
Christmas songs on her violin and flute for her temporarily extended family.

Later that night, there was a heartwarming service at the pretty Baroque church
in the nearby village of Schonthal, whose name means ''beautiful valley.'' And
then, against all expectations, it snowed. When we awoke on Christmas morning,
the ancient trees that form an allee between the two buildings were crusted in
white, and mist hung low over the fields. The staff had set fresh-cut balsams
against the front of the schloss. It was quite magical. We arrived early for our
Christmas stay at the Friedrichsruhe. Within an hour's drive of Ohringen, we
found more than enough to occupy ourselves - Schwabisch Hall, which has perhaps
the finest market square in all Germany, flanked by timbered patrician houses
and a Baroque town hall and overlooked, from a crag just outside town, by the
grim old fortified abbey of Gross Comburg; the Neue Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart,
designed by James Stirling; Heidelberg, with its great university and its mighty
ruined castle; the isolated Chapel of Our Lord (Herrgottskirche) near
Creglingen, which contains an intensely expressive altarpiece by Tilman
Riemenschneider, considered by many the masterpiece of that greatest of German
Renaissance sculptors; the church at Stuppach, with a Madonna by Matthias
Grunewald, full of tragic intensity, which is one of his relatively few
surviving works.

Almost every town of any size has, in the days before Christmas, a
Christkindlmarkt or Christ-child market, an assembly of stalls in one of the
main squares. There can be few more pleasant and less commercial ways to do
one's holiday shopping than to wander through one of these markets, eating a
wurst here and drinking a beer there, buying handmade Christmas-tree ornaments
or wreaths made of nuts and cones and dried vegetables. Almost nothing is tawdry
or tacky and almost nothing is terribly expensive.

One of the best of the markets is in Rothenburg ob der Tauber, a hugely
picturesque little city on the aptly named Romantic Road. Kaethe Wohlfahrts, a
local artisan famous for Christmas decorations, now has a shop in Rothenburg,
with baskets of charming wooden ornaments, that is open year round. (Ornaments
are priced from about 50 cents to $5.) Christmas at Friedrichsruhe is not a gift
- our room cost $95 a night, and our three days cost $985, including all meals,
drinks, tips and taxes - but we did order caviar, and the wine list broke down
our self-discipline once or twice. We would have stayed for New Year's Eve if we
could have afforded it; Mr. Eiermann said that he planned to have musicians
dressed in 17th-century costumes that night.

The Wald- und Schlosshotel Friedrichsruhe, 7111 Friedrichsruhe; telephone 7078.
Current rates for a double room are about $90 to $95 for two, with breakfast.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of West Germany; Photo of the Hotel Friedrichsruhe and the hotel's
stube (Patrick Piel/Gamma); Photo of guest bedroom with brass beds

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR PORTRAIT ARTIST, TRUTH IS IN THE EYES

BYLINE: By B. BLAKE LEVITT

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


FOR the portrait artist Herbert Abrams, the most prestigious commission of his
career was the official White House portrait of President Jimmy Carter. That
was, that is, until he was asked to paint the portrait of Clement Conger - the
man in charge of recommending painters to Presidents for the last 16 years.

As curator of art for the White House and the State Department, Mr. Conger chose
Mr. Abrams, a Warren resident, to do the Carter painting, and described it as
''the finest of the contemporary portraits in the White House collection.''

Mr. Conger's portrait is the latest of Mr. Abrams's work that graces such places
as the halls of Congress, the Pentagon, numerous universities, libraries,
private collections and corporate board rooms. When it is finished, Mr. Conger's
portrait will hang in the State Department.

In the State Capitol in Hartford is Mr. Abrams's portrait of the past Governors
Ella T. Grasso and Thomas J. Meskill. Also in his portfolio are portraits of
former United States Senator and Mrs. Howard Baker, Admiral John Bull, Gen.
Creighton Abrams (no relation) and several paintings of Gen. William C.
Westmoreland and his family.

Known for his sharp contrasts, which focus the viewer's attention on the
subject's eyes, Mr. Abrams describes the art of portraiture as similar to our
own natural perception. When we look at each other, our interest gravitates
toward the eyes ''and you're not looking at everything at once,'' he said.
''There's a center of interest where your visual world begins at that moment and
shifts from there and back again.''

This conscious manipulation by the artist is what distinguishes portraiture from
photography and photo realism, which view everything ''with equal interest,'' he
said.

''The camera looks at you and sees the highlight in your eye and also the little
spot on your shoe with the same interest,'' he said. ''Or you and what's right
behind you with the same attention. No human can conceivably do that. And the
feet aren't as important as the eyes.''

One technique to control the viewer's interest is to soften edges, he said. Mr.
Conger, for example, is seated in front of an elaborately carved desk and
although the detail is there, the edges are slightly blurred ''so he stands
out,'' the artist said.

Mr. Abrams, who is 64 years old and a Hartford native, studied at several art
schools in New York, including the Pratt Institute and the Art Students League.
He taught private classes, as well as a weekly art class for officers and their
families at the Military Academy at West Point for 20 years. There, he met and
painted William Westmoreland when he was a young officer.

Ten years later, Mr. Abrams accompanied General Westmoreland, then the army's
Chief of Staff, to Vietnam under the Combat Artist's Program. There he rendered
several paintings of American and Vietnamese generals in jungle briefing rooms,
a rare perspective he said he chose because most visual emphasis of that war was
on the soldiers doing the fighting, not on the decision-makers. These portraits
are now part of the Pentagon's military history department.

How does a portrait artist capture a likeness?

''The life is in the light,'' said Mr. Abrams. ''My real subject is light moving
through space, striking something, slipping off, going back.''

A characteristic Abrams portrait, like a Rembrandt, reveals a light source from
above that cascades across a face, strikes an imaginary surface just out of
view, then is reflected upward onto the face in half-shadow.

Light often gathers on metal objects, such as a man's wedding band.

''That how she gets in the picture,'' the artist said.

Capturing a subtle gesture that embodies the subject's character is essential,
he said.

''In portraiture, you have to be right,'' Mr. Abrams said. ''It's not a form
that's very open to interpretation,'' especially to those who know the person,
he added.

To create rapport with his subject and reduce tension, Mr. Abrams spends an hour
or more casually getting to know the person. He observed President Carter
teaching his Sunday school class in Plains, Ga., for example, then returned to
the Carter home to talk.

During the first sitting, Mr. Abrams arranges the light and takes a series of
transparencies, working around one or two poses. Then he returns to his studio
and projects them into a darkened space ''until I get what I want,'' he said,
sometimes utilizing aspects of different slides.

Next, an underpainting - a portrait without color - is done, which he brings to
the subject for review and a second sitting. Color is added and a final sitting
is arranged for revisions.

A portrait costs between $8,000 and $25,000 and takes a couple of months to
complete.

Personal decisions accompany esthetic ones, he said. Mr. Abrams added a tall
vase of roses to former Governor Grasso's portrait, painted posthumously,
because it would hang near those of male state leaders, and he wanted something
special for her.

Mr. Abrams attributes his skill to years of working with live models and never
allowing his students to work with photographs while learning because, he said,
using photographs too soon promotes copying.

''But if you build this knowledge of light revealing form and light in the human
being, then you can use your photograph as a tool,'' he said.

Mr. Abrams admitted that portraitists tread a fine line concerning flattery. He
said he puts on canvas what he honestly sees, but renders the qualities he
enjoys about the person. Describing his subjects as often carrying themselves
with an ''illusive aura of accomplishment,'' Mr. Abrams noted, ''You don't have
to fake or make something up. Just look.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Herbert Abrams putting the finishing touches on portrait of
Clement conger; photo of Mr. Abrams with some of his portraits (NYT/Steve
Zavatski)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

There Are Reasons Grandparents Act

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 21, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


I read the article ''Grandparents, Grandchildren and the Law'' [Dec. 1]. When at
first I read it, I was angry at what I considered a biased attack on
grandparents. After rereading the article, I feel perhaps you are under some
personal pressure that has made you very bitter.

Thinking back in time, I visualize myself and other young people 30 or 40 years
ago. There were many trying periods during the passage of time. There was a
Second World War with all of its tragedies, then we came into the Nuclear Age
with its catastrophic potential that haunts us to this day. The Vietnam War was
a cause of grief and worry for many parents. The positive movement of women's
rights came upon the scene. The sexual revolution portended a permissive
society. Of special concern is the increase of the use of drugs by adolescents
and adults. These and many other issues were enough to turn mothers' and
grandmothers' hair gray.

Well, some of us were fortunate to withstand these traumas and realize a
wonderful time in our lives; that of becoming grandparents. Most of us view it
as a special privilege that has enriched our lives.

How wonderful it has been, to play, to teach, to guide, to share time together
with our grandchildren. What a marvelous pleasure to accompany them to a
playground, play ball, dig in a sandbox or watch them on a sliding part, wave to
them as they whirl about on a merry-go-round at an amusement park; see the
excitement in their eyes at a circus or a play for children. The best of all is
to hear a grandchild say, ''I love you grandma and grandpa. Can I spend a
weekend with you.''

My husband and I have had the pleasure of our own parents sharing many of the
above events with our own children. Now our daughter and son-in-law are happy
that we are able to play a part in the lives of their children.

It is my fervent wish for you that some day you will come to know this bliss. I
hope by that time you will be more understanding of grandparents who in time of
stress would wish to band together to address their grievences to the law,
because this unfortunately may be their only alternative to defend the rights of
their grandchildren to share their precious time with grandma and grandpa.

RITA Z. LAMPE

White Plains

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. PROGRAM IS THRIVING AT YONKERS HIGH SCHOOL

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1621 words

DATELINE: YONKERS


I may have been the uniform that initially attracted some of the 150 students at
Yonkers High School to the Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps. But much more
than that compels them to rise at 7 A.M. each school day to attend morning
drills, face authority and endure admonition in front of their peers without
flinching.

What keeps them coming back, the students say, is a genuine love for the
R.O.T.C. and a belief that the program's structure and discipline are making
them better men and women. The program, sponsored by the United States Marines,
also offers an opportunity to travel, to compete in national drill competitions
and to qualify for thousands of dollars in scholarships.

But it was the red, white and blue Marine uniform, with its shiny brass buttons
and the white hat with gold encrusted brim, that first caught the eye and lured
many of these young men and women to join up.

''I love the uniform,'' acknowledged Ismael Hernandez, a 17-year-old senior who
has risen to the rank of first sergeant during his four-year stint in the Junior
R.O.T.C. ''But I also saw this as an opportunity to develop leadership qualities
and to do something positive for my school and my community.''

''I love the uniform, but more important than that, being in the R.O.T.C. helped
me come out of my shell,'' said Cadet Sergeant Christine Marques, a junior,
prompting her fellow cadets to nod their heads in agreement. ''When I first came
to Yonkers High, I felt out of place. Now I feel like I have something to do and
to hold on to.''

Since the R.O.T.C. program was first offered at Yonkers High School seven years
ago, more than 800 students have participated in the program.

Marine Corps officials said the program, established nationwide in 1964 for boys
and extended in 1973 to girls, is enjoying a revival after the lean years of the
1960's and 1970's, when the nation was divided over the Vietnam War. The Army,
Navy and Air Force also sponsor R.O.T.C. courses in high schools in the region
and have reported a similar rise in interest.

There are about 30 Junior R.O.T.C. units in the Northeast, according to
officials involved in the programs. In addition to Yonkers, Lindenhurst High
School on Long Island and St. Pius X Regional High School in Piscataway, N.J.,
are the only high schools in the New York City area that have a Marine Corps
Junior R.O.T.C. program.

Rye High School, which has a Junior R.O.T.C. program sponsored by the United
States Navy, is the only other Westchester high school with a R.O.T.C. program.

According to Capt. Ralph Kemper, who heads the seven-year-old Rye program, 57
students are involved in R.O.T.C. at Rye, a drop (attributed to tougher Regents
requirements) from last year, when there were 85 cadets. Since the program began
at Rye, three students have been accepted into the Naval Academy at Annopolis
and 15 students received full-tuition R.O.T.C. scholarships. These students have
received about $1 million in tuition payments, according to Captain Kemper.

Although there is still some debate within and outside the country's educational
community over whether R.O.T.C. should be offered in high schools, many of the
initial reservations expressed by faculty members, administrators and parents
appear to have eased over the years.

The Yonkers High School R.O.T.C. has received citations from Mayor Angelo R.
Martinelli for outstanding service to the community. Members of the R.O.T.C.
have served as ushers at various functions held in the city, and the R.O.T.C.
drill team's presence in the Veterans Day and Memorial Day parades has been
greeted each year with applause and cheers.

Last year, the Yonkers R.O.T.C. program was selected by the Marine Corps Reserve
Officers Association as No. 3 among the 80 Marine Corps R.O.T.C. high school
programs nationwide. The award, given to the top three junior R.O.T.C.'s, is
based on overall academic achievement by the cadets, on their contributions to
the community, and on how well the units perform in a physical fitness
competition. This is a national competition held at various sites in which
cadets perform pullups and situps and take part in a timed 600-yard run; the
unit's rifle team also competes in marksmanship.

''How can Yonkers High have such a bad reputation if we are judged this way,
competing against some of the top schools in the country, schools with more and,
academically, better students,'' asked Col. Peter Duggan, a retired Marine who
is senior military instructor in the Yonkers R.O.T.C. program. ''The kids here
have so many negative things said about them. Too often, the good is
overlooked.''

The program includes a course that is given during the regular school day for
credit toward graduation. Taught by Colonel Duggan and Capt. Joseph Matthews,
also a retired Marine, it covers topics ranging from the history of the Armed
Forces in the United States to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to a
history of the armed forces in the Soviet Union. In addition to the course,
R.O.T.C. students participate in riflery, drills and weeklong field trips to
Marine military bases in the East. Since 1978, Yonkers students have visited
Marine bases at Camp LeJeune in North Carolina; Parris Island in South Carolina,
and in Quantico, Va.

''We give quizzes during the year to try to find out what the kids feel about
their country,'' Colonel Duggan said. ''We find that the kids like their
country, but they don't understand how it works.''

Each Wednesday, part of the class period is devoted to inspection. The cadets,
some dressed in the red, white and blue uniforms, others in green tunics, stand
at attention inside the classroom, while Captain Matthews or Colonel Duggan look
them up and down to see if their uniforms have the spit and polish that is
expected by the armed forces.

On one recent day, Captain Matthews was handling the inspections. He went down
the line examining the uniform of each cadet, taking off points for shoes that
were not polished, for hair that was not closely cropped on the boys or was
straggly on the girls. Points are also deducted for uniforms that do not appear
neatly cleaned and pressed. Students are graded on a scale of zero to 100 with
10 points deducted for each violation.

''With the girls, we are looking at the hair and makeup,'' explained Captain
Matthews. ''Lipstick and nail polish must harmonize. Only red lipstick is
acceptable. The hair must not touch the neckline. With the boys, we look at
haircuts and whether they are clean shaven. Uniforms for all cadets must fit and
be pressed and clean.''

School districts that want a high school R.O.T.C. program must apply to the
Defense Department, and currently there is a waiting list, according to Colonel
Duggan. The popularity of the program may be because, in part, of the various
benefits that come with it.

For example, in the Yonkers program the Marine Corps pays half the salary of
Colonel Duggan, who is a certified teacher and a member of the teachers union.
The Corps also pays for all the uniforms; for all school supplies used in class,
including the use of a telephone; for bus transportation to allow the drill team
to compete in area competition, and for the field trips to Marine bases.

The Marine Corps offers $60,000 in college scholarships yearly to Yonkers
R.0.T.C.students. The scholarships cover tuition, room and board, books and a
$100-a-month allowance; they are available to all students, but special
consideration is given to students in the R.O.T.C. program.

Although students enrolled in Junior R.O.T.C. are under no obligation to join
the military, if high-school graduates do enroll in the Marines they are
eligible, upon completion of basic training, for immediate promotion to private
first class. In the seven years the program has been offered at Yonkers High
School, nearly 60 Junior R.O.T.C. cadets have enlisted in a branch of the Armed
Forces. Many of their official photographs are on display in the R.O.T.C.
classroom under a gold headline: ''R.O.T.C. Honor Roll.''

''We are not here to recruit,'' said Colonel Duggan. ''If, however, I see a kid
who is not college-bound and for whom the service would be a viable alternative,
I certainly would encourage him or her.''

The pride of the Yonkers R.O.T.C. is its drill team, which has won just about
every honor offered through the program. The walls of the classroom are covered
with plaques and certificates. Trophies line the top shelf of a supply-room to
the rear of the class.

The drill team, which consists of a boys team and a girls team, will become one
of the first high school teams to compete on the collegiate level when it enters
a competition at Villanova University next February.

To a novice, the team's routines may look easy. They are not.

Hours and hours of work go into the drills. Every morning at 7:30, members of
the boys' and girls' drill teams can be found in the high school arena going
over their routines. The boys' team is noted for its so-called trick squad,
which includes a routine in which the cadets line up facing each other and toss
11-pound rifles through the air while their commanding officer, one of the
cadets, walks down the middle.

It is believed to be the only Junior R.O.T.C. unit in the country to use the
standard M-14 rifles during drills. The rifle barrels have been clogged so they
will not fire - an alteration that adds two pounds to the normal nine-pound
weight of the M-14.

At one point during a recent drill, Cadet Pfc. Timothy Brown, a 16-year-old
junior, lost his step and frowned in obvious displeasure.

''Straighten up, Timmy,'' Colonel Duggan yelled from his place in the stands.
''Never let them know you made a mistake.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Members of the Marine Corps R.O.T.C.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RIFT SEEN IN CAMBODIA GUERRILLA FORCE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 22


A power struggle within the major non-Communist guerrilla group fighting the
Vietnamese in Cambodia has burst into the open in the last few days, threatening
to weaken the guerrilla cause, diplomats say, just as Hanoi is preparing its
annual dry-season offensive against them.

An urgent meeting called for Monday will try to heal the deep rift in the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front, according to officials of the group. At
stake is the leadership of Son Sann, the former Cambodian Prime Minister who as
President of the front has attracted support for the guerrillas in the United
States and other nations.

Congress recently allocated $5 million for the front and a smaller
anti-Vietnamese organization led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. They belong to a
coalition that also includes the Communist Khmer Rouge, the most powerful of the
three groups.

Western and non-Communist Asian nations have supported Mr. Son Sann at least
partly to prevent the complete domination of the coalition by the Khmer Rouge,
who ruled Cambodia in a reign of terror from 1975 to 1979. Cambodian refugees
say Mr. Son Sann, a soft-spoken, courtly man who once headed Cambodia's national
bank, appeals to well educated, middle-class Cambodians who reject and fear the
Khmer Rouge and have reservations about Prince Sihanouk, who once allied himself
with Pol Pot, leader of the former Khmer Rouge Government.

Numbers 15,000 Fighters

Diplomats and officials in the region say the long-simmering squabble in the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front has virtually immobilized its 15,000
fighters, leaving the field in Cambodia to the Chinese-armed Khmer Rouge, with
about 30,000 troops. The Sihanouk forces number fewer than 10,000, confined to a
small geographical area of operation.

The National Liberation Front, with a huge civilian following of about a quarter
of a million Cambodians now in temporary camps, dominates a long and
strategically important stretch of the Thai-Cambodian border.

The seriousness of the front's internal disagreements became evident on Tuesday,
when a group of its leaders went into open rebellion against Mr. Son Sann, 74
years old, setting up what they called a Provisional Central Committee for
Salvation. They are reported to be dissatisfied with Mr. Son Sann's tactical
command, especially since Vietnamese troops overran the front's bases inside
Cambodia last winter.

Among the rebels is the front's former political and diplomatic spokesman, Dr.
Abdul Gaffar Peang Meth, and its military commander, Gen. Sak Sutsakhon, who was
Cambodia's last non-Communist armed forces chief. General Sak fled Phnom Penh in
1975, just before the Khmer Rouge entered the city.

According to critics of Mr. Son Sann inside and outside his organization, the
loss of the border bases last December and January should have taught the
National Liberation Front that it was foolhardy to have allowed such large,
vulnerable targets to develop. The setback should have also forced the front
into a quick switch to a more mobile form of guerrilla warfare, in closer
cooperation with Prince Sihanouk's troops, it is argued.

Irregular Troops Criticized

Finally, Thai officials and aid organizations have faulted the front's
leadership for failing to control irregular troops who are little more than
bandits, preying on villagers and refugees alike and engaging in large-scale
smuggling.

Mr. Son Sann, meanwhile, has been concentrating on trying to build up a
political movement inside Cambodia and a clearer democratic ideology among
refugees. In interviews, he pleads for help from the West to train new
generations of Cambodian teachers, doctors and civil servants.

The Khmer Rouge, despite some military setbacks last winter, continue to inflict
casualties on Vietnamese troops in Cambodia, according to diplomats and others
who have access to the closed capital of Phnom Penh.

There is impartial evidence from residents of Phnom Penh that Khmer Rouge
guerrillas are regularly within striking distance of the city. In September,
they fired rockets into the capital's central fuel storage depot, a resident of
the city said.

The resident said the explosions had shaken buildings across a wide area. Only
the failure of several of the rockets to fire saved the the whole depot from
destruction, he added.

Anti-Hanoi Mutinies Reported

The guerrillas are also reporting success at encouraging rebellion among
Cambodian troops fighting alongside the Vietnamese. Diplomats gave cautious
credence to a Khmer Rouge reports that several hundred Cambodians, possibly as
many as 700 to 900, were involved in mutinies in Pursat and Siem Reap provinces
over the last week. More than 100 Vietnamese soldiers and a Soviet adviser were
reported killed.

Because of the level of warfare persisting in Cambodia, diplomats and officials
here are divided on how much military activity is likely on the Thai-Cambodian
border this year, the seventh year of the war. The Vietnamese, with forced
Cambodian labor, have been working for the last eight or nine months to seal the
frontier with barriers, trenches and minefields. Some diplomats believe that
Hanoi's troops may devote their energies to rounding up guerrillas inside the
country.

But refugees say they fear that as long as there is guerrilla activity inside
Cambodia, the Vietnamese will be tempted to strike at the rebels' sanctuaries in
or near Thai territory.

Officials of the United Nations Border Relief Operation have already prepared
civilian evacuation camps for National Liberation Front and Khmer Rouge families
deeper inside Thailand. ----Troop Movements Reported BANGKOK, Dec. 22 (UPI) -
Vietnam has moved 28,000 fresh troops to the Thai-Cambodian border area in the
last month, a Cambodian guerrilla broadcast said today.

The broadcast by the Khmer Rouge radio, monitored here, said the Vietnamese
troops were supported by 78 Soviet-built T-54 tanks, 130-millimeter artillery
and thousands of tons of ammunition.

No independent confirmation of the report was available, but Thai intelligence
sources said last week that convoys of Vietnamese troops and supplies had been
seen moving toward the border in recent weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL ON POLICY TO PICK A LEADER

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 599 words


A committee to select a new president of the Council on Foreign Relations will
recommend the appointment of Peter Tarnoff at a board meeting today, council
members and officials said yesterday.

The recommendation must be approved by the council's 24-member board of
directors. Council members said that the board was scheduled to meet today in
New York City and that a decision to approve the committee recommendation was
virtually certain.

Mr. Tarnoff, a 48-year-old career diplomat, served in American embassies in
Africa, Europe and Asia, including Vietnam, and was executive secretary and
special assistant to Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance during the Carter
Administration. Since 1983 he has lived in San Francisco, where he is the
executive director of the World Affairs Council of Northern California.

The president's job has been vacant since June, when Winston Lord, a protege of
former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, resigned after President Reagan
nominated him to be Ambassador to China. Mr. Lord, a former official of the
National Security Council and State Department, became president of the Council
in 1977.

Earlier, there were reports that the selection process had been affected by a
factional dispute between Mr. Kissinger, who lost his seat on the Council's
board in 1981, and Mr. Vance, who is the Council's vice chairman and a member of
the selection committee. Council officials said yesterday, however, that no such
disagreement existed.

''As a friend both of Henry Kissinger and Cyrus Vance, I know that the notion
that this was a big struggle between forces is nonsense,'' Brent Scowcroft, a
close associate of Mr. Kissinger and a member of the Council's board, said.
''People jump to those kinds of conclusions, but they are unwarranted.''

A 10-member search committee headed by William D. Rogers, a prominent Washington
lawyer and former Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, has been
meeting since Mr. Lord's resignation to choose his successor. Council officials
said yesterday that the committee had considered dozens of names during the
deliberations and that Mr. Tarnoff was chosen through a process of consensus
rather than a formal vote.

Council members said that among other candidates considered by the committee was
Robert C. McFarlane, who resigned this month from the position of national
security adviser to President Reagan. In the 1970's he was an aide to Mr.
Kissinger.

Officials said that there were contacts between the selection committee and Mr.
McFarlane after his resignation, but that after initial discussions Mr.
McFarlane let it be known that he did not want to remain under consideration.

''McFarlane became available only a couple of weeks ago,'' a Council official
said. ''He had not been approached or even considered until after his
resignation.''

A spokesman for the National Security Council in Washington said yesterday that
Mr. McFarlane could not be reached for comment.

Founded in 1921, the Council on Foreign Relations has long been among the most
influential private American organizations for the study of international
affairs. It has nearly 2,400 members, including Government officials, scholars,
leaders in business and banking, and other professionals interested in foreign
policy.

Because of its elite membership, the Council has often been viewed as something
of a nonpartisan adjunct to official foreign policy organs. It conducts research
and study programs on specific foreign policy issues and also sponsors
appearances by visiting heads of state and other foreign dignitaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS APPOINTS PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 917 words


The Council on Foreign Relations, one of the nation's most influential private
groups for the study of international affairs, named a former diplomat as its
new president yesterday.

The announcement of the appointment of the former diplomat, Peter Tarnoff, made
after the group's Board of Directors approved the recommendation of a selection
committee, concluded a six-month search. Council officials said 75 candidates
had been considered, including Robert C. McFarlane, who resigned Dec. 4 as
President Reagan's national security adviser.

Mr. Tarnoff's appointment comes at a time when the Council, whose 2,400 members
include government officials, scholars and business and banking leaders, is
reconsidering its role and is seeking to broaden its membership. Council
officials said that they expected Mr. Tarnoff to contribute to that effort.

Close to 'Ideal Candidate'

''Peter was as close to an ideal candidate as we could find,'' said William D.
Rogers, the Washington lawyer and former Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs who led the selection committee. ''In the end, it was his experience in
foreign affairs and his command of substantive issues that commended his name
most strongly to us.''

Mr. Tarnoff, 48 years old, is a former Foreign Service officer who served in
Nigeria, Vietnam, West Germany, France and Luxembourg and has held policy posts
in Washington. Since 1983, he has been executive director of the San
Francisco-based World Affairs Council of Northern California.

From 1965 to 1969, he was a special assistant to Henry Cabot Lodge, then
Ambassador to Vietnam and later to West Germany. In the Carter Administration,
Mr. Tarnoff served as special assistant to Secretaries of State Cyrus R. Vance
and Edmund S. Muskie.

''I think he is an excellent choice,'' Mr. Vance, a member of the selection
committee and the Council's vice chairman, said. ''He will be imaginative, he
will be balanced, and he will bring real vigor and a deep knowledge of foreign
policy to his new office.''

Replaces Winston Lord

Mr. Tarnoff replaces Winston Lord, a protege of former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger who resigned as Council president in June to become Ambassador to
China.

In the Council's search for a new president, there were reports that some
conservative and Republican members were trying to block Mr. Tarnoff's
appointment.

According to some members, associates of Mr. Kissinger offered Mr. McFarlane as
an alternative candidate. Council officials said Mr. McFarlane eventually asked
that his name not be considered.

Mr. Rogers said the selection committee ''presented a single name'' to the board
yesterday, but that ''a number of people were discussed at the meeting'' before
the board voted on Mr. Tarnoff. The board has 24 members, though not all
attended the meeting yesterday.

'Baloney,' Vance Says

Mr. Vance said reports of differences between him and Mr. Kissinger were
''baloney.'' Accounts that Mr. Kissinger and other Council members associated
with him had tried to torpedo Mr. Tarnoff's appointment were ''really
exaggerated all out of proportion,'' Mr. Vance said.

A secretary in Mr. McFarlane's office in Washington said yeterday that ''he is
not taking any press calls'' on the matter.

Mr. Tarnoff's selection concluded what had been a year of transition for the
Council, which was founded in 1921. Earlier this year, David Rockefeller stepped
down as chairman of the Council, a position he had held for 15 years, and was
replaced by Peter G. Peterson, Secretary of Commerce in the Nixon Administration
and a former chairman of Lehman Brothers.

The changing of the guard comes at a time, Mr. Rogers said, when the Council
''has been conducting a quite systematic analysis of its future'' and is engaged
in ''a thorough self-critique'' aimed at determining how to maintain its stature
in a changing domestic political environment.

'Public's Role Is Different'

''The making of foreign policy has changed, the consensus has broken apart, and
the public's role is now different from what it was even 10 years ago,'' Mr.
Rogers said. ''We want a Council that is equal to those new challenges.''

As part of that effort, the Council has tried to broaden its membership by
encouraging women and young professionals to join. The organization has also
sought to bring in members outside the traditional New York-Washington foreign
policy axis.

Mr. Rogers praised Mr. Tarnoff for his ''political balance,'' noting that though
he ''has reached very high levels, he did so on a nonpartisan basis and has
never been a political appointee.''

In an interview yesterday afternoon at the Council's headquarters at 58 East 68
Street, Mr. Tarnoff described himself as a centrist who, though deeply
interested in foreign affairs, had ''never been much of a political person'' and
is ''comfortable in a nonpartisan role.''

Among the ideas that a special Council committee has been examining and that Mr.
Tarnoff said he favored are teleconferences that would allow members outside the
New York area to take part in the many Council-sponsored appearances by foreign
leaders and foreign policy specialists. He said he also supported the idea of
Council-sponsored ''study groups'' to look at foreign policy questions around
the country.

Mr. Tarnoff said he planned to ''call on all the directors of the Council'' and
other members in order to ''establish a relationship with them and determine
their interests in the Council.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Off for the Season

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


From the Queens County courthouse comes a Christmas story -Walter R. Christmas's
story.

The 33-year-old Mr. Christmas walked out of the courthouse yesterday after the
office of District Attorney John J. Santucci had asked for an adjournment in
contemplation of dismissal of charges against him.

''We don't think we want to put Mr. Christmas in jail two days before
Christmas,'' an assistant district attorney, James O'Donnell, said.

What had prompted the request for an adjournment - in effect, a six-month
probation period - were Mr. Christmas's ''background and the nature of the
charges,'' according to Mr. Santucci's office.

Mr. Christmas, of Peekskill, N.Y., was arrested Sunday and charged with driving
without a license, having an uninspected vehicle and possessing a small amount
of marijuana.

Prosecutors learned that Mr. Christmas was a disabled Vietnam veteran whose
handicap had prevented him from getting work. The car he drove belonged to his
girlfriend, who was mugged two weeks ago and is hospitalized. He was visiting
his mother in Jamaica, Queens.

''It was close to Christmas, so they let me out because of my name,'' Mr.
Christmas joked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN PARK WHERE RHINOCEROS ROAMS, RANGERS STALK POACHERS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: KAZIRANGA, India


At dusk, a pinpoint of light shines from inside the forest. Slowly the light
gets closer to reveal a jeep full of hunters, returning to camp with their
quarry.

But these hunters are actually government rangers who stalk the marshes and tall
grass in search of rhinoceros poachers. Today, eight men were captured, and one
was killed in three encounters in the previous 24 hours.

''This was one of our biggest catches,'' said P. C. Mahanta, a 35-year-old
ranger who greeted the incoming hunters. In full view of a reporter, he and some
others proceeded to kick and beat the suspects in the course of their
interrogation.

Rhinoceros Country

This place is the rhinoceros capital of the world. Kaziranga National Park, just
south of the Brahmaputra River in the remote northeastern Indian state of Assam,
has 1,080 rhinoceroses - a bigger concentration than any single territory,
including those in Africa.

Once the species known as the great Indian one-horned rhinoceros roamed all
across the grasslands of the Indo-Gangetic plain. Today the animal is endangered
here, as elsewhere, because of encroaching population growth and poachers.

The poachers are after the rhino's famous horn, which millions of Asians,
particularly Chinese living in Southeast Asia, continue to prize for its
legendary but scientifically unproved powers as an aphrodisiac.

Looking for poachers is a frustrating occupation. Some 100 men patrol the
270-square-mile preserve, searching for footprints and telltale signs of pits
dug in the ground and camouflaged to trap the unsuspecting beasts.

Meanwhile, the poachers stalk the same territory, looking for signs of the
rangers. Encounters often lead to shoot-outs. ''Usually we shoot at them and
they shoot at us and they run away and nothing happens,'' said P. C. Das, the
chief conservator in Assam.

Mr. Das said the government had thought of looking for poachers aboard
airplanes, helicopters or balloons. ''But it's like what the Americans
discovered in Vietnam,'' he explained. ''If there is ground cover, the poachers
will be able to hide in it.''

From atop the park's trained elephants, visitors can observe the rhinos grazing,
often with an egret on their back. The rhinos are docile, although males
occasionally attack each over a female, and a mother will sometimes charge
something - or someone - she feels is threatening her calf.

Laden with their passengers, the elephants clump through the grasslands in their
search. But once found, the rhinoceroses stare up at the visitors, looking bored
and unimpressed.

Other parts of the lush Kaziranga preserve can be toured by jeep. On rare
occasions, a visitor one can spot one of the park's 52 tigers. On this day the
most dramatic sight was at a marshy lake.

Honking and jabbering on the lake were thousands of brown ducks, pelicans,
black-necked storks and white geese. A lone wild boar wandered nearby. In the
distance were some swamp deer. Toward the horizon was a wild elephant. At
nightfall, fireflies darted about, casting a magic spell.

Horns Fetch $30,000 a Pound

It is an almost impossible task to keep intruders from coming into this huge
area. There are no fences to keep them out, as nearby farmers who sometimes
encounter rhinoceroses and elephants on their land can attest. The rangers have
spread an intelligence network through the surrounding villages in hope of
hearing when a poaching party enters. Today's batch was pursued and caught after
a tip-off.

The poachers had expensive-looking fur-lined nylon jackets and waterproof
rations of food, reflecting the lucrativeness of their work.

The poachers themselves may get only $200 for making a trip into the sanctuary.
But Mr. Das said rhinoceros horns - which are actually lumps of matted hair -
command more than $30,000 a pound. An average horn weighs more than a pound and
a half.

The biggest marketplace for rhino horns is Singapore, which has declined to sign
the worldwide covenant that bans the sale of products of endangered species, Mr.
Das said.

Until five years ago, the demand for rhinoceros horns could be met by stealing
horns from animals that had died naturally. In 1980, the problem here surged as
more and more places made the sale of rhino horns illegal. By the middle of last
month, rangers had already found 34 dead rhinos with their horns removed, almost
as many as the record 37 found in Kaziranga in 1983.

Rhinoceros poaching is also a problem in other parts of India. Indeed, the
one-horned rhino has become an endangered species everywhere in Asia, as has its
two-horned cousin in Africa.

Nevertheless, the population of rhinos in the Kaziranga preserve has increased
from 939 in 1978, and some naturalists think there are enough to start
transporting extra rhinos to other national parks in India.

In 1984, in an effort to preserve the species by spreading its habitat, the
Indian Government flew five rhinos from Kaziranga to another park in northern
India, where poaching might be less of a threat.

Assamese naturalists protested, expressing concern that the transported rhinos
would not be able to survive in anything less lush than this swampy flood plain.
Two of the five transported rhinos eventually died, but the government regarded
the experiment as a success.

Few Poachers Are Caught

Only a couple dozen poachers have been caught here in the last year, and Mr. Das
said they frequently get light sentences.

In the course of its quest, the government has put itself in the odd position of
the narcotics police in other countries. They are now sitting on a Fort Knox of
nearly 470 pounds of confiscated or seized rhinoceros horn, worth more than $3
million.

Some people have suggested that the government sell it off to try to lower the
price and undercut the poachers. Mr. Das said the idea has been rejected.

''The goal, like in drugs, is to reduce the demand,'' he said. ''Otherwise it is
useless. The poachers will always be one step ahead of us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of P.C. Mahanta (NYT/Steven R. Weisman)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENTS TURNING TO SPIRITUAL LIFE AT CAMPUSES IN NEW YORK AREA

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, Dec. 20


College students in the New York metropolitan area are returning to churches and
synagogues, enrolling in religion courses and volunteering for charity work in
numbers that many chaplains believe suggest a spiritual renaissance on campus.

Catholic, Protestant and Jewish chaplains said they had observed a deeper
commitment to faith along with a keener appreciation of tradition among
students.

''People are coming back to religion in a way that some of us once went to the
counterculture,'' said Rabbi Ruth Sohn, the assistant Jewish chaplain at
Columbia University. ''Religion is being seen as an alternative to the values -
or lack of values - in the mainstream.''

'This Is an Exciting Time'

''It's not only O.K. to be religious now, it's neat,'' said the Rev. Alison
Stokes, associate chaplain at Yale University. ''This is an exciting time for
campus ministry.''

The new climate, chaplains said, has largely supplanted the cynicism of students
toward organized religion during the Vietnam War and for years after. Some of
the new generation of students - born in the late 1960's - are the children of
those who challenged the validity and relevance of religious institutions a
generation ago.

''Many of these students were brought up without religious training,'' Dr.
Stokes said. ''And some of them feel deprived, almost angry about it. They want
to get a sense of their roots.''

Religious Studies Added

Religious studies have become so popular on campus that universities are adding
more courses and designing new majors.

At Yale, for example, registration in Judaica Studies has nearly tripled since
1982, the first year it was offered as a major. The State University College at
Buffalo, which offered no religious studies in 1975, finds so much interest in
its religion courses that officials are considering adding a major.

The increased interest in religion has affected graduate programs as well.
Officials of the Princeton Theological Seminary and the Union Theological
Seminary in New York City said the number of applicants had increased by about
25 percent in the last few years.

In part, college chaplains view the interest in religion on campus as part of a
broader return to conservative values and a freer acceptance of traditional
institutions.

''Students today are more reconciled to authority,'' said Rabbi Paul Golomb, of
the Hillel Foundation, the Jewish student center at the State University at
Buffalo. ''There is less need for students to sit on their own mountaintop.''

The renewed interest, the chaplains and many students said, stems at least in
part from a need for guidance and security in a world threatened by catastrophic
new diseases and the specter of nuclear war. Moreover, they said, there seems to
be a desire among many young people to cast off the image of a ''me
generation,'' one bent on climbing, spending and having.

Social Service Linked to Faith

''Students are realizing there must be a change in attitude within society,''
said Eric Plickert, a Yale Divinity School student who did not begin attending
church until he was 19 years old.

''At one time, students thought politics could change the world, but
unemployment is still over 7 percent,'' he said. ''At one time, people thought
science would provide all the answers. But science has reached the edge in a lot
of ways.''

With few clear-cut causes of the day, campus religious groups have sought to
incorporate social service as an important component of faith. In addition to
attending services, increasing numbers of students are working in soup kitchens
and shelters for the homeless, or volunteering in programs that help poor youths
or the elderly.

These social programs, some chaplains said, have helped foster the return of
students to religion. By combining good works with devotion to scripture, they
said, the students better understand the larger purpose of religion.

''And for people who still don't feel comfortable worshipping with us,'' said
the Rev. Gerald Cohen, the Catholic chaplain at Yale, volunteer work offers
''another setting'' to show devotion to God.

More Students at Services

With his flannel sleeves rolled up, Thomas Howard chopped vegetables at a
church-sponsored soup kitchen here. ''Bible studies and prayer groups don't
appeal to me,'' said Mr. Howard, an economics student at Yale who first
volunteered in a soup kitchen two years ago as a Lenten sacrifice. ''I'm more
comfortable with the physical tasks.''

But, at many schools, chaplains have observed significant increases in
attendance at services. Until recent years, some students who desired a
religious life felt bashful about worshipping in public, lest they be considered
intellectually backward, some chaplains said.

''Not too long ago,'' said Jack Hasegawa, secretary of Dwight Hall, a ministry
group at Yale, ''religion was the kind of thing that 'polite Yalies' didn't talk
about.''

Gary Eisenberg was raised in a Conservative Jewish home but switched to Orthodox
Judaism during his sophomore year at Yale. At least a dozen other Jewish
students here have made the same move, he said, in an expression of deepening
faith.

Each morning, he now dons the tefillin, a network of leather straps and cubes
containing biblical parchment that symbolically binds Jews to God, and recites
from Moses. On the Sabbath, in compliance with Jewish law, he neither drives a
car nor spends money.

Religious Competition

Mr. Eisenberg said he believed a prevailing conservatism among students had
abetted the return to more traditional forms of worship. ''There's a sort of a
gap between people our age and the generation of the 60's. They thought it was
abhorrent to belong to a larger establishment. We don't think being part of a
larger establishment is such a horrible crime.''

Indeed, evangelism - a most public expression of faith - has grown significantly
on campuses. The Campus Crusade for Christ, a student evangelical movement, for
example, now has chapters on 575 college campuses across the country.

''You walk down the halls and people are giving out New Testaments,'' Michael
Caputo, a student at the State University at Buffalo, said. ''I've been
approached a lot. There are actually competitive religions on campus.''

Students attracted to such evangelical groups frequently change not only their
styles of worship, but often their church, as well.

Educated in Roman Catholic schools on Long Island, 19-year-old Michael Norton
was plagued by a sense of spiritual ennui when he enrolled at Yale. In his
sophomore year, he joined a charismatic movement. Now, he participates in one of
the dozens of Bible study groups that meet virtually every night in dormitories
here.

''My entire life has changed,'' said Mr. Norton, a violinist and geophysics
major. ''Since I was saved, I sleep better at night. I confessed my sinful ways
to God. Now, the anxieties and pressures are gone.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Eisenberg (NYT/Rollin Riggs) (page 36); photo of Alison
Stokes (NYT) (page 36)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Torch Beside the Golden Door Burns Anew

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


To the Editor:

Even as our nation prepares to celebrate the Statue of Liberty's 100th birthday
with a brand new torch, the governor of one of our states, Richard D. Lamm of
Colorado, argues that we should extinguish that torch (''The U.S. Accepts Too
Many Refugees,'' Op-Ed, Dec. 15).  Without citing any supporting evidence,
Governor Lamm asserts that ''we simply do not have the capacity to accept new,
large infusions of refugees for resettlement on top of our regular immigrant
quota.'' Governor Lamm has both his facts and his priorities wrong.

To begin with, we have not been accepting ''large infusions'' of refugees. Fewer
than one million - a scant .4 percent of our current population -have been
admitted in the last decade, placing our nation seventh per capita, behind such
countries as Canada, Australia and Honduras.

But in a more important sense, we are the leader, since the United States level
of admissions sends a signal to other countries about our willingness, as the
major stronghold of freedom and democracy, to help ease the worldwide refugee
burden. For example, when we drop admissions levels or slow down the processing
of refugees, countries like Thailand react by closing asylum camps and making it
difficult for refugees from Cambodia and Vietnam to cross the border to safety.

Nor does Governor Lamm cite any evidence that refugees as a group are placing
strains on our economy or our culture. On the contrary, as documented at a
conference on refugee employment held Nov. 1 at The New York Times, statistics
show that refugees ''have made significant contributions to our economy by
bringing their ingenuity and high standards to the workplace'' (news article,
Nov. 3). And the contribution of refugees to our nation's intellectual and
cultural life are too numerous to recount here.

Although Governor Lamm purports to recognize that refugees and immigrants are
distinct categories, he adds to the confusion that too often attends
public-policy decisions on the subject - by proposing a single cap on admissions
for both and then suggesting that whatever refugees we accept must be ''on top
of our regular immigrant quota.''

Whatever the pros and cons of a more liberal immigration policy (toward either
legal immigrants or illegal aliens), we cannot maintain our credibility as the
voice of conscience against human-rights violations in the Soviet Union and
elsewhere if at the same time we refuse to provide refuge to the victims of
oppression.

Governor Lamm ends by insisting that if we do not start closing our doors to
refugees, ''our compassion to share what we have will destroy what we have.''
But if we were to heed Governor Lamm's call, that would destroy what we have -
the proud tradition symbolized by the torch of Liberty, whose beacon should
never be dimmed. STEVEN B. ROSENFELD New York, Dec. 17, 1985 The writer is a
member of the executive committee of the board of the New York Association of
New Americans, a refugee-resettlement agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. REPORTS 50 VIETNAMESE SLAIN AND 10 RAPED BY PIRATES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 24


Fifty Vietnamese refugees were slain and 10 women were raped last week when
their boat was intercepted by pirates in the South China Sea, a spokesman for
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said today.

The victims were among a group of 80 refugees who fled Vietnam for Malaysia on
Dec. 12, the spokesman, Leon Davico, said.

Twenty-nine survivors, mostly women and children, sailed into Malaysia and
requested asylum there Thursday, he said, two days after the pirates attacked
the refugees and left their boat adrift. Another survivor was rescued by
Malaysian fishermen.

Reports from the High Commissioner's office said the pirates were Thai
fishermen. The exact location of the attack was unknown.

A spokesman for the Thai Mission said he had not heard of the incident. Efforts
by telephone to reach spokesmen at the Malaysian Mission were unsuccessful. #3d
Major Slaying in 2 Years Pirates have killed nearly 1,450 refugees and raped
more than 2,300 in the South China Sea since 1980, authorities have said. The
most recent incident is the third large-scale slaying to take place there in two
years.

Officials say the refugees and their flimsy boats make easy prey for the
pirates.

''Refugees are no match for organized pirates,'' Mr. Davico said. ''They come
with women and children, they are unarmed - they don't dare carry even a knife,
because if they are attacked, no knife will help them.''

Thailand and the High Commissioner's office have been cooperating on an
anti-piracy program since 1981. The program has reduced the percentage of
refugees robbed by pirates by more than half, to 33 percent this year from 77.4
percent in 1981.

Nearly 2,000 refugees a month flee Vietnam by boat, with numbers surging in the
summer.

According to initial reports, the 80 Vietnamese who were attacked last week left
Vietnam from a port near Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, on the morning of
Dec. 12.

Under the anti-piracy program, Thailand has spent $1 million and 11 nations have
contributed roughly $2 million annually since 1981 to help Thailand to buy naval
equipment and to increase anti-pirate patrols.

''It is more of a deterrent,'' Mr. Davico said. ''The equipment is not really
used for operations.''

Although the attacks in Thai-patrolled areas have been reduced, experts have
expressed fear that the pirates are shifting their activity into international
and Malaysian waters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 25, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

0.3 OF AN INCH KEEPS ENSIGN OFF PILOT SEAT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: PENSACOLA, Fla., Dec. 24


A Vietnamese refugee who finished in the top 10 of his class at the United
States Navy officer school is three-tenths of an inch short of his dream of
becoming a naval aviator.

The 24-year-old candidate, Ensign Hung Dinh Vu, said last Wednesday that he
needed more padding in his seat and was confident that he could correct the
problem by eating and exercising.

The Navy requires that a pilot's upper legs measure at least 21.9 inches from
buttocks to knees to make sure they can reach rudder pedals and keep their legs
flat against the seat in case they have to eject, said Lieut. (j.g.) Donnie
Plombon, an aviation psychologist.

Ensign Vu, a recent graduate of the Pensacola Naval Air Station's officer school
who is now a naturalized citizen from Glen Ellyn, Ill., is anticipating another
measurement soon. ''My goal is to gain at least 10 pounds, if not more,'' he
said. ''I'm doing squatting exercises to push it all back.''

He Has Gained 5 Pounds

The 5-foot-5-inch officer weighs 140 pounds and says he has gained at least five
pounds since being measured at the air station's Naval Aerospace Medical
Institute in September.

Ensign Vu said he was very skinny when he reported to officer school and was
unable to gain any weight in the 12-week course.

''I'm putting on the padding,'' he said. ''This is something that can be
corrected.

''I'm not sore'' about the requirement, he said, adding, ''They are concerned
about my safety.''

He said he had a lot of support from Navy officials who endorsed his request for
a waiver in the event he did not meet the requirement. ''It seems like everybody
is pulling for me,'' he said.

Ensign Vu is working as a maintenance officer at the Pensacola Naval Air Rework
Facility, which overhauls aircraft. He is scheduled to report Jan. 6 to
Maintenance Duty Officer School, also in Pensacola.

He said he would fit into whatever role the Navy chose for him and would take
this latest obstacle in stride, as he did when the Navy rejected him as a
security risk two years ago because he had two older brothers still living in
Vietnam. They escaped this year. Ensign Vu came to the United States when he was
14 years old as Saigon was being captured by Communist forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS OF VIETNAM GAINING NEW AID TO FIGHT ADDICTION

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1474 words

DATELINE: BABYLON, L.I.


In a yellow clapboard house here on West Main Street, a group of veterans
gathers each week to discuss the horrors of their service in Vietnam and the
drugs and alcohol they have consumed in the 15 wild and angry years since they
returned home.

Bill snorts cocaine because ''it makes it easier to be obnoxious'' when he is
overcome by rage and guilt, the residue of a steamy jungle day, he says, when he
shot a pregnant woman and her daughter.

Lenny regularly gets picked up for drunken driving, which is what brought him
here, to the Long Island Vet Center, where he talks of using alcohol to quiet
his clamorous nightmares.

Jim also drinks and sometimes ''gets these rage feelings where I just go nuts,''
injuring himself or ransacking his home.

Jerry used to ''do dope, acid, you name it,'' and started barroom brawls each
time somebody asked, ''How did it feel to kill somebody?''

These men are among the 800,000 Vietnam veterans - a quarter of the Americans
who served in Southeast Asia - who experts say are still plagued by a host of
psychological and behavioral problems associated with their time in combat.

There are no reliable data about how many of them are drug abusers or
alcoholics, but experts agree that Vietnam veterans - especially those who saw a
great deal of combat - are at special risk for addiction.

The problem is keen enough that Congress recently addressed it in the Veterans
Health Care Amendments of 1985, legislation signed earlier this month by
President Reagan.

The law includes provisions for more drug and alcohol counseling at 10 of the
186 storefront veterans centers nationwide. It also extends a pilot program
requiring Veterans Administration hospitals to refer patients in detoxification
wards to community addiction services for follow-up care.

Veterans with histories of substance abuse attribute their problems to several
factors associated with the war, including the availability of cheap and
powerful drugs in Southeast Asia, the social pressure in certain units where
drug use was rampant and the need to blunt the terror of combat.

But these explanations pale, the veterans said, beside the hostility they faced
upon returning home during the antiwar protests. In more than a dozen interviews
with Vietnam-era combat soldiers who had abused drugs, all of them recalled in
excruciating detail the experience of being reviled, sometimes spat upon, in the
years after their discharges.

Facing 'Hurting Days'

''In country, we saw horrendous things that I don't think I could have survived
without being ripped,'' said Angel Almedina, a former heroin addict who runs the
Vet Center at 166 West 75th Street in Manhattan. ''Then we came back to a lot of
hurting days and it seemed like the easiest thing to revert to.''

Rick Smith, who runs the drug abuse group on Long Island, describes the Vietnam
veteran as ''a setup'' for drug abuse. ''We told ourselves that they weren't
accepting us anyway, so what difference did it make,'' said Mr. Smith, who said
he hoped to inspire sobriety by sharing stories of the decade he wasted in
detoxification wards, jail cells and flophouses.

''Some guys had a worse experience after the war than during the war,'' said
John L. Behan, a Republican Assemblyman from Long Island who lost both legs to a
Vietnam land mine. ''It was the experience when they came home that almost
killed them.''

Many of these same veterans expressed hope that the changed climate of opinion
about the men who fought in Da Nang or Quang Tri, evident at parades last spring
commemorating the 10th anniversary of the war's end, would ease their recovery.

'Emotional Corrosion'

''That type of catharsis helps,'' said Richard B. Fuller, an aide to
Representative Robert W. Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, the sponsor of the
recently signed veterans legislation. ''But a lot of emotional corrosion is
still there that should have been polished up and straightened out early on.''

Mr. Behan conceded that wounded veterans like himself may have contributed to
the emotional problems of their fellow soldiers. ''Until recently, I and people
like me had no sympathy for those people, because we didn't like the image they
were casting,'' he said.

''Nobody was printing stories about veterans who won office, and everybody was
printing stories about crazy addicts who held up gas stations,'' Mr. Behan
added. ''I was thinking, 'What's wrong with those guys? They have arms and legs
so why can't they get jobs?' Now I understand that it doesn't matter how we are
wounded, because we are all wounded.''

Mr. Behan is one of many experts who hesitantly broached the notion that
addiction is especially widespead among Vietnam veterans because theirs was a
war, more than any other, fought by servicemen who were preponderantly poor and
raised in America's slums.

Mr. Smith, who describes himself as a ''working class white'' from the East New
York section of Brooklyn, characterized a significant proportion of Vietnam-era
veterans as ''society's misfits.''

Checking the History

Dr. Charles Rohrs confronts this question every day as the head of the
substance-abuse program at the Veterans Administration Medical Center at First
Avenue and 24th Street in Manhattan, where patients in the detoxification ward
are overwhelmingly black or Hispanic and in their mid-30's.

''Just about every guy that comes into the unit tells us his problems are
related to Vietnam,'' Dr. Rohrs said, ''and everybody wants to buy into that.
But if you take a careful history, things don't sound like they were so great
before. The more we look, the more we find they were maladaptive before Vietnam,
although that's not subject to systematic study.''

''The reality,'' said Dr. Rohrs, who also runs one of the treatment centers at
Phoenix House, ''is that they went through a terrible experience that may have
contributed to a problem, made a pre-existing problem worse, or initiated a
problem. We don't know how to tease out the role of being a veteran. But that
doesn't make any difference. If they don't stop using it as an excuse, it will
only keep them sick.''

Mr. Almedina, who like many of his fellow veterans resembles a long-haired
refugee from the 60's, a grunt-turned-hippie, countered: ''To simplify and say
it's over is not that easily done. If you tell me you don't want to hear about
the greatest adventure of my life, the therapeutic process is going to break
down.''

Abusing Benefit System

Whether they are in treatment with others who served in Vietnam or in more
integrated surroundings like Phoenix House, many of these substance-abusing
veterans fault the Veterans Administration for a benefits system that, in
effect, supports addiction.

Over and over, these veterans described registering for college, but never
attending classes, and buying drugs with the tuition money (currently $376 a
month for a full-time student) mailed directly to them under the terms of the
G.I. Bill of Rights.

In lesser numbers, they also noted that it can be useful for an addict to have
his condition characterized as a service-related disorder, which entitles a
veteran to disability payments. Depending on the extent of incapacitation,
disability payments range from $66 to $1,295 a month.

''It's amazing how negatively creative you can be when you're using drugs,''
said Jacques Crivelli, a heroin and cocaine abuser who, as a condition of
probation for charges of burglary, is a patient at Phoenix House.

Dr. Rohrs acknowledged that educational benefits are frequently abused in this
way. He also agreed that ''there is a tremendous financial incentive to say the
problem is related to Vietnam.''

Difficulty of Crackdown

''It's similar to the welfare situation, with tax-levied money subsidizing
use,'' Dr. Rohrs said. He hastened to add, however, that it was ''inflammatory''
and potentially ''dangerous'' to crack down and risk depriving honest veterans
of their benefits.

Another common theme among substance-abusing veterans is the fondness they
acquired in Vietnam for a life lived on the brink.

In the stories they tell, and in the growing body of literature about their
experiences after the war, these veterans routinely describe themselves as
feeling ''berserk'' - driving too fast, fighting too often, losing control.

Back home, unemployed or in humdrum jobs, these men say that illegal drugs or
alcohol offered both danger and forgetfulness, that their wayward lives mimicked
the thrill of war.

''As wretched as the war was it was stimulating to the umpteenth degree,'' said
Mr. Smith. ''That's why a lot of vets still live on the edge, either 90 miles or
nothing.''

''I want to go to the wall all the time and that's a rough way to be,'' Mr.
Almedina agreed. ''I haven't shot heroin in years, but I'm still trying to get
straight.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rick Smith (NYT/Tony Jerome) (page B6)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, DECEMBER 26, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 856 words




International

Tribal fighting in South Africa killed at least 53 people as about 2,000 Zulus
clashed with 3,000 members of the Pondo tribe in what police called the worst
factional fighting in years. Police said the fighting, involving thousands with
knives, spears and possibly firearms, erupted Tuesday night at Umbumbulu, 20
miles south of Durban on South Africa's Indian Ocean coastline. [Page A1, Column
6.]

Moscow may restore diplomatic ties with Israel and dramatically increase the
number of Jews permitted to emigrate to Israel, according to reports of a
conversation between a representative of an American Jewish group and a Soviet
diplomat. The Jewish representative met a few days ago with an unidentified
Soviet official who predicted the restoration of full Soviet-Israeli diplomatic
relations and an increase in emigration to Israel. [A1:4-5.]

Mount Etna erupted suddenly, setting off a series of earthquakes that destroyed
a resort hotel and killed one person in Sicily. Four rivers of red lava steamed
down the sides of Etna, Europe's most active volcano, which last erupted in May
1983. [A3:4-6.]

Leftist rebels in El Salvador have organized a ''popular power'' government as
part of a network of services set up for their followers. The guerrillas are
trying to maintain support in the dwindling regions where they have strong
influence. [A12:1-3.]

Troops and planes from Mali invaded a border village and two towns in the
neighboring West African country of Burkina Faso, killing four, Burkina Faso
reported. Ten Malians were reported killed. [A9:1-6.]

Pope John Paul II delivered his Christmas Day message to a world he called
''scandalously'' marked by human rights violations, oppression and suffering.
The Pope told 30,000 people outside St. Peter's Basilica that he wanted to put
the words of Jesus into the ''context of the signs and needs of our times.''
[A3:1-3.]

National

A garden dating to 1680, the earliest documented formal garden in the United
States, has been discovered in Virginia. A team of archeologists uncovered the
English-style Renaissance garden adjacent to Bacon's Castle, near Williamsburg.
[A1:1.]

Methodist bishops are preparing a denunciation of nuclear war that may be
stronger than the pastoral letter issued by the Roman Catholic bishops of the
United States. An early draft of the document, which bishops of the United
Methodist Church have been deliberating for more than a year, said that nuclear
deterrence, which the Catholic bishops conditionally accepted, ''cannot receive
the churches' blessing.'' [A19:1.]

The forest fire that ravaged the Houghton Creek area in Montana 16 months ago
left the mountainside blackened, but man and nature have combined to begin the
long forest repair process. It will take another century or so for the forest to
restore itself. [A18:4-6.]

The shopping-mall plane crash in Concord, Calif., Monday has raised questions
about the nearby airport's ability to handle expanded traffic in an increasingly
congested area. While many residents were saddened by the crash, several said
they had expected such an accident. [A20:1.]

Nurses caring for the first woman to receive an artificial heart have been
volunteering to work extra shifts because of concern over her slow recovery,
hospital officials said. The patient, Mary Lund, 40 years old, remained in
critical but stable condition at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis.
[A21:6.]

Metropolitan

Fiscal problems will plague the Transit Authority through the end of the decade
despite the 10-cent fare rise just enacted, transit officials say. Under the
authority's current formula, the deficits would translate into annual fare
increases that would bring the fare to about $1.40 by 1990 unless new sources of
revenue were found. [A1:3.]

Celebrating Christmas, New Yorkers stayed indoors on the blustery, cold day. The
Reagans shared a traditional feast of roast turkey with relatives and friends,
while at the North Pole it was unseasonably warm - 18 degrees. [A1:1-2.]

Vietnam veterans are at special risk for drug and alcohol addiction because of
the range of psychological and behavioral problems that still plague many of
them, experts say. Veterans with histories of substance abuse attribute their
problems most directly to the hostility they faced upon returning home during
the antiwar protests. [A1:5-6.]

The city will audit Carol Bellamy's staff records, Mayor Koch announced as Miss
Bellamy prepared to leave public office after 13 years. The Mayor said he
believed that money was owed the city because Miss Bellamy, the City Council
President, had given about 50 of her staff members a day off in January for the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday before the day became a paid city
holiday. [B3:5-6.]

The Fountain Avenue Landfill, one of the city's last remaining dumps, will close
next week. With the closing of the site, on the Brooklyn-Queens border, more
than 80 percent of the city's garbage will go to the Fresh Kills Landfill on
Staten Island. [B1:1-6.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CONFORMITY: COOL STYLE FOR YOUNG

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GROSS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words


THE 29th Gold and Silver Ball was no stereotypical teen-age get-together.

But the gathering of East Coast prep and public school students eager to rock
into their Christmas vacations has become an annual opportunity to discover what
fashions fit the mood of sophisticated youth. This year conformity was revealed
as the rage, and cool was a matter of quiet sophistication.

No one crashed. The only casualties in the infirmary were two broken bra straps.
Though some smooched in dark corners, not a single jaded youth was seen sipping
from a flask, despite the fact that only soft drinks were served. And when the
rare political opinion was expressed, it was likely to reflect Reaganism. Yet
for the thousand-plus 14- to 19-year-olds who attended this year's benefit for
the Youth Counseling League at the Grand Hyatt Hotel Sunday night, the
$125-a-ticket black-tie dance was still an occasion to let loose.

Much of the fun comes from the serious business of ''getting a little more
dressed up than usual,'' explained Donzie Barroso, a statuesque Barnard College
freshman and one of the few college students present. She was on the receiving
line in a black Dior gown, with a bright blue sash, that was a half-dozen years
older than she.

''Kids don't usually have an occasion to wear nice clothes,'' added Scott
Schiff, looking perfectly at home in his traditional tuxedo. ''My friends dress
nicely to look older, sophisticated, whatever. This gives them a chance to dress
. . . ''

'' . . . like they will in 20 years,'' finished Miss Barroso.

Sophistication was the evening's fashion theme. Dresses by Janet Russo and Norma
Kamali, two designers who know how to let girls have fun, were abundant. Ginny
Bond, a Spence freshman, wore a body-hugging strapless green velvet Russo, of
which she said, ''There's like four more here, but it's O.K.'' Isabel Gillies, a
Westminster student, was less blase when she saw her silver satin Kamali on
someone else. ''Bum me out,'' she complained.  Skin-baring, off-the-shoulder
black dresses and ropes of pearls with rhinestone clasps were de rigueur. ''All
the girls wear the neatest dress they can find,'' said Victoria Vought, a
sophomore at Chapin, who chose a black velvet jacket by Betsey Johnson. And to
the delight of the young ladies, more of the boys dressed in black tie, as
directed, than do the men at many functions for folks their parents' age.
Elizabeth Fine, a Marymount freshman, aptly captured the mood when she said she
preferred boys ''wearing the uniform, instead of, like, tartan.''

Carolina Herrera, an executive junior chairman, wore a pearl choker, an Ace
bandage on a broken arm and a strapless black velvet and blue taffeta gown
designed by her mother, the designer of the same name.

Though many other dresses and tuxedos were generational hand-me-downs, some
fashions came from less traditional sources. Jane Gladstone, a Brearley senior
who said she prefered to be known as Phoebe Golightly, lofted a two-foot-long
rhinestone-encrusted cigarette holder that she had found in Greenwich Village.

''Are those real diamonds?'' asked Pierce Loughran, a South Kent sophomore.

''I hope not,'' Miss Gladstone replied. ''I'd lose it.''

''Can I have a puff?'' Mr. Loughran asked. Miss Gladstone was pleased. ''Some
terrible boys told us they hated girls who smoked,'' she said with a sigh.

Tobacco was, in fact, the only vice in evidence. ''They wear tuxes like pros,
but they hold cigarettes like amateurs,'' muttered Stephanie Reisin, a Choate
senior in a black Tina Turner wig and a Janet Russo black lace dress. But Sam
Spencer, a Putney senior, chomped a fat black stogie like a pro. ''Stole it from
Dad,'' he said.

Megan Williams, a Brearley junior, wore a creamy sequined jacket and a satin top
and skirt. ''I got this for $36 at an antique clothing store,'' she said of her
jacket. Her skirt cost $19. ''I got it at a store that was going out of
business, if you really want to know. Should I say it all came from Lord &
Taylor?''

Miss Williams dismissed as ''preppy clones'' the boys who clustered in
studiously world-weary groups. Girls snaked past them in hand-holding chains,
letting out frequent giggles and squeals and tugging up the bodices of low-cut
dresses.

There were exceptions to the evening's conservative tone. Tom Mullarkey, a
Colgate University freshman, wore an evening jacket with a Vietnam-era
tiger-stripe camouflage pattern. Scott B. Bar-Tzvi, a Browning junior, wore a
ponytail, moussed hair and a purple patterned jacket. Shoes ranged from patent
leather slip-ons to one pair of scuffed brown Timberlands, and sundry black-tie
variations were seen, ranging from bright colors to stripes. Ties, cummerbunds
and suspenders in red were the most popular alternatives, but one boy wore no
tie at all with a wing-collar shirt buttoned to the neck and wrinkled white
painters' pants. That look led Betsy Kaiser, the evening's honorary chairman, to
wonder, ''Who let him in?''

The consensus among the girls was that the ''fierce'' - most fashionable - boys
were those in white tie and tails. ''That's the look now,'' Ginny Bond declared.
Shannon Finley, a Hotchkiss junior, took that look to the limit, wearing a blue
and black brocade vest and black Weejuns (with pennies) with his cutaway. But
his classmate Jonathan Sobel had a different view. What did Mr. Sobel consider
sartorial cool? ''Someone who owns their own tuxedo,'' he said, glancing down.
''This is mine.''

Not everyone was happy with the conservative turn of youthful fashion. Olivia
Blueprint, a student at the High School of Music and the Arts who arrived late
in a varsity jacket and lizard-print leggings, looked around and scowled.
''Everyone tries to look alike and conform,'' she said. ''It bothers me. I think
people should be different.''

But delight was the mood in the chaperones' room. ''The children of a few years
ago were trying to prove something,'' Dr. Peter Rizzo 3d said. ''Parents are now
listening and trying to understand, so their children are more secure. They
don't have to make a statement to be heard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption in The Home Section on Dec. 26 with an article about the Gold
and Silver Ball misidentified a guest, shown at the center of a group wearing
black dresses. She was Alexis Brashich.

GRAPHIC: photos of guests at the 29th Gold and Silver Ball

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. HEALTH CARE FOR VETERANS CUT IN BUDGET DRAFT

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 26


President Reagan's draft budget for the fiscal year 1987 would cut spending on
veterans' health care benefits by reducing the number of people treated and, for
the first time, by requiring insurance companies to help pay the costs.

Harry N. Walters, the Administrator of Veterans Affairs, warned that cutbacks in
spending and staff could ''ultimately result in a reduced quality of medical
care'' for veterans. He made the comment in a letter to the Office of Management
and Budget, which wrote the proposals.

The draft 1987 budget, to be submitted to Congress in early February, would
require many veterans to show financial need to receive care. It would also
provide no money for new nursing homes for veterans even as the number of older
veterans is rising rapidly because of the large number of men who served in
World War II.

Dispute on Nursing Homes

The proposal calls for a ''new long-term care policy'' emphasizing the use of
community nursing homes and state institutions, rather than additional Federal
facilities.

The Veterans Administration had sought seven new nursing homes, and Mr. Walters
is appealing to Mr. Reagan's budget director, James C. Miller 3d, to permit at
least ''the two highest- priority projects,'' at Hampton, Va., and Tampa, Fla.
At present the agency, which boasts the nation's largest medical care system,
has 116 nursing homes with 11,072 beds.

Mr. Walters, in a letter to Mr. Miller, said the new policy on long-term care
was ''not practical'' because ''there are no community or state nursing home
beds available in the affected areas.''

Higher Efficiency Sought

The budget office said the Veterans Administration must increase productivity by
1 percent a year for the next five years. In a hospiital, the number of patients
treated by a given number of employees in a given time might, for example,
increase because of new technology.

The agency also must treat ''fewer low-priority veterans,'' the budget office
said. It did not define such veterans.

Confidential budget documents show that the Office of Management and Budget
expects that the level of spending would require the Veterans Administration to
reduce the number of patients admitted to veterans' hospitals by 62,000, to 1.2
million, in 1987. It would reduce the number of visits to outpatient clinics by
1.3 million, to 16.5 million, in 1987, and by another 1.9 million, to 14.6
million visits, in 1989.

These cutbacks would be accompanied by a shrinking of V.A. hospital staffs and
other health-care resources for veterans. The number of Veterans Administration
employees working on medical care programs would decline, under the President's
budget proposal, from 193,941 in the fiscal year 1986, which began Oct. 1, to
185,039 in 1987 and 171,674 in the fiscal year 1991, the documents show.

In the letter to Mr. Miller, Mr. Walters said he was ''fully supportive of the
need to exercise budget constraints'' so long as they did not harm the quality
of care.

Nonmilitary Cuts Planned

The proposals for veterans' programs in Mr. Reagan's 1987 budget are part of a
larger White House package of nonmilitary budget cuts designed to reduce the
Federal deficit to levels specified by a new law. The law seeks to balance the
budget by 1991.

It appears likely that Congress will authorize the Government to collect
reimbursement from private insurance companies and will establish some
income-based eligibility test for veterans, though perhaps not the one being
proposed by Mr. Reagan.

Both houses of Congress endorsed such changes earlier this month, but they
adjourned last week without giving final approval to the legislation, which was
included in a bill designed to save $74 billion over three years.

Effect on Insurers

Under the bill, the Government could collect from private insurers the
''reasonable cost'' of care provided by the Veterans Administration to veterans
with disabilities unrelated to their military service. The insurers would be
legally obliged to pay for such care to the same extent as if the patient had
been treated in a private hospital.

Many insurance contracts now preclude payment for care given by Federal
hospitals. The bill would, in effect, invalidate such language in any contracts
written after the proposal became law.

The income eligibility test envisioned by Mr. Reagan is more stringent than the
one endorsed by key members of the Senate and House Committees on Veterans
Affairs. Under current law, at the age of 65 a veteran is automatically eligible
for medical care on request, without regard to financial need, if space is
available in a V.A. facility.

Under the Congressional proposal, the V.A. would have to provide hospital care
to veterans with service-related disabilities. It would also provide care to
those with disabilities unrelated to military service if they had income less
than specified amounts: $15,000 a year for a single veteran, $18,000 for a
veteran with one dependent (plus $1,000 for each additional dependent).

The Government could decide, based on available resources, whether to care for
people with higher incomes. Veterans without service-connected disabilities
would have to contribute to the cost of their care - $492 for the first 90 days
- if they had income exceeding $20,000 a year for a single person or $25,000 for
a married couple.

Administration's Proposal

Under the Reagan Administration's proposal, veterans without service-related
disabilities who have family incomes of more than $15,000 a year would have to
pay substantially more before they could qualify for V.A. health care.

In other budgetary areas, the White House approved $320 million for major V.A.
construction projects in 1987. That represents about half the $646 million that
the agency said was needed to meet its commitments to veterans.

The Office of Management and Budget has apparently directed the Veterans
Administration and other agencies to come up with specific amounts of property
that can be declared surplus. The budget documents say that the V.A.'s target is
to list excess property with a market value of $364 million. If the property is
not needed by another agency, it can then be sold, according to the General
Services Administration.

Mr. Walters complained that two of the ''excess properties'' listed by the
budget office were essential to the operation of veterans' hospitals, in Los
Angeles and Sepulveda, Calif. The property in Los Angeles, he said, provides ''a
much-needed buffer zone'' between a veterans' psychiatric facility and its
neighborhood.

Funds for Transportation

The Office of Management and Budget is also proposing to eliminate funds for
veterans who need special transportation, such as an ambulance or a wheelchair
van, to get to a veterans' hospital. Mr. Walters said eliminating this money was
''not feasible,'' and he asked the budget office to provide $10 million in 1987
for ''emergency travel needs'' of veterans.

Mr. Walters said the proposals would force his agency to defer new services that
Congress just authorized for Vietnam veterans. The services include counseling
on employment, vocational rehabilitation, alcohol and drug abuse and veterans'
benefits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Harry N. Waters (page B9)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER 3,854 GRAVES, NO MORE AT SHILOH NATIONAL CEMETERY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: SHILOH NATIONAL MILITARY PARK, Tenn., Dec. 26


Veterans of at least seven wars are interred here, where Union and Confederate
troops fought for two bloody days in 1862, but room has run out.

The Shiloh National Military Cemetery is full at 3,854 graves, and the National
Park Service has no plans to expand the burial ground, which occupies 10 of the
3,872 acres officially designated as the Civil War battlefield.

''We've known for several years that we were reaching our capacity,'' said Zeb
McKinney, the park superintendent. ''We filled our last grave Aug. 28.'' The
last veteran buried at Shiloh was Tilman Floyd, who served in the Navy in World
War II.

After the Battle of Shiloh, where obscure officers like William Tecumseh Sherman
and Ulysses S. Grant became prominent military leaders, Union men buried their
dead and the dead of their foes in separate trenches. ''There was no provision
for anything else,'' Mr. McKinney said. ''The trenches were marked, but it
wasn't a formal cemetery.''

Start of National Cemeteries

Five years later a cemetery was established at the battlefield, about 90 miles
east of Memphis, and the Union dead were moved to it. ''At the end of the Civil
War, Congress established a system of national cemeteries for Union soldiers,''
Mr. McKinney said. ''The cemeteries were either on or adjacent to prominent
battlefields. And this was the beginning of our national cemetery system.''

The Shiloh Cemetery became the final resting place for soldiers who served in
the Spanish-American War, World Wars I and II, and the Korean and Vietnam wars.
The grave of one Revolutionary War veteran also was moved there in 1930.

No Confederate soldiers are buried in the Shiloh Cemetery. ''You had to have
proof of service in the armed forces of the United States,'' Mr. McKinney said.
''And, of course, the Confederate soldiers had been in the service of a hostile
nation.''

Services for Confederates

The Confederate dead remain in the trenches where they were buried by the Union
soldiers. Their graves are marked, however, and are the scene of annual memorial
services conducted by the Sons of Confederate Veterans.

The War Department established its own system of national cemeteries after World
War I, but the old Civil War cemeteries on battlefields remained under control
of the National Park Service.

Mr. McKinney said there were no plans to expand the cemetery because the
Veterans Administration now has primary responsibility for operating burial
sites for veterans.

''The National Park Service is not the Federal agency for maintaining
cemeteries,'' he said. ''The cemetery remained active because there was
additional space available, but it's more appropriate for the Veterans
Administration to provide burial sites now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
A War Scribes Monument?

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Irving Molotsky

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


Representative Mary Rose Oakar thinks the Washington area should have a monument
dedicated to journalists killed while covering ''wars and other armed
conflicts.''

The Ohio Democrat, who is also urging recognition of women who served in the
armed forces, has introduced legislation that would authorize a journalists'
memorial on Federal property. The project would be financed by a private
organization, as was the Vietnam Memorial.

So far, 25 members of Congress have signed on as co-sponsors. Miss Oakar's
office said that hearings are to be held on the project soon and that Senator
Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, had promised to testify for it. Mr.
Cranston was a correspondent for the International News Service in Rome and
Berlin in the 1930's. He also covered the invasion of Ethiopia by Mussolini's
troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Doctrine, Angola and Nonpartisanship

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis's columns (Dec. 9 and 12) opposing both covert aid to Angola's
freedom fighters and legislation sponsored by Representative Claude Pepper and
myself offering humanitarian assistance deserves comment.

Mr. Lewis believes we have more to fear from Jonas Savimbi's indigenous black
nationalists because they receive support from South Africa than we do from
Soviet domination of the whole region.

According to your news reports, the Russians are pouring billions of dollars of
equipment into Angola to support its surrogates' forces with hundreds of tanks,
dozens of sophisticated helicopter gunships, large numbers of advanced fighters
(including MiG-23's) and one of the most sophisticated air-defense networks
outside the Warsaw Pact.

It does not seem to trouble Mr. Lewis that unchecked, this Soviet presence may
produce a Moscow-dominated regional hegemony, which can jeopardize essential sea
lanes around the Cape of Good Hope and naval bases bordering the South Atlantic.
Moreover, it would be a great mistake to imagine that the communization of the
southern African region could relieve apartheid or improve the condition of
South Africa's black people. Communism in power has never improved the lives of
any people anywhere on earth.

Angola's ruling party is solidly pro-Soviet. President Jose Eduardo dos Santos
proclaims his ''support for the Republic of Nicaragua's struggle'' against the
pro-American ''contras'' and aligns himself with those ''struggling'' against
''Zionism.'' The ruling party's recent congress received warm messages of
brotherly support from Soviet-bloc rulers in Vietnam, East Germany, North Korea
and elsewhere. The Soviet-Cuban escalation of conflict and attacks on the
civilian population of Angola have been unable to wipe out the popular
opposition to their neo-colonialist enterprise. A modest amount of U.S.
assistance cannot assure Mr. Savimbi's immediate victory, but prompt provision
of minimal levels of appropriate material resources can stop his defeat and open
hope for future elections and Angolan independence.

Mr. Lewis complains that the proposal to assist Unita is not a ''conservative''
idea, though supported by a conservative President and conservatives in
Congress. But what has really changed in our time is not conservatism but the
liberal left. How far we have come from the soaring global idealism of President
Kennedy only 25 years ago to the timid neoisolationism of today's disaffected
liberals!

The Reagan doctrine, including the modest step of assisting genuine African
freedom fighters, embodies the nonpartisan idealism common to both the
conservative and liberal traditions. In this respect, it is true to the basic
ideas that define the American people.JACK KEMP Member of Congress, 31st Dist.,
N.Y.

Washington, Dec. 17, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Look Back To Look Ahead

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A disturbing new French film by Agnes Varda is a reminder of how much has
changed in the Western world since 1968. Titled ''Without a Roof or a Law,'' the
film is the story of the degradation and death of a pretty, stubborn girl with
but one thought on her mind: to live by and for herself alone.

The film is set in the present, not the heyday of hippiedom. The girl is frankly
portrayed as selfish, insensitive, uncaring, if brave. The character excites
pity but not sympathy because there is no suggestion that society is to blame
for her plight. Her willful indolence, her insistence on absolute personal
freedom at whatever cost it may impose on others is all that is offered to
explain what happens to her.

Miss Varda does not preach or draw the implicit conclusion. Still, the change of
perspective from a generation ago is striking. It does reflect the rise and
consolidation of a more conservative, traditional outlook in modern societies.

There are no politics or polemics, no sociological or ideological abstractions.
The background is rural France and the ordinary people who live in it, peasants,
North African migrants, but also university educated agronomists, vestiges of
the gentry, truck drivers, gas station attendants. They have become rather
open-minded, but the girl is not.

It is her view that seems obsolete. The film's approach makes a sharp contrast
with the dominant intellectual fashion of the late 1960's. It revives a need to
seek better understanding of what happened then, why the counterculture movement
arose and exploded, why it collapsed, what it left and what it means for the
future, the relation of a new underclass of unemployed and often unemployable
youth in most industrial countries to that spent rebellion against social norms.

The 1968 upheavals came near the end of an unprecedented growth of prosperity in
the developed world. Affluence was taken for granted. Freedom was redefined as
the individual's right to defy social authority in whatever way he or she might
choose, not as the best way to accomodate all kinds of people and spirits who
must share a society.

Permissiveness was the word used to describe the attitude, but it wasn't a good
word. No permission was asked, no acceptance given that rules should apply
because they serve most people's tranquil purposes.

In each of the many countries that underwent upheavals, there were special
issues. In the U.S., experts said it was about Vietnam and civil rights. In
France, they said it was about the rigid system of education and the
disgruntlement of workers. In Germany, they said education, environment and the
authoritarian family. But underdeveloped Turkey and socialist Yugoslavia had
similar experiences. So did Japan, the world's most consensual community.

Some kind of lightning bolt leapt around the world, igniting tinder that had
been accumulating. There must have been some deeper common urge than was
identified. The fires burnt out and the old answers returned with the old
questions of jobs, religion, bringing up children, making ends meet.

But it would be a mistake to sweep aside the memory as an aberration, a
fuzzy-minded disturbance with no significance for the evolution of economically
advanced societies. Those hairy, deliberately bedraggled youth were misguided,
largely inarticulate in trying to express their grievances, seeking something
they couldn't name and foolishly imagining that to demand obtrusively enough
would suffice to obtain it.

They felt something wrong. But not knowing quite what it was or what to do about
it, most of them returned to everyday life. Miss Varda's film is a cool,
brooding commentary on the inevitable failure of a mindless attempt at a
solution.

Whatever the source, however, it is probably still there lurking under current
apprehensions. There is no reason to suppose that if there is success in
restoring steady growth without a bust due to debts and the deficit, the
emotional and psychological malaise of modern society will not resurface.

There was a message in the restive noise of 1968 that the rapid transformations
of the second half of the 20th Century have been hard to digest, that there is a
gap between our habits and assumptions and the way the world is hurtling through
change.

Now, with quiet hindsight, it is time to peer through the emotional fog and try
to figure out what it was really about and what it signals for modernism.
Otherwise, there is still little chance to chart the rupturing reefs that may
lie ahead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
KENNEDY CENTER PAYS TRIBUTE TO 6 IN THE ARTS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 523 words


CONSIDER this for a fail-safe entertainment recipe: Open the show with the
National Anthem and the voice of John F. Kennedy declaring, ''I look forward to
an America that will reward achievement in the arts as it rewards achievement in
business''; cut to shots of President Reagan sitting in his Kennedy Center box
with Mrs. Reagan, while Walter Cronkite walks out on stage to serve as narrator;
then, for a finale two hours later, bring on several military choral groups to
sing a rousing medley of ''The Army Goes Rolling Along,'' ''The Marine Corps
Hymn'' and ''Anchors Aweigh.'' There is more than one way, obviously, to get an
audience to stand up and salute.

The occasion is the eighth annual presentation of ''The Kennedy Center Honors: A
Celebration of the Performing Arts,'' taped in Washington on Dec. 8 and now
being shown, after appropriate editing, on CBS this evening at 9. Being honored
this year for ''lifetime achievement'' in the arts are Beverly Sills, Frederick
Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner, Irene Dunne, Merce Cunningham and Bob Hope. Once
again, the special has been co-produced by Nick Vanoff and George Stevens Jr.
and directed by Don Mischer.

The formula is by now familiar, but still effective. There are clips from an
earlier White House reception at which the President personally addressed the
artists and invited guests. Then, back in the Kennedy Center, each of the
honorees, while sitting in a box next to the President, is given a separate
tribute that includes a biographical film and special performing material,
followed by a standing ovation from the audience in formal dress.

As an awards event, this occasion is unfailingly heartfelt and dignified. These
recipients represent the very best of American artistic achievement, their
careers spanning decades. The first honorees in 1978 were Marian Anderson, Fred
Astaire, George Balanchine, Richard Rodgers and Arthur Rubinstein, and that
level of overall excellence has since been maintained admirably.

Some passing changes in the telecast can be noted. Art Buchwald is not on hand
this year to offer his satirical comments on political antics in Washington.
Also, this marks the first time that one of the honorees is not present.
Suffering from a bad back, Miss Dunne was unable to attend, but her film career
is reviewed affectionately by James Stewart.

Carol Burnett praises Miss Sills, Mikhail Baryshnikov pays tribute to Mr.
Cunningham (''he reinvented dance and then waited for the audience - it was a
long wait''), Rex Harrison thanks Lerner and Loewe for ''My Fair Lady'' and, for
reasons that are not entirely clear, Kirk Douglas is the celebrity chosen to
offer an homage to Mr. Hope. It is Mr. Hope, of course, who triggers the
choruses of military songs as his years of entertaining the troops abroad are
recalled. Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam step forward to offer
their personal thanks to the extraordinary entertainer.

In the end, President Reagan flashes a thumbs-up sign to the choral groups and
Mr. Cronkite reminds us that ''that's the way it is.'' The honorees come up for
one final bow and standing ovation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Beverly Sills

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1985, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS ECONOMISTS FACE A BLEAKET OUTLOOK

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 26


For business economists, one area of the economy that may appear the bleakest is
their own profession.

Major corporations, leading banks and the Federal Government have been
eliminating, de-emphasizing or reassigning their once-elite staffs of Ph.D.
economists. Some companies are now buying whatever analysis they need from
economic consulting firms.

Although economists have often come under fire for their forecasts, business has
generally valued their insights and their number had continued to grow. But for
the past couple of years, severe pressures on corporate profits have led many
chief executives to reassess the role of economists in their organizations, and
some have concluded that such staffs are a luxury.

'I'm One Who Got Chopped'

''A lot of people are chopping economists,'' said Noel Perry, the senior
economist at the Cummins Engine Company in Columbus, Ind., a major producer of
truck motors. ''I'm one who got chopped.'' Mr. Perry was part of a companywide
layoff of blue- and white-collar workers at Cummins Engine last summer. He
retains an office there, but is looking for other work.

International Paper, Monsanto, Union Carbide, Uniroyal and Dresser Industries
are among the other companies that in recent months have also shrunk their
economics staffs, or shut them down. The General Electric Company, which had one
of industry's biggest economics departments, has cut the payroll to seven from
20 over four years.

''This is a case of General Electric's management being aggressive in reducing
corporate overhead,'' said Walter K. Joelson, the company's chief economist.
'We're weeding out what management likes to call things that are nice to know
but not necessary to know.''

Among the things G.E. used to do but no longer does, for example, are in-depth
studies of such countries as Australia or China. ''Now we try to find people who
have made such studies, and buy their studies,'' Mr. Joelson said.

Banks Also Cut Back

Many of the nation's biggest banks, such as Citibank, Chase Manhattan, Bankers
Trust, the Bank of New York, Continental Illinois and Harris Trust in Chicago
have been making similar cuts for several years, and there is no sign of an end
to the trend.

One move that attracted considerable attention was that of Chemical Bank, which
last summer disbanded its entire 30-member economics department. It transferred
about half its members to other parts of the bank and dismissed the other half
with severance pay. The bank's former chief economist is now an industry analyst
at Chemical.

''In our case, the decision does not reflect cynicism or unhappiness with the
importance of economic analysis to business,'' said Thomas S. Johnson, one of
the bank's three presidents. ''Our decision was a question of cost. We had a
fine - one of the best - economics departments. But we decided not to have the
department, and to get our analysis in other ways.''

'Take the Risk'

By relying on outside economic forecasting firms, he said, ''we're not getting
our analysis as easily or as conveniently as we did, but we decided to take the
risk.''

Continental Illinois, which the Government rescued in 1984, has cut its
economics staff to six from 12, and, like many banks, has now eliminated a
newsletter it sent gratis to customers. ''It got expensive,'' said the bank's
chief economist, Richard S. Peterson. ''Our annual bill was $140,000, just for
postage.''

Economists' jobs appear largely unaffected in academia, among Wall Street's
major investment banking firms, and in some large companies, including
International Business Machines and General Motors.

Henry Kaufman, chief economist at the investment banking firm of Salomon
Brothers Inc., said he has 250 economists and that the department continues to
grow.

But the 4,000-member National Association of Business Economists reports that
after many years of steady growth, membership has been flat for two years.
''What appears to be happening,'' said David L. Williams, the association's
full-time secretary-treasurer, ''is that those staff people who are not making a
direct contribution to the management decision-making process are under
scrutiny.''

The de-emphasis of economics has primarily within the field of macroeconomics.
Its practitioners specialize in explaining the behavior of the overall economy,
examining such broad issues as growth, employment, inflation and interest rates.
Not only do they have to explain these items, but are also expected to predict -
down to the decimal point - where the items will stand six or 12 months hence.

An Imperfect Science

Such analysis is imperfect. Perhaps its biggest failing is its inability to
predict, or to gauge properly, the impact of some of the shocks that have shaped
the economy most in the past two decades. Some of them have been as much
political as economic: Vietnam, the oil price explosion of the 1970's, the
decline of inflation in the 1980's and the growth of the American Federal budget
deficits.

Economists take pride in noting that, in most years, the consensus of their
forecasts has been close to the economy's ensuing performance. But every year
individual forecasts predict everything from recessions to booms, from the
falling prices of deflation to virulent inflation.

Another problem that has bedeviled the economics profession has been the wide
ideological differences that have cropped up in recent years, in the search to
get a better handle on the world. Today, most economists would agree that no one
ideology -Keynesianism, monetarism, and the Reagan Administration's new
supply-side-ism - has proved a reliable foundation for understanding the state
of the economy.

'The Religious Zeal'

''I think the politicization of economics brought about by the religious zeal of
the supply-siders gave economics a bad name,'' said Roger E. Brinner, chief
economist at Data Resources Inc., in Lexington, a firm that sells forecasts to
industry and the Government. ''They felt they needed to support a political goal
with a so-called economics goal.'' Firms such as Data Resources have suffered
from corporate disenchantment with forecasting, but they have made up some of
the loss by capturing consulting contracts from companies that have dismissed
in-house economists.

Some organizations have kept their macroeconomists, but are using them
differently.

Officials in the Reagan Administration, for instance, say they now rely on the
President's Council of Economic Advisers, and its chairman, Beryl W. Sprinkel, a
macroeconomist, primarily for studies of such issues as the effects of farm
legislation, or a relaxation of the antitrust laws on the overall economy. The
council still makes macroeconomic forecasts, but they are more subject now than
they have been to modification by politicians in the White House and economists
in other agencies.

The role of economists is also changing in many businesses. Economists are
moving from ivory-tower isolation in the executive suite into the trenches where
banks and businesses make their money. In some companies, they are helping plan
production of the company's goods and services.

'It Doesn't Sell G.N.P.'s

''Monsanto realized it doesn't sell G.N.P.'s,'' said John H. Qualls, who moved
into market research at Monsanto when his position as chief economic forecaster
there was terminated. ''I'm no longer an economist. I'm a market researcher.''

Other companies have kept their economists and their economic analyses, but have
made the analyses into products for sale. Citibank, for example, still conducts
economic analyses, but it has dropped those it cannot sell to customers. For the
most part, companies are selling analyses of specific interest to industrial
clients, and dropping such prestigious, but money-losing, products as
newsletters.

At the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, the economics department bills other
departments of the bank for its work. ''They can say they don't like it and
won't pay,'' said Norman Robertson, the chief economist. ''So we try to meet
their needs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Beryl Sprinkel (page D3)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
SOLID JOURNALISM OUTSHONE TECHNICAL WIZARDRY

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words


The news wasn't different in 1985; television was.

Wars, revolutions, politics and natural disasters continued apace; television,
meanwhile, was shaking down. CBS begot ''West 57th.'' Phil Donahue moved to New
York. Documentaries almost vanished, replaced, in a way, by the Big Story.
Importance was measured by air time. The 10th anniversary of the fall of Saigon
was big; the Geneva summit was bigger; the hostage crisis was biggest of all.
Was the world a huge sound stage? Television, increasingly supranational, leaped
whole continents at a single bound. Where this will end nobody knows, and one
missed the Presidential campaign of 1984. We knew where we were then, and so did
anchormen and correspondents. The ground rules were firm. In 1985, Nabih Berri
metamorphosed into Raisa Gorbachev and somehow they both visited Bitburg. Only
occasionally did a journalist restore order.  Thus, while correspondents roamed
all over Vietnam last spring, pondering, explaining and trying to come to grips,
the clearest picture of what Vietnam meant was presented by Marvin Kalb, who
stayed home. Mr. Kalb and his colleagues gave us ''Vietnam: Lessons of a Lost
War,'' an NBC ''White Paper.'' Coincidentally, they also gave all three networks
a splendid argument for why they should retain documentaries if they are serious
about news and public affairs. ''Vietnam: Lessons of a Lost War'' pulled things
together. Reporting replaced conjecture. We found out how we mismanaged Vietnam.
The ''White Paper'' needed an hour to tell the story and not a minute less.

A corollary lesson here was that while personalities and pretty faces are nice
to have around, journalists are better at doing news stories. One appreciated
Mr. Kalb. It wasn't just that he spoke persuasively; any member of the Screen
Actors Guild could do that. It was more that he seemed to have thought about
what he was saying. Peter Jennings, the anchorman on ABC's ''World News
Tonight,'' increasingly did that, too.

Mr. Jennings came into his own as a television newsman in 1985. In 1984, he
always seemed to appear with David Brinkley, which was approximately like being
an actor and trying to steal a scene from George C. Scott. This year, listening
to Mr. Jennings, we could hear a mind at work. Here he was, for example, in the
final weekend of the Beirut hostage crisis, speculating on why the Amal, after
saying they would, now seemed reluctant to give the hostages up: ''They were at
the center of the universe - these hostage takers - why should they give them
up?''

That may seem obvious, but in the simplicity there was beauty. Mr. Jennings has
also shown a gift for not speaking when he has nothing to say. When President
Reagan visited the Bitburg military cemetery, Mr. Jennings was there, anchoring
the ABC coverage. Network anchormen fly everywhere these days, even when they
have nothing to do except pose. Mr. Jennings, however, was the only network
anchor at Bitburg, possibly because while Bitburg was an important story, it
wasn't a big story to cover. Mr. Reagan would be in the cemetery only a few
minutes. The importance wasn't in the actual visit; it was in what the visit
meant.

Mr. Jennings reported sparely; he allowed us to find our own meaning. In a
medium that abhors silence, this was high professional work. One learned to
appreciate professionalism in 1985. Satellites and earth stations obliterated
time and distance, but these were technical tricks. The question was, where was
journalism practiced?  Much of the best was on the ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour''
night after night after night. Robert MacNeil, Jim Lehrer and Les Crystal, the
''MacNeil/Lehrer'' producer, are professionals. In fact, they are the best that
public television consistently has to offer, mostly because they always look
after the public interest. In a speech at Columbia University, shown on Channel
13, Mr. MacNeil expressed some of the ''MacNeil/Lehrer'' philosophy this way:

''I think there is, frankly, scorn for fairness in some quarters. In some
quarters, it is clearly a yearning for straight advocacy journalism, which
regards fairness as effete and unmanly, and thinks telling both sides of a story
and letting the public decide the merits is wimpy and even irresponsible.''

''MacNeil/Lehrer'' would have none of that. Its viewers would have to work for
truth; the program would not serve it up on a platter. In 1985, meanwhile,
''MacNeil/ Lehrer'' began not at 7 but at 7:30 P.M., and thus spent its last 30
minutes in prime time. Therefore, it no longer had to compete with the network
news programs. It was able to supplement them. It didn't tell us what the
network news meant, however. Television has sufficient pundits who do that
already.

Instead, ''MacNeil/Lehrer'' tried to put the news in perspective. The story it
talked about at the top of each program really was the most important story of
the day. Judgment was used in its selection. Then, in a ''Focus'' segment, the
story would be expanded. ''Focus'' segments didn't always work. Sometimes Mr.
MacNeil and Mr. Lehrer would worry a subject to death, or else leave it faint
with exhaustion. On the other hand, viewers were never cheated. Consistently,
''MacNeil/Lehrer'' gave us more news in a balanced way than anywhere else on
television.

Elsewhere there were bright spots, sometimes in unexpected places. ''American
Caesar'' was a milestone of sorts - a five-hour documentary series about one
man, Gen. Douglas MacArthur. It was produced jointly by Metromedia Television
and the Turner Broadcasting System, and in a way it had the same strengths as
''MacNeil/ Lehrer.'' MacArthur was a complex man, but ''American Caesar,''
eschewing psycho-history, allowed us to judge him ourselves.

Otherwise, the best of the documentaries were found on public television.
''Shielding America: Can 'Star Wars' Make us Safe?'' was a first-rate
examination of the Strategic Defense Initiative. ''Remembering Life'' was a
wonderfully sentimental film about Life magazine. ''The Shakers: Hands to Work,
Hearts to God'' and ''The Statue of Liberty,'' fine works about widely separated
subjects, were both by the film maker Ken Burns.

There were other good documentaries, too, although they were single works and
not done as part of a series. Indeed, the best two series around were reruns
from 1984 -public television's ''The Brain'' and ''A Walk Through the 20th
Century With Bill Moyers.'' It should be noted here that while Mr. Moyers's
series was on public television, Mr. Moyers was on CBS, exercising a prerogative
as pundit. He was pretty good at this all year; he was splendid during the
Geneva summit.

Mr. Moyers is a certified liberal, with chevrons on his sleeve. At the same
time, orthodoxy does not bind him, the way it does, say, George Will. Mr. Will,
on ABC, is a certified conservative, very bright, very provocative and very
effective on television. At the same time, we always know which side he'll take.
When he conducts an interview, we can even guess some of his questions. Mr.
Moyers is not so consistent. For Geneva, he was intelligent and thoughtful, but
once he rose up in scorn.

That was when he commented on the Rev. Jesse Jackson's characterization of
Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Mr. Jackson, talking about his visit to the Soviet leader,
said that Mr. Gorbachev favored disarmament. Mr. Moyers, after noting that Mr.
Gorbachev had once been in charge of Soviet agriculture, declared that ''if Mr.
Gorbachev strives as efficiently for disarmament as he did for agriculture, the
Soviet Union will simply sink out of sight under the weight of missiles, guns
and tanks.''

It was a glorious diatribe; one hoped that right-wingers, often critical of Mr.
Moyers, had called everyone into their living rooms to listen. Even if he was
wrong, at least he was trying to put things in perspective. Where was he when we
needed him on some of the other big stories this year?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter Jennings

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
ONCE AGAIN, THEATER WAS A PLACE FOR WONDER

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2055 words


After feasting on Sam Shepard's new play, ''A Lie of the Mind,'' one may find it
difficult to be pessimistic about the American theater of 1985.

Here is a work as wide, long, deep, mysterious and unruly as the Mississippi
River - a variously rending and hilarious reverie about parents and sons and
husbands and wives, all bleeding into a mythic wilderness that has served
writers from Harte, Twain and Cather to Welty, Didion and McMurtry. Even if
there were nothing else to recommend the past 12 months in the theater - and
there is much more - ''A Lie of the Mind'' might lift 1985 above the
undistinguished years that have characterized this decade.

Mr. Shepard, it's increasingly clear, is an artist who has his country in his
blood and just can't prevent its spirit from pouring out, in ever more poetic
and exuberant forms of expression. Are all four hours of ''A Lie of the Mind''
perfect? Hardly. But a standard critical vocabulary (''needs pruning in Act
II'') applies to Mr. Shepard to about the same degree that it applies to Dreiser
or O'Neill. The work flows on, a natural force not easily tamed by the
immaculate intellectual formulas one might try to impose upon it.

What makes ''A Lie of the Mind'' a particular boon to the theater year, however,
has as much to do with the context of its creation as the creation itself. This
play isn't some showbiz novelty. It's a midpoint culmination of a career
containing more than 40 previous plays, stretching back over two decades to the
early days of Off Off Broadway. With consistent struggle - and without ever
having had a play produced on Broadway - Sam Shepard has managed to sustain an
artistic life in the theater as long and fertile as those achieved by major
American dramatists before him. Mr. Shepard is not alone among current American
playwrights in accomplishing this - nor is he alone in subsidizing his stage
career in Hollywood - but he is this year's most spectacular reminder of the
durability of the theatrical impulse, regardless of a theatrical industry's hard
times.

As Mr. Shepard reminds us that some major American artists still choose to
devote their greatest energies to the theater, so his play is a reminder of why
they do so. Some art can only happen on a stage; some experiences are available
to audiences only in a playhouse. Where but in a theater can a small gulf of
stage space separating a pair of bedrooms (one in California, one in Montana)
stretch in our minds until it carries the spiritual and geographical weight of a
continental divide? Where else can an actor in the role of a son, by blowing a
puff of a dead father's ashes into the air, make us shudder in recognition of a
family's eternal, inescapable continuum? One won't find such a moment in a book
or movie, even Mr. Shepard's own.

The vitality of ''A Lie of the Mind,'' which was produced at Off Broadway's
Promenade Theater, dramatizes the paradox of New York theatergoing in 1985. This
was a year in which Broadway production reached its lowest ebb of the century
and the Broadway audience continued to show terminal signs of attrition. Even
the occasional serious play that dared venture into the Times Square theater
district (''As Is,'' ''The Iceman Cometh'') was unlikely to draw crowds; more
than ever, Broadway has become a safe haven only for musicals, stars, light
comedies and Las Vegas-style cabarets. (How many ''Tango Argentino'' clones,
heaven help us, are waiting in the wings?) Yet the theater's artists went their
own way and found audiences, even if those audiences were closer in size to the
readership of new novels than to the throngs at Sylvester Stallone films.

The artists' best efforts - some of which spilled over, however briefly, to
Broadway - were indigenously theatrical creations. Like ''A Lie of the Mind,''
the other superior plays of 1985 made the case that there is nothing quite like
the theater and that the theater still attracts sensibilities that matter. To
miss the best stage offerings this year was to miss art unavailable in any other
form anywhere else.

Seeing Lily Tomlin on television or film, for instance, is no substitute for
seeing her new one-woman show, ''The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the
Universe.'' What makes Miss Tomlin's performance intrinsically theatrical is not
merely that it's in the flesh - that could happen at a nightclub, too - but that
the actress is performing a play, solo, in her show's second act. The play,
written and directed by the star's invaluable collaborator Jane Wagner, is a
compact history of the modern women's movement, from the 1960's to the summer of
Geraldine Ferraro. As if it weren't exciting enough to watch Miss Tomlin whip in
and out of this saga's various roles, we're also treated to a trenchant view of
social history that few other mass entertainers in any medium would dramatize
with such sophistication and ideological evenhandedness.

As Miss Tomlin brings alive a patch of history in idiosyncratic personal terms
on a bare stage, so did the Polish director Tadeusz Kantor and his Cricot 2
troupe, during their visit to La Mama. In ''Let the Artists Die,'' a handful of
ragtag performers replayed a stylized, gestural pageant of horrors over and
over, until the audience felt possessed by a nightmare. The nightmare's content
-the dislocations, genocide and repression of modern Poland - was clear, but it
was stated, as dreams are wont to be, in distorting metaphors whose precise
meanings are known only to their creator. That didn't matter. However abstract
the recurrent sounds and sights, Mr. Kantor uncovered our charnel-house terrors
in his, tapping into the collective unconscious of the 20th century.

It would be just as hard to imagine either ''Orphans'' or ''The Iceman Cometh''
in forms other than the theatrical shapes they assumed this season. As a play,
''Orphans'' (by Lyle Kessler) is a pastiche of Harold Pinter (''The Caretaker'')
and Mr. Shepard (''True West''), but who cares? As directed by Gary Sinise of
Chicago's Steppenwolf Company, the three original cast members (Terry Kinney,
Kevin Anderson, John Mahoney) achieved a heightened, rock-and-roll-cadenced
naturalism far removed from the rock-and-roll video esthetic now ruling film and
television. There are no quick cuts in ''Orphans''; the actors simply bounce off
the walls.

Not unlike ''A Lie of the Mind,'' this production achieves its primal power by
choreographing a ritual reunion of father and sons - and choreographing it in
figurative images that defy literal-minded explications of plot and character.
Indeed, both ''Orphans'' and Mr. Shepard's play redefine the poetic tradition of
O'Neill in ''Iceman'': Reality festers verbally and visually until it boils over
in the concentrated, mesmerizing form of hallucinatory myth. Thanks to the
exemplary revival of ''Iceman,'' as directed by Jose Quintero and acted by a
stellar cast led by Jason Robards and Donald Moffat, a patriarchal play of the
modern American theater was on simultaneous display with its progeny this fall.

Other outstanding attractions of 1985 exploit the theater to challenging
intellectual effect. Michael Frayn, the English author of the farce ''Noises
Off,'' returned with ''Benefactors,'' a sorrowful philosophical comedy of
equally dazzling precision. By dramatizing the complex conflicts of two married
couples in contemporary London, Mr. Frayn manages to tell the much larger story
of liberalism's collapse. If there are echoes of Ibsen and Chekhov in
''Benefactors,'' there's a whiff of Shaw in Wallace Shawn's ''Aunt Dan and
Lemon,'' a perversely funny play in which the most genteel characters say the
most monstrously fascist things in lengthy, oddly shaped monologues. ''Aunt
Dan'' can drive theatergoers of all knee-jerk ideological persuasions wild by
refusing to tell them what to think. The audience must instead muster its own
counter-arguments to the characters' seductive rationalizations for governmental
immorality.

Perhaps Neil Simon's ''Biloxi Blues,'' the year's one invigorating Broadway-bred
new play, and Horton Foote's ''Road to the Graveyard,'' a one-act work seen at
the Ensemble Studio Theater's annual Marathon, are conventional in form, but
they are both prime creations of veteran writers who, like the maverick Mr.
Shepard, keep improving with age. Besides being extremely funny, ''Biloxi
Blues'' is Mr. Simon's first serious attempt to examine his conscience as an
artist and a Jew. Mr. Foote, whose long writing career is enjoying a second
coming on all fronts (his recent films include ''Tender Mercies'' and ''The Trip
to Bountiful''), once again spun a portrait of the disappointed lives in a
small-town Texas household (of 1939); the compressed, Faulknerian ''Graveyard''
created a magnetic field of anxiety that was almost suffocating in its
intensity.

Only in musicals did 1985 fall short. The somewhat bland ''Big River'' and the
unabashedly broad ''Mystery of Edwin Drood'' can both be applauded for their
winning casts and their initiation of gifted pop songwriters (Roger Miller and
Rupert Holmes) into the theater. But one would have to match the spirited first
act of the former with the delirious second act of the latter to approximate a
good year's ''best'' musical. The single electrifying piece of musical theater
in 1985 was a concert version of Stephen Sondheim's 1971 ''Follies,'' given for
two nights by the New York Philharmonic (and now available on record).
''Follies'' is set in a Broadway theater on the eve of its demolition, and
surely it was the theater-imitates-reality irony of the year that Broadway
didn't have the wherewithal or imagination to stage this brief revival itself.
The concert took place instead at Avery Fisher Hall, where the record producer
Thomas Z. Shepard assembled stars (Barbara Cook, Carol Burnett, Lee Remick)
whose own stage careers, like ''Follies,'' recall a vanished Broadway.

The commercial theater's difficulties are unlikely to disappear in 1986, but
neither will the theater of substance. There's just too much ferment. (By year's
end, even Lincoln Center's Newhouse Theater was reopening, with a David Mamet
double bill.) One could come up with a second-best list of 1985 plays that, in
some recent years, would constitute an A list. Among them were ''Tracers,'' an
exorcism of the Vietnam war by and with veterans; ''As Is,'' William M.
Hoffman's impassioned response to the AIDS crisis; David Hare's ''Map of the
World,'' a comedy about the conflicting, often self-serving perspectives from
which journalists, novelists and film makers perceive the Third World; Ron
Hutchinson's ''Rat in the Skull,'' a raw plunge into the tragedy of Northern
Ireland; and Keith Reddin's ''Life and Limb'' and Richard Greenberg's ''Life
Under Water,'' comedies marking the emergence of distinctive new voices. The Off
Broadway musicals ''Three Guys Naked From the Waist Down'' (by Michael Rupert
and Jerry Colker) and ''Goblin Market'' (by Peggy Harmon and Polly Pen) were
similarly bubbling with youthful promise. This was also a year for delightful
nonesuches (the New Vaudevillians Penn & Teller, Brenda Currin's ''Sister and
Miss Lexie,'' Shel Silverstein's ''Crate'') and for many other first-class
revivals to rival ''Iceman'': Noel Coward's ''Hay Fever,'' Peter Nichols's ''Joe
Egg,'' Eugene O'Neill's ''Strange Interlude,'' Athol Fugard's ''Blood Knot'' and
Lanford Wilson's ''Lemon Sky.''

The quality of acting in New York remains extravagantly high. Where else can one
watch Bernadette Peters, John Lithgow and Kate Nelligan squander their amazing
gifts on material like ''Song & Dance,'' ''Requiem for a Heavyweight'' and
''Virginia''? In December alone, there were outstanding performances by (among
many others) George Rose, Cleo Laine, Howard McGillin, Zakes Mokae, Jeff
Daniels, Jill Eikenberry, Rosemary Harris, Deborah Rush, Geraldine Page, Amanda
Plummer, Aidan Quinn, Uta Hagen, Sam Waterston and Mary Beth Hurt - actors of
several generations in plays by writers as diverse as Shaw and Shepard, Frayn
and Wilson. Yes, 1985 was a year during which merchandised spectacles rather
than plays were likely to flourish on Broadway. But it was also a year when
established and new theater artists alike insisted on reclaiming the stage as a
place for wonder all over town.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Matthew Broderick (Jay Thompson); Photos of Mary Beth Hurt,
Barbara Cook, Kathryn Pogson, Lily Tomlin and Jason Robards (NYT/Jim Wilson;
Martha Swope)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
MODERN MASTERS AND VIEWS OF WAR HELD CENTER STAGE

BYLINE: By Andy Grundberg

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1498 words


The major figure of 1985 in photography was Andre Kertesz, whose seven decades
of picture taking ended just as his achievements were being amply celebrated
with a major museum show. Having insisted for years that his work had never
received its due, Kertesz died while the exhibition, ''Andre Kertesz: Of Paris
and New York,'' was wending its way from the Art Institute of Chicago to the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. The show opened here two weeks ago and, like many an
Oscar-winning movie, it arrived just in time to garner honors as the year's
best.

''Of Paris and New York'' is great not only because it contains great pictures
(and there are at least two dozen classics in its ranks), but because it
presents Kertesz's central work in a way that lets us measure, for the first
time, the extent of his impact on 20th-century photography. Kertesz, it is
clear, had a natural eye for Cubist composition, and it served him well
throughout the period the exhibition covers, from the 1920's to the 50's. His
framing has a simplicity and sense of inevitability that stands in opposition to
the angled, Constructivist-inspired photography of the 20's and 30's, and his
naturalistic style can be seen as a precursor of much ''street'' photography.

''Of Paris and New York'' was assembled by David Travis of Chicago's Art
Institute and Weston Naef of the J. Paul Getty Museum, in collaboration with the
art historian Sandra S. Phillips. It will no doubt lead to a re-evaluation of
Kertesz's place in history - especially now that he is no longer able to supply
his own ''official'' version. But it seems likely, on the evidence, that we will
end up thinking more of his artistic contribution, not less. The show is at the
Met through Feb. 23 and should not be missed.

A second modern master of photography in the spotlight - one who bridges
Kertesz's lyric conception of the medium and 19th-century documentary practice -
was Eugene Atget. This year marked the end of the Museum of Modern Art's
four-part series of exhibitions and books on the turn-of-the-century Frenchman's
work, and the last two installments, seen together at the museum, were enough to
convince all but the most obdurate retinas of his consummate skill. Although he
lived and worked as a craftsman, dedicating himself to the project of recording
disappearing aspects of French life, what he accomplished is art. The
expressiveness of his lugubrious vision recalls Proust: It offers us consolation
for a past that cannot be reclaimed. The efforts of John Szarkowski and Maria
Morris Hambourg in assembling and comprehending Atget's work are now over (Mrs.
Hambourg has moved on to the Met), but what they showed us will not be soon
forgotten.

The calming sublimity of the Kertesz and Atget shows was made all the more
appealing by the year's most popular new discovery: war photography. The most
vivid assemblage of pictures of man's inhumanity to man, which appeared in the
fall at New York University's Grey Art Gallery, was ''The Indelible Image:
Photographs of War, 1846 to the Present.'' The pictures in the show, selected
with great skill by Frances Fralin of the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington,
spanned several gamuts: from empty battlefields to scenes of carnage, from
gruesome horrors to near-Surreal juxtapositions, from epic struggles to
peripheral incident. Their cumulative overall effect, however, was to leave this
viewer angry at such a repetitious waste of life - a feeling not often
encountered when looking at art.

Whether images intended to serve as news or documentation should be elevated to
the realm of art photography is itself a troubling question, more troubling in
some cases than in others. In that of Robert Capa, whose retrospective followed
on the heels of a show of Soviet World War II photographs at the International
Center of Photography, the claims to artistry seem out of sync with the pictures
themselves. Capa took a great many viscerally immediate pictures of war, many of
which required considerable courage, but for the most part they do not have the
staying power of pictures made to be seen on gallery walls in the first place.
The same could be said for the work of W. Eugene Smith and Carl Mydans, both of
whom photographed World War II and both of whom had major retrospectives this
fall. Like Capa, Smith and Mydans seem better suited to the printed page, where
the written word can put their images in context.

The Vietnam war photographs of Larry Burrows, on the other hand, stand on their
own - at least as they were presented last spring at the Laurence Miller
Gallery. Burrows, who was killed in combat in 1971, worked for Life magazine,
but unlike his predecessors he photographed war in color, a radical step in the
60's. The color and the foreign environment conspire to make one think of the
National Geographic, but whatever picturesque qualities the images have is
overwhelmed by the gut-wrenching reality of Burrows's subjects. Perhaps what
makes Burrows's record of Vietnam so affecting is that it pictorially organizes
the chaos of war while never losing the tension between actuality and its
two-dimensional transcription.

A second, less grisly trend was the increased attention being paid to
collectors. When Malcolm Forbes Jr. paid more than $100,000 at auction for a
single photograph of Lincoln, headlines were inevitable. But more significantly,
New York was host to exhibitions of the collections of Paul Walter (at the
Museum of Modern Art) and of Sam Wagstaff and Carlos Cruz (at the International
Center of Photography). This tendency of institutions to focus on collectors
instead of artists is ancient history in painting, drawing and sculpture
circles, and so it would seem to mark photography's growing maturity in terms of
its place in the museum and art market.

The most audacious and spectacular performance by a private collection, though,
belongs to the Gilman Paper Company and its curator, Pierre Apraxine, who have
published a massive, limited-edition book reproducing 200 of the best
masterworks owned by the Gilman firm. And what reproductions they are! The
plates were individually produced for printing by Richard Benson, a well-known
master craftsman of the offset process, using as many as six shades of ink. This
meticulous attention has resulted in exceptionally high-quality images, most of
which are the same size as the originals. Museums, libraries, schools and
collectors can now easily acquire a large slice of photography history, for
$2,500 a copy.

The cream of another leading collection appeared in ''Images of Excellence,'' a
traveling exhibition that appeared this summer at the IBM Gallery of Science and
Art. The collection was that of the International Museum of Photography at
George Eastman House in Rochester, and the show testified to its vast and
unequaled store of treasures from the medium's beginnings. The exhibition
arrived not long after the Eastman Kodak Company announced it was giving the
financially ailing museum a building worth some $13 million to endow its future.

Other shows of considerable impact and importance included ''L'Amour Fou,'' an
impressive compilation of European Surrealist photography tracked down by the
art historian Rosalind Krauss and the Corcoran curator Jane Livingston, and
Richard Avedon's ''In the American West,'' now appearing in New York at Pace and
Pace/ MacGill Galleries, and in Washington at the Corcoran Gallery. While
stopping shy of Surrealism, Avedon's portraits of people west of the Mississippi
seem more idiosyncratic than documentary - which, it turns out, is to the credit
of the pictures. In the West Avedon seems to have found a subject equal to his
ambitions.

Among the standout shows by younger artists were Cindy Sherman's self-portraits
(at Metro Pictures), now eerily mythic, and Jan Groover's new still lifes (at
Robert Miller), gorgeous black-and-white prints in which she demonstrated the
brash self-confidence of her earlier color images. That Miss Sherman can
continue to grow, unfazed by fame, and that Miss Groover can wage a protracted
formal struggle and emerge triumphant, testifies to the vitality of contemporary
photography. So do the impressive one-person debuts of Holly Roberts, Tina
Barney and Alan Belcher, who have nothing in common but promising futures.

Some of the most interesting new work this year was being done at the edges of
the medium. It ranged from Louise Lawler's conflation of slot-machine and
art-market machinery in ''Slides by Night,'' a three-projector slide show at
Metro Pictures that could only be seen after the gallery was closed, to Gretchen
Bender's ''Dumping Core,'' a complex video program alerting us to corporate-logo
overload. And the much-maligned Whitney Biennial offered slide shows by Nan
Goldin and Perry Hoberman (Hoberman's in 3-D) and Juan Downey's haunting
videotape ''Information Withheld.'' In all, it was a year that kept one's eyes
open, and one's mind as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Richar Avedon's photograph of a Texas factory worker

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PREJUDICE IS ONE OF ASIA'S MORE COMMON AFFLICTIONS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Call him Paul. He was born in Singapore about 20 years ago to a Filipino father
and a Chinese mother. He has always felt ''100 percent Singaporean'' and never
thought much about race, he said, until he visited India with an English friend.
''Everywhere we went,'' he said, ''they treated me like his servant. I said to
them: 'My skin is brown like yours. Why do you do this to me?' ''

Said a high-caste Bengali intellectual in Calcutta: ''We were lucky the British
were prejudiced colonizers. If there had been more intermarriage, it would have
destroyed the purity of our race and culture, not theirs.'' And a Thai teacher
interrupts a student describing Mexicans during a language exercise. ''So they
are not so dark as Africans,'' the teacher says. ''That's good. We don't like
black skin.''

Asians take pride in avoiding conflict and rejecting institutionalized bias. But
complicated currents of racial, ethnic and cultural animosity flow beneath the
surface, carrying an assortment of color prejudice, nationalist conflicts and
religious animosity. Occasionally, events or movements plumb these
undercurrents, with unsettling, even violent results. Two such factors, some
believe, may be Islamic radicalism and the rapid opening of China.

The Islamic revival has stirred only limited repercussions, although a worried
Malaysia is hastening to improve the fortunes of ethnic Malays, most of them
Moslems. China's economic takeoff may have wider effects. Neighbors ask if
Peking, with the help of overseas Chinese, will steamroller fragile economies
that are trying to make room for indigenous peoples. Overseas Chinese, for their
part, wonder if the anxieties implicit in such questioning could make their
position more precarious.

Chinese imperialism has been feared in Southeast Asia and the Pacific for
centuries, and Chinese minorities have long had to fend off accusations of local
disloyalty. The fears intensified after the 1949 Communist revolution, when
overseas Chinese, with Peking's help, supported guerrilla wars throughout the
region. After the insurgencies ended in the 1970's, diplomatic relations with
Peking improved, but overseas Chinese communities remained in jeopardy.

In Indonesia, thousands of ethnic Chinese were slaughtered by death squads after
the 1965 Communist coup attempt. The Chinese language is still banned. In
Vietnam, although Peking helped the Communists to victory, ethnic Chinese say
they have since been forced to flee discrimination and compulsory relocation.

In Malaysia, Chinese political and economic power has been curbed by law and
practice. ''We sort of have to laugh at our Prime Minister going to Commonwealth
meetings to attack South Africa for apartheid,'' said an ethnic Chinese mining
official in Kuala Lumpur. ''Here my identity card tells everyone I am Chinese.''
And throughout the region, Chinese are caricatured as compulsive workers and are
blamed for drug-dealing, prostitution and gambling.

The Chinese are the most visible minority, but many smaller ethnic communities
also resent their treatment. Indonesia, struggling to assimilate East Timor and
Irian Jaya, faces armed Melanesian and aboriginal separatists, who say they fear
attacks on their distinctive cultures by the Javanese-Muslim dominated society.
In Thailand, second-generation and even third-generation ethnic Vietnamese are
denied citizenship and certain educational rights. With more than 150,000 North
Vietnamese soldiers on the Thai-Cambodian border, Thai patience is thin. In
Malaysia's Sabah state, Kadazan Christians (and disaffected local Chinese)
recently ousted the Muslim-led state government. The election was an indication
that Borneo's tribal people had come of age politically and wanted power
reflecting their local majority.

In Japan, the majority sees itself as a homogeneous people who intuitively
understand each other, but there is discrimination against ethnic Koreans, many
of them born in Japan; 63,000 ethnic Chinese in Japan also complain of
discrimination, as do the people of the Ryukyu Islands, also known as Okinawa.
Another bias is directed against the Burakumin, native Japanese descended from a
caste once relegated (as were low-caste Indians) to ''unclean'' slaughtering and
tanning work. They sometimes try to conceal their identity, but employers and
prospective in-laws routinely hire detectives to seek out hints of Burakumin
antecedents.

Discrimination is outlawed in China, but its minorities remain ill at ease.
Peking is concerned about the dangers of racial or ethnic prejudice, and
(athough Tibetans will say otherwise) takes steps to suppress discrimination.
Leaders remember the Cultural Revolution when, in the name of ideology, zealots
persecuted minority and ''nationality'' members. In 1975, for example, Muslim
Hui people in Yunan province rebelled after indignities including the
destruction of mosques and forced marriages of their women to ethnic Han
Chinese. The Hui rebellion was suppressed with heavy losses of life. Later, the
new leadership blamed Wang Hungwen of the Maoist ''Gang of Four.''

In Singapore, which is more than three-quarters ethnic Chinese, Prime Minister
Lee Kuan Yew has rigorously attempted to prevent racial polarization in housing,
education and broadcasting. But he also freely attacks what he sees as the
corrosive influence of Western values and berates ethnic Indians for ''lacking
discipline.''

Australia, the South Pacific's largest ''Western'' country, also has
assimilation problems. Among the soul-searching about how and what to celebrate
at Australia's bicentennial, The Bulletin, a business magazine, proposed waiting
a century. A reader thereupon sent in a letter suggesting that in 100 years the
only thing remaining to celebrate may be ''the final handing over of this lucky
country to the Asians.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Charles Salzberg

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


F.N.G. By Donald Bodey. (Viking, $15.95.) In 1969, at the height of our
involvement in Vietnam, Gabe Sauers, a Cincinnati house painter, begins his tour
of duty in the central highlands province of Kontum, in the mountainous jungles
near the Cambodian border. His uniform is unsullied and he has yet to be issued
a weapon; he is an F.N.G., a new guy, and it is through his eyes that we
experience one year in the life of a foot soldier in Vietnam. In this hostile
world of mud, insects and lush overgrowth, amid the omnipresent sound of
gunfire, life is a constant battle not only against an enemy who remains mostly
unseen, but also against fear, boredom, loneliness, disease and the elements.
The struggle is simply to stay alive, sane and human. The day-to-day grind,
beautifully and touchingly rendered by Donald Bodey, himself a Vietnam veteran,
is told with an unrelenting accumulation of detail. The members of Two Squad
spend much of their time smoking dope, digging trenches for ''hooches,''
scratching jungle rot, trying to keep dry in a place where it rains much of the
time, counting days till they return to ''The World'' and occasionally
patrolling the jungle. Mr. Bodey writes in a straightforward, understated style,
nearly always managing to avoid cliches. His characters are flesh and blood, for
this is a first novel of survival unmarred by politics of the ''should we have
been there?'' variety. If the novel ends predictably, petering out with a
whimper rather than a bang, it's forgivable, for that is the way the war ended
too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION ON NEWSPRINT

BYLINE: By Robert Atwan; Robert Atwan will be the editor of a forthcoming annual
series, ''Best American Essays.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


THE AVAILABLE PRESS/PEN SHORT STORY COLLECTION With an introduction by Anne
Tyler. 502 pp. New York: Available Press/ Ballantine Books. Paper, $8.95.

THOUGH now almost exclusively connected to literary magazines, quality fiction
once had a vital attachment to American journalism.

Newspapers not only regularly published the stories of Edgar Allan Poe, Bret
Harte, Mark Twain, Henry James and Stephen Crane (''The Red Badge of Courage''
first appeared in syndication), but also nurtured such writers as Theodore
Dreiser and Ernest Hemingway. By the mid-20th century, however, fiction and
newspapers began to go their separate ways. The reasons may have been strictly
economic, though it is possible that - as Philip Roth pointed out some time ago
- the inventions of the contemporary writer could no longer compete with the
horrors and absurdities of the daily news.

Recently, the PEN American Center (one of 80 centers that make up PEN, the
international association of literary writers, editors and translators) made a
concerted effort to reunite the short story and the American newspaper. With
support from the National Endowment for the Arts as well as various foundations
and corporations, it set up the PEN Syndicated Fiction Project in 1982 as a
noncommercial venture. Each year a panel selects nearly 100 stories from a
national competition and then syndicates them in participating newspapers. ''The
Available Press/Pen Short Story Collection'' is a hefty book presenting the
initial winners - 82 stories, selected by Ann Beattie, Robert Stone, Russell
Baker, Kurt Vonnegut and Anne Tyler. Miss Tyler's brief introduction
affectionately sends the stories off on their second publishing adventure.

In screening for newspapers, this panel clearly had to choose material of
suitable length and appropriate subject matter. Thus, nearly all of the stories
are quite short and many stay comfortably inside the bounds of everyday realism.
Still, a few playful and lyrical exceptions, such as ''Light Sleeper'' by
Charles H. Clifton and ''The Hermit Journals IX'' by Jack Driscoll, contribute
to stylistic variety.

As Miss Tyler observes of the stories she read as a panelist, the overall
impression of this volume is that of ''family members galore in every possible
configuration.'' Surely the family - or what's left of it - is the primary
social theme of our time. That should come as no surprise, since the American
family appears to be disintegrating faster than the census can record.
Separation, divorce and desertion haunt this volume, unintentionally supplying
it with a unifying theme.

Two fine stories resist this epidemic of uncoupling with a surprising acceptance
of older, less egocentric values. In ''The Bigamist'' by Nancy A. Potter, a
hardheaded nurse allows herself to be courted by a ''womanizing'' elderly
patient who ''can't stand being unmarried.'' In Irene Wanner's ''Ozzie and
Harriet,'' a woman - acutely aware of how private dreams tear marriages apart -
cautiously comes to terms with the once laughable 1950's ideal of a ''square''
home-loving couple. These stories, like '' 'It Got Smashed' '' by Raymond H.
Abbott and ''The Hijacking'' by David Ray, push against tidy formulations of
character and incident. Yet too many stories depend on predictable
characterization. Stereotypes abound: in the short story -as on television - a
Vietnam veteran must be emotionally disturbed; an academic husband cold and
pedantic; children wise beyond their years; government officials soulless and
obstructive; supersensitive women unhappy with men and unhappy without them. M
ANY of the stories conspicuously lack a strong central action - what Flannery
O'Connor meant by ''an action that is totally unexpected, yet totally
believable.'' Judging from this volume, the American short story is becoming
increasingly full of talk. Jonathan Penner's ''This Is My Voice'' provides an
entertaining, parodic response to this trend. As plot, structure, atmosphere and
climax -those standard textbook ingredients - give way to narrative voice as the
main element of short fiction, literary criticism may soon start taking a cue
from Erving Goffman's sociological analysis of everyday talk.

There is one very puzzling story in the collection -the story behind the volume
itself. Is this collection the first in a series? Will it be an annual? Did
every story here make it into a newspaper? And which newspapers participated in
the venture? Why are we told so little about the process of selection, the
newspapers involved and the contributors (the book contains no biographical
information)? Ambiguity has its place in the fiction, but why are we left
guessing about the book's apparatus? If the Syndicated Fiction Project is to
become - as the anonymous preface suggests - the ''Pulitzer Prize for the short
story,'' perhaps subsequent collections will make such basic information more
available.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TERROR IN 1985: BRUTAL ATTACKS, TOUGH RESPONSE

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3962 words


As a year of hijackings, kidnappings, car bombings and murder draws to a close,
reports from correspondents of The New York Times around the world indicate that
governments have hardened their attitudes and toughened security measures
against a growing plague of terrorism.

Across Europe and the Middle East, where terrorists in 1985 struck more often
and more brutally than in years past, governments have adopted new laws, ordered
tighter defenses and forged new links of international cooperation to exchange
information, catch and prosecute terrorists, and isolate nations that support
them.

Even Italy and Austria, which have long been sympathetic to Palestinian and Arab
causes, on Friday found their airports the targets of men with links to
Palestinians, and officials' responses showed they were embarrassed.

Britain's Tough Measures

Britain, which uses tough measures to suppress Northern Ireland violence that
have led to more violence, agreed last fall to give the Irish Republic a voice
in the affairs of Northern Ireland.

France, where violence by leftist radicals has sharply increased in the past
year, has made little progress in trying to track terrorists and is considering
a range of tougher measures -including more police powers to infiltrate
terrorist groups, even if these encroach upon traditional freedoms.

Israel, which has heavy antiterrorist security, found it harder in 1985 to
retaliate against Palestinian terrorists. Some experts say Israel, which
scattered the Palestinians when it destroyed their sanctuary in Lebanon several
years ago, may have to resume using its tactics of the 1970's, when Mossad hit
teams sought terrorists.

Though many American citizens abroad have been attacked by terrorists in the
last year, the United States has been spared from major violence, partly because
of its own security measures and partly because targets overseas have presumably
been seen by terrorists as easier marks.

After years of relative immunity, the Soviet Union, which has long backed
Palestinian aspirations and countries that aid terrorists, found itself a victim
in 1985 when terrorists kidnapped four Soviet Embassy workers in Beirut and
killed one of them. Moscow and other Soviet-bloc countries, in response, seemed
to edge away from their past tolerance toward terrorist groups, calling for
severe punishment for them.

Though the Soviet Union has not backed away from Libya and Syria, which support
terrorists, or from the Palestine Liberation Organization, there have been
reports that Soviet and American officials have begun to share information about
terrorism in an effort to combat attacks.

Further evidence of the hardening Soviet-bloc attitudes toward terrorism came at
the United Nations on Dec. 9, when the General Assembly, which has 159 members,
unanimously adopted a resolution condemning all international terrorism as
criminal.

Cuba Joins in Vote

''It is an important resolution - we support it all the way and
wholeheartedly,'' said Oleg A. Troyanovsky, the chief Soviet delegate. Even
Cuba, which had cast the sole vote against the resolution in the Assembly's
legal committee, switched at the last minute in the full Assembly vote.

Though the United Nations vote was no more than a moral commitment, it ended
more than 13 years of bitter debate over the issue and underscored a growing
attitude of revulsion against terrorism in a year in which, according to State
Department figures, there were more than 690 major terrorist attacks around the
world.

While there is no easy way to quantify terrorism and compare it with that in
years past, interviews with government officials and terrorism experts in a
score of countries around the world over the weekend indicated that 1985 was one
of the most active, lethal and brutal times of terrorism in years.

Children were killed. An elderly New York City man in a wheelchair was shot and
hurled into the Mediterranean. There were murders without demands by some
terrorists, and some bombings for which no group took responsibility.

Many Faces of Terror

There were acts of terrorism in Europe, the Middle East, Central and South
America and other parts of the world in the name of various Palestinian
factions, the Irish Republican Army, anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua, Sikhs
in India, Islamic fundamentalists, Basque separatists and others.

In March, 80 people were killed in a car bomb in Beirut. In June, an American
Navy diver was slain and hostages were held for two weeks by hijackers of a
Trans World Airlines jet that had just left the Athens airport, and gunmen in
San Salvador killed 13 people in a cafe.

In August, a car bomb killed 50 people in Beirut. In September, 39 people were
wounded in a grenade attack on a cafe in Rome. In October, gunmen seized an
Italian cruise ship, the Achille Lauro, and shot Leon Klinghoffer, the New York
man in a wheelchair.

In November, rebels in Bogota, Colombia, seized a court building and 95 people,
including 11 Supreme Court Justices, were killed; later that month, an Egyptair
plane was hijacked and 60 of the 98 people on the jet were killed during the
hijacking and the storming of the plane.

Death Toll in Hundreds

The year's toll of hundreds killed and thousands wounded was capped last Friday
by attacks on crowds near El Al Israel Airlines check-in counters at airports in
Rome and Vienna. The attacks seemed to symbolize much of the year's terrorism:
shocking, brutal, with innocent people slain.

They also reflected the difficulties of providing effective security at public
places like airports, which can hardly prevent incursions by trained, determined
terrorists willing to die for a cause.

Nonetheless, governments around the world have toughened security measures and,
according to experts, terrorists have responded in the past year with new
tactics and strategies. Instead of directly attacking security-minded foes like
Israel, for example, Palestinians have attacked softer Israeli targets in Italy,
Austria and elsewhere.

A Year of Growing Terror

Moreover, in 1985 terrorists also made more lethal bombs, struck more frequently
and tried to kill larger numbers of people in the belief that these tactics
would more forcefully express their own grievances and inflict greater
psychological shocks on a public that seems to be growing inured to minor acts
of terrorism.

''With one or two people being killed by terrorist bombs every week,'' said
Ariel Merari, a terrorism expert at Tel Aviv University, ''terrorists feel they
need to kill more people to get the same amount of attention. The public is not
so easily shocked as before. Today, you have to kill a lot of people to shock
the public.''

Claus Walter Herbertz, one of West Germany's leading academic authorities on
terrorism, also said he has observed a growing quiescence of public opinion in
response to the rising level of violence, as if people were becoming hardened to
the horrors of terrorism.

''I believe it is a new normality,'' Mr. Herbertz said. ''It is cruel and
abnormal, but it is normality. The German public is very strongly used to it.''

Israel

Israeli officials said 1985 marked the re-emergence of the P.L.O., which had
been destroyed as a conventional military force and crippled as a guerrilla
movement when it was ousted from Lebanon and scattered throughout the Middle
East in August 1982.

In the last year, at least 12 Israelis were killed by Palestinian attackers.
Palestinian guerrillas were involved in 38 attacks in Israel or on Israelis in
Europe in the first nine months of 1985, more than double the 1984 total for the
same period, Israeli officials said.

Israeli officials say that, despite his disavowals, Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O.
chairman, sanctioned many of these attacks, while rival and dissident
Palestinian groups were responsible for others, seeking to embarrass him or
destroy peace initiatives.

The policy of blaming Mr. Arafat appears to be based partly on the belief that
he is behind many of the attacks. It is also the result of a general effort to
discredit him at a critical time in the Middle East peace process.

Meanwhile, the Israelis have found it increasingly difficult to retaliate for
Palestinian attacks. Experts on terrorism said the Israeli bombing of the P.L.O.
headquarters near Tunis last fall was an act of desperation that had little
effect on Palestinian violence and provoked an outcry by other nations.

With nations like Syria, Libya and Iran accused of clandestinely providing
terrorists with weapons, training and sanctuary, Israeli officials feel they
will have to make it clear that such nations will be held responsible for their
clients' actions.

Britain

The Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has taken a hard line on
terrorism, warning that no prisoners would be released, no statements made, no
hijacked airliners allowed to take off and no other concessions made in response
to terrorists' demands.

The Prime Minister has also appealed to news organizations to ''deprive
terrorists of the oxygen of publicity,'' but beyond appeals for restraint, the
Government has not tried to invoke censorship or employ coercion.

The Irish Republican Army is the Government's main worry. The organization says
it has killed 23 policemen this year; there have been bomb and mortar attacks on
six police stations since Dec. 5.

Britain's decision last fall to give the Irish Republic a voice in Northern
Ireland's affairs is partly an effort to starve the I.R.A. of local support and
to improve security in a region where harsh measures have angered many
nationalists.

The measures include the use of plastic bullets and undercover units, trial
without jury, the use of uncorroborated testimony of paid informers, and the
Emergency Powers Act and the Prevention of Terrorism Act, under which suspects
can be held for a week without charges.

Britain has tight controls on Irish flights at airports. Travelers to and from
Ireland and Northern Ireland must file information about the purpose and
duration of their trips and where they will stay; all passengers, even children,
undergo body searches; and luggage is hand-searched as well as X-rayed.

Douglas Hurd, the former Northern Ireland Secretary who is now Home Secretary,
recently called for all countries to refuse substantive concessions to terrorist
demands, for exchanges of information on terrorists and for cooperation in
apprehending and prosecuting terrorists.

France

Direct Action, a radical leftist group, says it has conducted 20 terrorist
attacks this year, including the bombing of the Marks & Spencer department store
in Paris. Yet not a single suspect has been arrested. There also has been no
progress in private and Government efforts to free four French hostages held for
many months, apparently by pro-Iranian extremists in Lebanon.

There is a widespread sense of anger and frustration, and a belief that the
standard security methods are no longer effective against terrorists.

''Is there ever among these fanatics who fire without shame on innocent people -
on women, on children -someone who asks himself if the struggle to which he is
devoted can justify in any way this madness?'' Le Monde asked over the weekend.

And Le Figaro, in a front-page editoral, called for tough new measures,
including greater powers for the police to infiltrate terrorist groups, even if
these measures encroached on traditional freedoms. Apparently the government was
already considering such steps.

Francois le Mouel, head of the French Antiterrorist Coordination Unit, in a
confidential memo that found its way into the press recently, complained that
the police had virtually no informers or other sources to infiltrate terrorist
groups.

He proposed greater use of telephone wiretaps, the reintroduction of hotel
security cards for security checks, new procedures for admitting visitors from
the Middle East, detention of suspects for up to four days for questioning
without filing charges and more use of technology to process information on
suspected terrorists.

''We will certainly have to find a difficult balance,'' he wrote, ''between our
principles of liberty and certain security measures which could impinge on
them.''

Italy

Defense Minister Giovanni Spadolini said he believed Italy was faced with a new
generation of Mediterranean terrorists, whose goal is ''to strike at the heart
of countries favorable to negotiations in the Middle East.''

Though no stranger to terrorism -the Red Brigades and other radical groups
created chaos for years - Italy has long been relatively free from Arab
violence, in part because of its friendliness to the P.L.O. and its
understanding for the Palestinian cause.

But the Government of Prime Minister Bettino Craxi has, with Western allies,
tried to involve the Palestinians in a new process of trying to negotiate peace
in the Middle East.

Italy, however, has become a virtual playground for Arab terrorists. A
Palestinian was charged in connection with a bombing on the Via Veneto in
September. Jordanian and British airline offices in Italy were attacked by
terrorists. Palestinians have been accused of the hijacking of the Achille
Lauro. After American jets forced the Egyptian plane carrying those Palestinians
to land in Italy, the United States criticized Italy for letting Mohammed Abbas,
the man Washington accuses of being the mastermind of the affair, go free. One
gunman who survived the attack at Leonardo da Vinci Airport on Friday carried a
note indicating he was a member of a renegade Palestinian group.

Italian officials complain that their intelligence services are lax about
terrorists, and some critics contend that in Italy there is a certain tolerance
toward terrorists. Italy does not harbor terrorists, though Interior Minister
Luigi Scalfaro conceded that there are hundreds of thousands of Arab nationals
in Italy whose movements the Government does not monitor.

West Germany

West Germany, which was shaken in the late 1970's by acts of terrorism carried
out by the Red Army Faction, has had fewer such incidents in recent years. West
German officials say this is partly because terrorists have not been well
organized and partly because the West Germany, with its efficient tracking of
all citizens, makes life difficult for terrorists on the run.

Despite the best West German efforts, terrorism continues, including the slaying
of a prominent industrialist in Munich in February and a bombing at the
Rhein-Main Air Base in August that killed 2 Americans and wounded 20. The Red
Army Faction took responsibility for both attacks. In addition, a bombing last
month at a United States Army post in Frankfurt wounded 35 people; the Abu Nidal
group, a renegade Palestinian faction, is suspected of involvement in that
attack.

Austria

In 1979, Austria became the first Western country to recognize the P.L.O.
Chancellor Bruno Kreisky sought to mediate in several Middle East peace
initiatives, as well as helping to arrange a prisoner exchange between Israel
and Syria last summer.

Despite Austria's relatively sympathetic position on Arab issues, though, Arab
terrorists hijacked a train carrying Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union in
1973, forcing Austria to cut its role as an immigration transit point. In 1975
terrorists took hostage several oil ministers from Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries nations, and in 1981 Heinz Nittel, president of the
Austria-Israel Society, was assassinated in Vienna.

Some diplomats in Vienna believe Austria's stance on Arab issues makes it
vulnerable to terrorist attacks, as Arab factions bent on using violence to
sabotage Middle East peace moves find it relatively easy to enter and leave.

Spain

Spain, which has seen nearly 500 people killed since 1968 and 36 killings this
year alone in violence related to the Basque separatist movement, has a tough
law that allows terrorism suspects to be held for 10 days without a court
appearance. Basque terrorism does appear to be declining.

The Socialist Government of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez has sought to rebut
charges that it is soft on terrorism. Mr. Gonzalez has negotiated an agreement
with France to deny Basque terrorists safe haven, and during the T.W.A.
hijacking last summer, Spain refused to give in to a demand to free two Shiite
Moslem militiamen that were being held by Spain.

Soviet Union

This year, after years of relative immunity to terrorism, the Soviet Union found
itself a target and seemed to edge away from its past tolerance of, if not
outright support for, terrorist groups. The turning point was in September, when
terrorists kidnapped four Soviet Embassy employees in Beirut and later killed
one of them.

On Oct. 9, hundreds of Soviet Foreign Ministry employees left work to attend a
memorial for Arkady Katakov, the Beirut embassy secretary who was slain. The
three others were released unharmed.

Further signs of a shift came two days after the memorial service when the
Soviet press agency Tass, reporting the killing of Mr. Klinghoffer aboard the
Achille Lauro, described American anger as ''understandable and just.''

''The crimes of terrorists, no matter where they are committed, must be punished
most severely, and such severity must be shown unfailingly to all perpetrators
of such crimes,'' Tass said.

The kidnapping of the Russians was also believed to have helped change the
Soviet attitude - and that of many of its allies - on the United Nations
resolution on terrorism.

Whether the change in the Soviet Union's public statements about terrorism will
mean a change in its policies remains to be seen. If support for Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, constitutes support for terrorism, as the Reagan
Administration contends, then Moscow showed little concern when it welcomed him
in October. Nor has the Soviet Union backed away from the P.L.O. or Syria.

Nicaragua

Nicaragua is a center of the global debate over terrorism. Both sides -the
Government and the United States-backed rebels - call their enemies terrorists.

Rebel units in Nicaragua have burned down scores of health centers, schools and
other public buildings. They have been accused of many kidnappings, rapes and
murders, and President Daniel Ortega Saavedra has denounced these at every
opportunity, saying the United States is responsible because it supports the
rebels.

During its 20-year struggle to gain power, which finally succeeded in 1979, the
Sandinista Front staged dozens of robberies, hijacked airplanes, and seized or
killed members of the National Guard who were implicated in incidents of
torture. President Ortega himself served seven years in prison for a bank
robbery in which a guard was killed.

The Sandinista Government says it never commited random assaults like those at
the Rome and Vienna airports Friday. It contends that its operations, as a
guerrilla movement before coming to power, were all of a political nature, not
terrorism, because they did not victimize innocent civilians.

The Reagan Administration has repeatedly pointed to the solidarity between the
Sandinistas and leftist rebels in other countries as proof that Managua has
become a haven for terrorists. The Sandinistas say their Government is the
victim, not the perpetrator, of terrorism.

Canada

Canada has always sided with the United States in condemning terrorism, but its
citizens have long believed themselves immune from, or at least far distant
from, terrorist strikes. That changed this year.

In June, an Air-India flight from Toronto crashed in the Irish Sea, killing all
329 people on board. While the cause of the disaster has yet to be officially
established, there has been speculation that Sikh extremists planted a bomb on
board. On the same day, a bomb exploded in the luggage of another airliner that
had flown from Canada to Narita International Airport near Tokyo, killing two
baggage handlers.

In November, a Canadian woman and her 16-month-old son were among 60 people
killed when Egyptian commandos stormed the hijacked Egyptian jet in Malta.

Since June, the Canadian Government has tightened security at all major
airports, and before Christmas it issued a general warning to travelers to look
out for suspicious persons and luggage at airports.

South Africa

South Africa's white rulers see themselves as a target of a terror campaign by
the outlawed and exiled African National Congress, which they call part of a
wider Soviet conspiracy against nations with Western values.

But critics contend that the South African Government itself exports terrorism
with across-the-border raids on insurgent bases in neighboring countries, and by
sponsoring anti-Government rebels in Angola and elsewhere.

Like Israel, with which it is said to maintain clandestine military and
intelligence ties, South Africa considers itself justified in attacking foes
beyond its borders.

Also, a bomb at a shopping mall in Amanzimtoti, south of Durban, recently killed
five whites. The African National Congress has warned that more civilians may
die. ''The distinction between soft and hard targets will disappear and innocent
people will get killed,'' said Oliver Tambo, the Congress's leader.

China

China's has condemned terrorism, and it not only voted for the United Nations
resolution of condemnation, but also offered a four-point program for fighting
terrorism. During the years of Mao Zedong, the Government applauded Palestinian
terrorist attacks.

Today, China, a staunch Palestinian supporter, trains P.L.O. fighters, and gives
the P.L.O. weapons. The aid is apparently limited to Mr. Arafat's faction. Mr.
Arafat himself was received in Peking in May with honors usually accorded to
heads of state.

For all its support of Palestinians, though, diplomats say Peking opposes to
indiscriminate violence.

Japan

Japan has been slow to criticize terrorism when it is carried out by
Palestinians or any Arab group, but when Israel has conducted reprisals Japan
has been swift to denounce them.

This apparently does not reflect a soft attitude on terrorism, but rather the
need of a nation starved for oil to avoid offending the Arab world.

Japan has also been far removed from terrorist events. In the 1970's, the
Japanese Red Army conducted several actions, including one at Lod Airport in
Israel in 1972 in which 26 people were killed.

But the group has been dormant for a decade and the only trouble in Japan lately
has been attributed to a group that took responsibility for knocking out public
rail service in Tokyo and Osaka on Nov. 29.

The Philippines

The Philippines takes a hard line on terrorism and an aggressive approach to
several insurgencies.

These include the Communist New People's Army, which has attacked military and
police installations and slain provincial officials; the Moslem Moro National
Liberation Front on the southern island of Mindanao, which has staged
kidnappings and bombings, and the April 6 Movement, which has set off bombs and
set fire to hotels.

Some moderate politicians who oppose the Marcos Government, while not generally
condoning terrorism, have expressed sympathy for the social problems that have
led desperate people to commit violence.

Southeast Asia

Organized terrorism has not threatened the stability of most of the nations of
Southeast Asia in recent years.

Burmese separatists known as Karens have blown up several trains this year,
killing about 100 people.

It is hard to assess events in the Communist nations of Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam, but it is known that Soviet or Eastern European advisers have been
assassinated in Laos and Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday with an article about the history of terrorism in
1985 incorrectly described a June attack in San Salvador. The 13 deaths there
occurred not in an explosion but in firing by gunmen at a cafe.

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DISSIDENTS CLAIMING CONTROL OF CAMBODIA GUERRILLA GROUP

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 479 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 29


A breakaway group trying to seize control of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, the larger of two non-Communist groups fighting to oust the
Vietnamese from Cambodia, says it now controls the organization's civilian
border camps as well as its army.

On the Thai-Cambodian border, there have been no reported changes in the
administration of the civilian exile settlements, where more than 120,000
supporters of the group live under Thai jurisdiction. But several Cambodian camp
administrators have said they would not welcome a visit from Son Sann, the
Liberation Front's president, who is being criticized by the dissidents but has
considerable civilian support in the settlements.

Congressman Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the
House subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, is due to visit the group's Site 2
camp early in January.

In an interview Friday, three leaders of the breakaway faction said they not
only controlled access to the border but had also taken complete charge of the
front's military affairs. They said they were ready to discuss closer
cooperation with the forces of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer Rouge, the
Communist anit-Vietnamese force, to wage a more effective fight against
Vietnamese troops and those of the Government it installed in Phnom Penh nearly
seven years ago.

Groups Allied Politically

The Liberation Front, the Sihanouk group and the Khmer Rouge have been allied
politically for three years in a loose federation known as the Coalition
Government of Democratic Kampuchea. But more integration of the guerrilla armies
has met with opposition in all camps, and there have been armed clashes among
them.

''The situation in Cambodia is becoming ripe for insurrection,'' Abdul Gaffar
Peang Meth, a spokesman for the breakaway group of the Liberation Front said.
''We have to push as many troops as possible inside.''

Mr. Gaffar was joined in the interview by Col. Chak Bory, the front's logisitics
officer and a member of military steering committee, and Huy Kanthoul, a former
Cambodian Prime Minister, who recently arrived from retirement in Paris to join
in the challenge to Mr. Son Sann.

The three dissidents are part of a group calling itself the Provisional
Committee of Salvation of the Liberation Front. They charged in the interview
that Mr. Sonn Sann, a former Cambodian Prime Minister, had been acting
''dictatorially'' over the last year, and had threatened the democratic
functioning of the front.

The group's more specific complaints indicate that the breakaway fighters want a
clearer mandate to pursue the guerrilla war without political interference, and
that they bridle under Mr. Son Sann's efforts to oversee their activities.

Gen. Sak Sutsakhan, the front's military commander, is leading the opposition to
Mr. Son Sann as chairman of the new committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHWEST JOURNAL;
IN TEXAS, MONKEYS GREW BIG

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


Lou Griffin of Dilley, Tex., is losing her lease and is looking for a home for
346 monkeys. Although the monkeys are from Japan - they are Japanese snow
monkeys, which have lived around temples in the mountains near Kyoto for
centuries - she says they are now Texan to the core.

Since the monkeys were brought from Japan to Texas in 1972, Miss Griffin says,
they have learned to eat cactus, mesquite and watermelon, and to steer clear of
bobcats, coyotes and rattlesnakes.

She also says there are indications that monkeys born in Texas will grow bigger
than those that grew up in Japan, but the Japanese monkeys are ''more
socialized,'' which may mean they are more polite. A ''twin'' troop of snow
monkeys still live in Japan for comparison with the Texas monkeys. The monkeys
in Japan, native to the cool reaches of the mountain Arashiyama, do not sweat.
The Texas monkeys do. They have also invented a warning cry for ''rattlesnake,''
according to Miss Griffin.

Miss Griffin is director of the Arashiyama West Primate Center at Dilley and
thus the legal guardian of the monkeys. The center, she says, is not a
traditional laboratory, nor is it a zoo or a game preserve. It is a
''naturalistic lab'' of 60 acres, over which the monkeys roam more or less free,
while the center's researchers add to the three decades of background data and
family histories collected since before the monkeys came to Texas.

The center, which is affiliated with a Japanese research group, is a nonprofit
research organization supported by private donations, chiefly from individuals
who ''adopt'' a monkey for an annual fee. The monkeys are made available to
behavioral researchers from such universities as the University of the Texas and
the University of Wisconsin.

Now, forced to move, Miss Griffin is searching for a new habitat, which she
hopes will be in Texas, and the $30,000 or so it will take to move the 13
extended families that make up the troop.

It does not require genius in marketing to determine that selling money at a
discount - offering dollar bills at 75 cents apiece, for example - is likely to
generate brisk sales.

It does not, on the other hand, seem the best way to turn a profit.

Why, then, would a Houston company offer to do more or less the same thing by
selling 22-cent postage stamps for 17 cents?

The answer, says Rob McDonald, who is one of the directors of American Discount
Stamps, is that it's good advertising.

The company takes an ordinary 22-cent stamp and affixes it to a 2-by-3-inch
swatch of gummed paper that carries an advertising message.

The mailer affixes the whole thing to his letter. The recipient thus gets not
only the letter, but a plug to buy Brand X. The advertiser, of course, picks up
the nickel difference, and pays American Discount Stamps a fee for producing the
package, likely to be sold to the public in 20-stamp books at $3.40 each.

Mr. McDonald reports considerable interest in the venture from potential
advertisers, including the Dallas-based Southland Corporation, which is
considering test-marketing the cut-rate stamps in about a third of its 7,500
7-Eleven stores.

American Discount Stamps is also toying with gimmicks like prize promotions, in
which a person who receives a letter scratches off a patch of ink to find out if
he's a winner, or even a ''scratch-and-sniff'' version, in which the recipient
would get a whiff of, say, pepperoni, and immediately run out to buy a pizza.

The Postal Service sees no problems, and Mr. McDonald says, ''It's a brand-new
company with a brand-new concept.''

It is an odd sort of nightclub, even for Houston, where urban cowpokes are used
to doing things like riding mechanical bulls and drinking with their hats on.

It is called Rambose, and it is described as the city's first paramilitary
nightclub. The name is a variant of ''Rambo,'' the movie, designed to avoid
copyright problems.

A grenade launcher dangles from the ceiling where a Californian would hang a
fern. A jeep outside the entrance has a 50-caliber machine gun mounted on it.
Inside are sandbagged bunkers and a M*A*S*H hospital unit for the wounded and
the snakebitten. There's also an R & R section with pool tables for the troops.
The waitresses wear bandoliers and signs warn of the dangers of ''rambush'' in
the on-premises jungle. The roar of jet engines pulses from the sound system and
puffs of smoke erupt on the dance floor.

A thousand to 1,500 patrons, many dressed in battle fatigues, invade the place
nightly to join in such frolic as rude salutes to the Soviet Union, Fidel
Castro, China or Nicaragua.

''It's patriotism,'' maintains the manager, Larry Dubose, a Vietnam veteran who
hands out American flags to the first 500 or so patrons each night. ''It's
pro-American. Rambo is our new John Wayne.''

Patrons, he says, are of all types, although he concedes that there are few
foreigners and that a lot of the men in battle fatigues on the dance floor have
worn them before.

''We get regulars,'' he said. ''Customers donate military stuff to us,'' like
the guy who just happened to have a grenade launcher lying around the house.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANGAR PLAQUE HONORS C.I.A.'S AIR OPERATIVE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Dec. 29


The anonymity that George A. Doole Jr. cultivated in life very nearly followed
him to the grave.

Mr. Doole founded the Central Intelligence Agency's network of covert air
operations, including Air America, Air Asia, Civil Air Transport and several
subsidiaries such as Intermountain Aviation and Southern Air Transport.

In peak periods in the Vietnam War years, Mr. Doole's air operations are said to
have employed 23,000 people, more than the parent agency's estimated 18,000
employees worldwide.

Mr. Doole died of cancer last March 9 in Washington Hospital Center in the
District of Columbia. He was 75 years old and unmarried. His death went largely
unnoticed. Private family services were held in Liberty, Ill.

Plaque on Remote Hangar

Today a bronze plaque on the wall of a new 60,000-square-foot hangar at a remote
airport in the central Arizona desert is the only permanent public
acknowledgment of Mr. Doole's connections over more than 20 years with the
intelligence agency.

The $3 million hangar was built by Evergreen International Aviation at Pinal Air
Park near the town of Marana, Ariz., midway between Phoenix and Tucson and far
from the interstate highway connecting the cities.

The huge airfield was built and operated by the C.I.A. It is now owned by Pinal
County and serves as a storage facility for 60 surplus civilian jetliners, as
well as a maintenance center for Evergreen, which is one of the world's largest
jet aircraft-leasing concerns.

Mr. Doole was on Evergreen's board of directors at the time of his death, and
was a consultant to Evergreen as well as having other aviation interests. The
plaque acknowledges that among his aviation achievements he was ''founder, chief
executive officer, board of directors of Air America Inc., Air Asia Company
Ltd., Civil Air Transport Company Ltd.''

The Mystery Lingers

Although Mr. Doole's connections with the C.I.A. and his role in founding the
agency's air operations have been documented in books and by Congressional
reports, the C.I.A. does not acknowledge the relationship.

According to a spokesman at the agency's headquarters at Langley, Va., Mr.
Doole's name is not listed on any official file.

However, Richard Helms, a former Director of Central Intelligence, said of Mr.
Doole: ''He was very competent at his job. He had a passion for anonymity. It
was a difficult job he handled without fanfare. And nobody had done it before.''

Mr. Doole retired from intelligence work in 1971.

A large quiet man with a pixie sense of humor, Mr. Doole interrupted a new
career as a pilot with Pan American World Airways in the 1930's to obtain a
master's degree in business administration at Harvard University.

Early Days at Pan American

He returned to Pan American, where he became a master pilot, and helped chart
new routes through South America.

In the late 1940's he left Pan American to begin his long career in intelligence
activities. In 1950, he chartered the Pacific Corporation in Delaware. It was
the parent company to the airlines Mr. Doole would later create.

Air America and Air Asia, the best known of the operations, concentrated their
activities in Southeast Asia. Nearly 200 aircraft of all sizes were used for
hauling personnel and materiel in several countries, including Laos.

At one point, Mr. Doole was able to make a profit for the agency by acquiring
civilian freight contracts to help maintain deception about the real purpose of
the operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Reports Chinese Raids

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 29


Hanoi said today that Chinese troops backed by a heavy artillery barrage had
crossed into Vietnam and battled with local villagers. The official Vietnamese
News Agency, monitored in Hong Kong, said that Chinese artillery fired thousands
of rounds yesterday into the northern provinces of Tinh Quang Ninh, Cao Bang and
Vi Xuyen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1985, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ANN BEATTIE'S LIFE AFTER REAL ESTATE

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words


On a cold Chelsea morning, Ann Beattie is sitting in the brownstone basement
apartment of a friend, around the corner from where she used to live. A little
more than a year ago, Miss Beattie decided to leave New York and move to
Charlottesville, Va.

''I got tired of talking about real estate,'' she says. ''All conversations in
New York center on real estate. People talk about whether or not their buildings
will be co-oped or condoed and if so what the buyer's credits will be, and where
to buy land and what things cost per square foot and what the variable mortgage
payments are. It is a constant, boring, hysterical subject, and I just felt that
I could not spend the rest of my life listening to people talk about real
estate.''

Miss Beattie has been busy since she moved to Charlottesville, where she taught
at the University of Virginia in 1975. Her most recent novel, ''Love Always,''
was published this year. She has just sold a short story to The New Yorker, and
a collection of some of her recent stories will come out next fall. A children's
book she wrote, ''Spectacles,'' was just published by Workman as one of the
first two in a new series of works for young readers by well-known authors (the
other is by William F. Buckley). And she is working on a book for Abrams about
the contemporary artist Alex Katz - she will do the text - her reason for coming
to town.

The 38-year-old Miss Beattie has often been called the pre-eminent chronicler of
the post-60's generation - and she is sick and tired of being called the
pre-eminent chronicler of the post-60's generation.

''I do not wish to be a spokesperson for my generation,'' she says. ''I write
about a small group of people -yes, sure, I mean it in some ways to have larger
implications - but I can't say something as general as that I think everybody's
the same, everybody suffers the same, basically it all comes down to the same. I
don't think that.''

'The Price People Pay'

Her characters have been variously described as shallow, egocentric,
narcissistic, selfish. It has been said that they lack compassion and avoid
commitments and relationships - that they know something vital is missing from
their lives but they are not certain what it is.

''They are suffering,'' Miss Beattie says. ''They are suffering.''

''I'm interested in the price people pay,'' she says, ''rather than in the ones
who get through perfectly fine with what they've decided on. As an artist, I'm
interested in looking at the edges and seeing if they're unraveling, if they're
coming apart. I'm interested in people who ostensibly do have some kind of
secure world - my characters are largely employed, largely live together or are
married, often have children - on some level they are certainly leading
conventional lives. And they're certainly not doing so well at that. Well,
that's what I'm interested in writing about - what it's like not to do so well
at that.''

One thing she especially loves about writing, she says, is that the ideas ''come
out of the subconscious already changed.''

''It wouldn't occur to me if I were writing about you that I couldn't describe
you accurately,'' she says. ''But for my purposes I would want us to be on the
beach at Atlantic City today. So boom! There we are at the beach. And then even
Ann couldn't predict that the seagulls would be having a fight that day. I don't
think it's some jigsaw puzzle that you put together with art. I think you go out
there and see that there are no clear pieces. And that you can do a lot with the
pieces and have not necessarily just one puzzle.''

'A Particular Group of People'

In much of her work, many of the characters search for, and can't seem to find,
a sense of community. They may travel around, often from coast to coast, but
they don't seem to know, or care, where they are. Is this something she senses
as a characteristic of our society?

''It's a particular group of people,'' she says. ''I don't think the whole
nation is out there in their wagons simply crisscrossing the Interstates.'' Her
generation, she adds, the kinds of people she has written about in many of her
stories and in her novels ''Chilly Scenes of Winter'' and ''Falling in Place,''
had a great deal of mobility. ''A lot of people from my generation got the idea
that they were free agents pretty early on,'' she says. ''And then I think that
the war in Vietnam made people make choices that were either terrible
compromises to them or scared them to death, or that embarrassed them, and so I
think that partly as a response to the Vietnam War, when that was finally over,
people had to make peace with what stand they had taken then and what they had
gone through, either having left the country or protesting the war or being
thrown in jail if it went that far.

''In some cases I think the political upheaval made people want to grab on to a
life pretty fast. And I think that they did it too young and they did it on the
defensive. And it didn't often work. And then, having been conditioned No. 1 for
a lot of freedom and No. 2 for a lot of social pressures, the war in particular,
they got to a point where they at least thought that they wanted to start
deciding for themselves, and that's when they were 25 years old or so, fairly
affluent, educated if not overeducated, used to movement, and a lot of them hit
the road, or joined groups, or got divorced. This was in the 70's, as a response
to the 60's.

''Today these people are quite security conscious, and they want it on all
levels; they want the double bolts on the door, and they want it in terms of
what they think is a viable career, and they want it with all the props of the
status quo - from other human beings to Eames chairs.''

'Impossible' in New York

With one exception, writing isn't harder or easier in Virginia than it was in
New York, says Miss Beattie, who herself travels around quite a bit and wrote
''Love Always'' in the summer of '84 while staying in a rented house in Vermont
and visiting with friends.

''Very rarely do I do a very long project like a novel, but I must admit that I
found that kind of sustained project absolutely impossible in New York City,''
she says. ''Because New York is New York. I need more quiet than that in order
to do something that long. I'm out of my element writing a novel, it doesn't
come naturally, and to keep up my attention and not be diverted by the plights
of my friends - which are very real plights - is impossible. They have very bad
days, the subways do break down, people do do horrible things to them in
business, they stab them in the back all the time. There's no way you can put
your answering machine on hold and not tune in at 5 o'clock to see what the
upshot is of your friend who was mugged the day before. But I didn't leave to
write a novel. I left because I couldn't stand talking about real estate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ann Beattie

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH U.S.-HANOI PARLEY NEXT WEEK ON MISSING

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


The United States and Vietnam will hold talks on the highest level in nine years
next Monday in Hanoi, the State Department announced today.

The purpose of the meeting is to lay the groundwork for resolving the problem of
the nearly 1,800 Americans still unaccounted for in Vietnam.

Charles E. Redman, a department spokesman, said the United States hoped to build
on ''the significant increase'' in cooperation that has become apparent.

The American team will be headed by Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of
Defense, and by Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific affairs. Others in the group are Richard Childress, political and
military affairs director of the National Security Council staff at the White
House, and Anne Mills Griffiths, executive director of the League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia. To Meet With Foreign Minister
They will confer with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach and with a Deputy Foreign
Minister, Hoang Bich Son, Mr. Redman said.

This is the latest in a series of recent moves toward tackling the emotionally
charged issue of the Americans still not unaccounted for from the war. It is the
highest-level American delegation to visit Vietnam since Leonard Woodcock, then
the president of the United Auto Workers, visited Hanoi in 1977 on behalf of
President Jimmy Carter, to discuss normalization of relations.

The United States lists 1,797 Americans as unaccounted for in Vietnam, 700 in
the north and 1,097 in the south. In addition, 556 are listed as unaccounted for
in Laos, 82 in Cambodia, and 6 in China, for a total of 2,441.

Of this total, half are listed on a roll of killed in action, but bodies not
recovered. The other half is on the list of prisoners of war and missing in
action, but the Pentagon regards all but one of them as legally dead.

The one American still regarded legally as missing or captured, is Col. Charles
Shelton, an Air Force pilot, who is known to have been captured in Laos by
Pathet Lao forces on April 29, 1965, a Pentagon spokesman said today. He is
listed as missing or captured ''symbolically,'' the spokesman said, to
demonstrate American interest in the issue.

Since the end of the Vietnam war in 1975, the United States has received over
800 reports of first-hand sightings of people who are possibly Americans in
Indochina. The Pentagon, in a news release last month, said most of these cases
had been resolved as either fabrications or involving Americans who had returned
to the United States.

But 119 cases are still under investigation,'' it said.

Of these 119, there are 28 from North Vietnam, 74 from South Vietnam, 15 from
Laos and 2 from Cambodia.

Until the issue is resolved, the United States Government takes the position
that ''although we have been thus far been unable to prove that Americans are
still detained against their will, the information available to us precludes
ruling out that possibility.''

The United States has made this a priority issue before there can be discussion
about the establishment of diplomatic relations with Vietnam. The United States
has also said that Vietnam would have to agree to a formula for withdrawing its
160,000 troops from Cambodia and allowing open elections there.

High-Level Talks Proposed

Vietnam said in July that it wanted the issue of the missing American resolved
once and for all within two years.

It proposed high-level talks to discuss ways of dealing with the problem. The
United States agreed and originally scheduled the Armitage-Wolfowitz mission for
Aug. 23. But when Foreign Minister Thach said he had to go to Moscow on that
date, only Mr. Childress and Mrs. Griffiths went to Hanoi.

After that visit, the State Department said Sept. 3 that the discussions had
been ''the most positive'' to date.

There have since been follow-up talks between Mr. Childress and Vietnamese
officials at the United Nations. And last month, a joint United States-Vietnam
team searched for remains of Americans in a rural area six miles north of Hanoi
where a B-52 bomber crashed in December 1972. That effort ended Dec. 1, with
only slim hopes of identifying American servicemen from the unearthed bone
fragments. Information About Crash Sites State Department officials said the
United States had information about the sites of plane crashes and locations
where Americans were seen being taken prisoner, and that increased efforts could
make headway in clearing up many cases.

The Vietnamese have been handing over remains over the years. So far, 130
remains identified as Americans have been turned over since 1974, 17 from Laos,
and 2 from Cambodia. There is a persistent belief, based on what is said to be
plausible information from a Vietnamese refugee, that the remains of several
hundred Americans are stored in a Hanoi warehouse mortuary. This has been denied
by Vietnam.

In a related matter, the State Department announced that Laos had authorized a
team of American technical specialists to examine a site where an Air Force
AC-130 gunship crashed during the Vietnam war. A similar team was able to
recover the remains of 13 Americans in an excavation last February.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A BIT OF VIETNAM IS PLANTED IN CHINA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: XINGLONG, China


In a clearing between rice paddies, a shirtless youth pedals rhythmically on a
threshing machine. Close by, an old woman with a bun of silver hair cries across
the paddies to summon an idling water buffalo. Crickets chatter in the trees.

As the last sunlight fades, a new image enters the tableau, something not of
China at all. Along a pathway wending toward distant mountains a man on a
motorbike appears, his face hidden by a plastic pith helmet. A laughing girl
rides on the back seat. They look like something from the streets of Vietnam,
and they are.

This community in the southeast of Hainan Island, about 275 miles across the
Gulf of Tonkin from Vietnam, has something in common with hundreds of towns and
cities in the United States that are a world removed from the rice paddies of
Xinglong. Since 1978 people here have been adjusting to the influx of a large
number of refugees from Vietnam, who have brought with them a way of life and
expectations that have not always blended harmoniously with local tradition.

Out of Their Element

The taste for motorbikes and pith helmets has been readily accommodated. But
other differences have proved less easy to reconcile.

Although almost all of the refugees were ethnic Chinese, they were predominantly
urban dwellers in Vietnam, with little preparation for the rural milieu into
which they were cast. In addition they were grafted onto a community of migrants
that was already populous. Resentments were inevitable, especially when the
newcomers were granted exemption from the strict one-child-per-family policy
applied to others in Xinglong.

More than 5,500 outcasts from Vietnam arrived amid Xinglong's groves of bananas,
pepper and papaya over a period of 15 months. They joined more than 20,000
Chinese from two previous waves of forced migration, the first from Malaya
during the anti-Communist ''emergency'' of the 1950's and the second from
Indonesia in the mid-1960's, when a government crackdown on Communists broadened
into a wholesale assault on Chinese.

Together, the two earlier groups founded and developed the Xinglong state farm,
one of the largest rubber plantations on an island that counts rubber as its
economic mainstay.

The bulk of the exodus from Vietnam after the Communist takeover in the south in
1975 fell on other Asian nations, especially Thailand, and eventually on the
United States, which has taken in more than 700,000 people of Vietnamese
descent.

But in the late 1970's the problem lapped over into China. The Government in
Hanoi, moving progressively into the Soviet camp, turned hostile toward its
Chinese minority, prompting more than 280,000 Chinese to flee to their ancestral
homeland.

China, wary of the potentially unsettling consequences, chose to disperse most
to state farms across the southern provinces of Yunnan, Guangdong, Fujian and
Jiangxi, as well as in the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region. About 1,500 of the
refugees have subsequently been resettled with relatives in the West, but the
remainder have stayed on the farms. Hainan has one of the largest
concentrations.

Problems Glossed Over

Recently, Xinglong suffered its worst shock in years when a refugee attacked a
neighboring family, slaying the parents and two children before killing himself.

The crime problem, like others, is glossed over by local Communist Party
officials who accompany visitors to the farm. But cracks in the presentation
begin to show when a visitor talks to one of the refugees spontaneously.

Moments after the farm's propaganda secretary, Li Guoliang, had said that no
more than a handful of the young people from Vietnam had shown any interest in
leaving for the West, the first youth approached said that it was his main aim.

''Go to America? Of course!'' said Xie Shouzhi, at 22 the oldest of seven
children who came to Xinglong with their parents from a rural county outside
Haiphong. ''People say that things in foreign countries are very good, much
better than here.''

As if to advertise his preference, the young rubber worker wore jeans and a
made-in-Hong Kong T-shirt.

The keenest source of the jealousies generated by the transplantation of
outsiders is the differentiated family planning policy. According to Mr. Li, the
rule for the refugees from Vietnam is that a second child is permitted once the
first child reaches the age of 6, with an ascending scale of monthly
''administrative fees,'' or fines, for every child thereafter. Among earlier
settlers and the Chinese population of Hainan in general, heavy pressure for
abortion arises after the first child, regardless of the interval.

According to figures compiled by the United Nations, more than 30,000 children
have been born to refugee families since they arrived in China, with some
families having as many as seven and eight children. It is one reason why the
Government has appealed to the world body for help in resettling some of the
refugee families in the West.

Hanoi Draws Their Hatred

The hopes of many at Xinglong seemed captured by a postcard of San Francisco
displayed prominently on the living room sideboard in the home of Liang Royuan,
the 50-year-old deputy leader of the state farm's July 1 Production Brigade,
whose cousin emigrated to the United States.

Otherwise, one of the main factors pulling the refugees together seemed to be a
common loathing for the Government in Hanoi, which confiscated the homes and
property of many of the refugees before loading them aboard trains and forcing
them to ford rivers at the Chinese frontier.

Mr. Liang said that his family had lived in Vietnam for three generations after
his grandfather left China in the 1920's to seek a better living under the
French in Indochina.

''When it came time to fight the French, we made our contributions, and later
against the Americans, too,'' he said. ''Then, after Ho Chi Minh died, the
Vietnamese party became hostile to China and threw us out. How can we be
anything but bitter?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of China; photo of Liang Royuan (NYT/John F. Burns); photo of
coffee beans at weight center (NYT)

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

For a One-Term, Six-Year Presidency

BYLINE: By The following article was co-authored by Griffin B. Bell, Attorney
General from 1977 to 1979; Herbert Brownell, Attorney General, 1953 to 1957;
William E. Simon, Secretary of the Treasury, 1974 to 1977; and Cyrus R. Vance,
Secretary of State, 1977 to 1980. They serve as national co-chairmen of the
Committee for a Single Six-Year Presidential Term.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


Once again, thanks to President Reagan's observations about the 22d Amendment,
the nation is turning its attention to the Presidential term. How long can - or
should - a chief executive run the country? Does re-election enhance or diminish
a President's ability to govern effectively?

Mr. Reagan has advocated repeal of the 22d Amendment so that Presidents may
again run for an unlimited number of four-year terms. We agree that it is time
to repeal the 22d Amendment: However, we believe a new amendment should replace
it. It is our belief - a belief shared by many Americans - that the national
interest would be better served by a Constitutional amendment providing for a
single six-year term.

The idea of a single term is older than the Republic. The length and number of
Presidential terms was debated at the Constitutional Convention, and the
decision was left to the discretion of George Washington. Once in office, he ran
for a second term - but reluctantly - because he believed that service in
official capacities should be limited. Sixteen Presidents since Washington,
beginning with Andrew Jackson and continuing through Jimmy Carter, have endorsed
a single six-year term as a preferrable alternative to multiple terms. The
six-year term proposal was a part of the Democratic platform in 1913 and passed
the Senate that year.

The single six-year term has received renewed attention in recent years because
of widespread bipartisan concern that, under the two-term system, re-election
pressures lie at the heart of our inability to manage complex, long-term
national problems, domestic and foreign. Opponents of the idea declare that the
potential hazards facing ''lame duck'' Presidents under a single term outweigh
the damage now caused by delays in decision-making during a re-election
campaign. Historical evidence contradicts that view.

According to Kenneth P. O'Donnell, President John F. Kennedy's appointments
secretary, in early 1963 Mr. Kennedy told Senator Mike Mansfield that although
he knew there was no future for us in Vietnam, he could not expect to be
re-elected, given the mood of the country, if he withdrew American forces before
the election.

Richard M. Nixon acknowledged in his book ''The Real War'' that he exaggerated
the potential of detente in 1972 because he wanted ''political credit'' in the
coming election. The break-in at the Watergate Hotel and subsequent upheaval
were directly attributable to the Nixon Administration's obsession with
re-election.

Gerald R. Ford did not press to a conclusion the strategic arms agreements
reached at the Vladivostok summit meeting when those agreements were opposed by
his challenger in the Presidential primaries, Ronald Reagan. In 1980, the Middle
East autonomy negotiations were not pushed by President Jimmy Carter as
vigorously as they might have been in a non-election year.

In the 1984 election, if President Reagan did not have to face the Federal
deficit as a campaign issue, he would likely have acknowledged its importance
earlier and begun addressing it as early as 1982 and 1983, rather than now.

These examples indicate that important policy decisions are often deferred
because of the enormous pressures a re-election campaign places on Presidents.
The result is that long-term foreign and domestic policies often lack
steadiness, continuity and predictability.

Regardless of party affiliation or popularity, all Presidents have delayed some
of the hardest and most important decisions until a second term. Lyndon B.
Johnson summed it up when he said, after leaving office: ''If a fellow knew from
the beginning that he had a definite limitation and the bell is going to ring at
a certain time, he might be able to tackle some of the problems he's inclined to
postpone.''

What of being a ''lame duck'' President? That factor is largely a myth. If it
now appears more difficult for Presidents to get the job done at the beginning
of the second term, it is because there is a strong temptation built into the
two-term system to defer the hard, unpopular decisions until the second term.

Dwight D. Eisenhower, as the only President to have served two full terms under
the 22d Amendment, provides a test case of the ''lame duck'' theory. Despite
Democratic control of Congress in both terms, he won passage of more
constructive legislation in his second term than in his first. The time spent on
re-election activity was minimized, permitting the President to function more
effectively as a political leader. In 1959, he declared he would veto major
spending bills and, if overridden, would increase taxes. That decision would
have been very unpopular in a first-term election period but it helped
contribute to low inflation and unemployment in his second term.

Ronald Reagan now has the opportunity to dispel the ''lame duck'' notion that
clouds perceptions of his second term. We're already talking about who will be
the next President. Yet the responsibility for managing this nation is in the
hands of today's, not tomorrow's, chief executive. That responsibility begins
the moment a President takes office and remains until the moment his term ends.

President Eisenhower entered his second term opposing the 22d Amendment for the
same reason as President Reagan. He left office a vigorous proponent of a single
six-year term because of his strong belief that he was able to function more
effectively once the pressures of re-election were removed. Perhaps experience
will also lead Mr. Reagan to this view.

As the nation approaches 1987, the 200th anniversary of the drafting of the
Constitution, it is appropriate to respond to Thomas Jefferson's plea that each
generation re-examine it in light of contemporary needs. Dr. Milton Eisenhower,
founder of the current national movement for the single six-year Presidential
term, spoke for many Americans when he wrote that he favored a single six-year
term so that a President would ''have no incentive to propose and fight for
measures conceived mainly to enhance his chances for re-election or merely to
confound the opposition.''

Rather than relegate Mr. Reagan prematurely to a ''lame duck'' status, we would
more profitably spend our time determining how we can enable a modern President
to manage government more effectively during his whole term. The single six-year
term is the right place to start, and Congressional hearings are the first
essential step to put the issue squarely before the American people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 1985

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


International Washington accused Libya of aiding the terrorists who carried out
airport attacks in Rome and Vienna last Friday and said the United States was
ready to work with other governments to ''exert pressure'' on the Qaddafi
Government to halt its export of terrorism. The attacks killed 18 people,
including 5 Americans, and wounded more than 110 people. [Page A1, Column 6.]

Investigators believe the attacks in Rome and Vienna were planned in Beirut and
partly coordinated in Switzerland. Officials in Rome believe the terrorists were
recruited in Palestinian refugeee neighborhoods of Beirut, flown to Geneva,
where they were given money and instructions, and then sent by train to Rome and
Vienna. [A4:4-6.]

The two terrorists who attacked an airport check-in lounge in Vienna have told
investigators they planned to take Israeli hostages and fly them out of the
country aboard an El Al plane, Austrian officials said. They said the terrorists
had said they were followers of Abu Nidal, a Palestinian leader who opposes any
accommodation with Israel. [A4:1-3.]

Three days before the attacks on airports in Rome and Vienna, airlines around
the world were warned that groups of ''Libyan-backed terrorists'' were being
sent to Europe for holiday time assaults, airline and security officials said.
They said Italy and Spain were areas where the terrorists were planning to go.
[A1:4-5.]

Pakistanis' rights were restored by President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq. He declared
an end to eight and a half years of martial law. [A1:3.]

King Hussein arrived in Syria for talks with an old enemy, President Hafez
al-Assad, against whom the Jordanian ruler almost went to war five years ago.
The two leaders held two meetings, one a private session that was said to have
lasted three hours. [A2:1-3.]

Winnie Mandela was arrested for the second time in eight days for breaking the
South African Government's restrictions on her movements. White plainclothesmen
in unmarked cars detained her after forcing her car to pull over on a freeway
leading to Soweto from Johannesburg. [A3:4-6.]

Americans and Vietnamese will confer in Hanoi next Monday, the State Department
announced. The purpose of the meeting is to lay the groundwork for resolving the
problem of the nearly 1,800 Americans still unaccounted for in Vietnam.
[A2:1-2.]

Nicaraguan rebels killed 1,143 Government soldiers in 1985 and suffered 4,608
dead, according to Nicaragua's Defense Minister, Humberto Ortega Saavedra. It
was the first time the Government has given out military casualty totals.
[A2:1-3.]

National

A key provision of a new law designed to balance the Federal budget by 1991 is
unconstitutional, the Justice Department said. It told a Federal court that the
law's procedures leading to automatic cuts in Government spending violated the
constitutional doctrine of separation of powers. [A1:1.]

Extensive investments in America have been made by Japan and other countries in
the last several years. Local officials are virtually unanimous in praising the
social and cultural impact of the foreign investments, and say they may also be
helpful catalysts in promoting greater efficiency and competitiveness in
American businesses. [A1:4-6.] Chicago City Council elections must be held in
March in seven predominantly black and Hispanic wards, a Federal District judge
ordered. The result of the elections could mean that Harold Washington,
Chicago's first black Mayor, might control a majority bloc on the 50-member city
council for the first time since he took office in April 1983. [A6:1-2.]

A jury convicted 10 neo-Nazis of racketeering charges based on a cross-country
crime spree and of plotting to bring about a racist revolution. The jury in
Seattle, Washington, heard 14 weeks of testimony from 370 witnesses and then
deliberated for 55 hours over nine days. [A6:1-4.]

Metropolitan

The M.T.A. is studying the possibility of allowing private companies to bid
against the New York City Transit Authority to operate some bus routes. The
Metropolitan Transportation Authority said it was acting under strong pressure
from Reagan Administration officials. [A1:2.]

Drinking patterns are changing markedly in the New York metropolitan area,
according to operators of taverns, restaurants and liquor stores. The managers
say their customers are buying fewer alcoholic beverages because of worries
about crackdowns on drunken driving and health concerns. [A1:1-3.]

A reputed Mafia leader, Matthew (Matty the Horse) Ianniello, his business
partner, Benjamin Cohen, and seven associates were convicted in a racketeering
case that involved skimming more than $2 million from bars and restaurants. The
jury, which acquitted a tenth defendant, deliberated for three days at the end
of a one-month trial in Manhattan. [B3:4-6.]

Fifty-four passengers were hurt when a six-car commuter train crashed into a
concrete bumper at the end of a track in the N.J. Transit terminal in Hoboken.
The cause of the accident was under investigation. [B2:1-4.] Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1985, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'I HAVE A DREAM,' MUSIC-DRAMA ON DR. KING

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


THE Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was one of the great orators of modern
times. The civil rights leader and apostle of nonviolent protest developed a
style of public address that fused the sacred and the secular, the musical and
the prosaic into a passionate inspirational rhetoric invoking a mystical faith
in the triumph of humanity's nobler instincts. Dr. King's was a Christian
philosophy that insisted, ''You must love your enemies - you must meet hate with
love.''

''I Have a Dream'' weaves the texts of Dr. King's speeches, sermons and other
writings along with 28 musical numbers into a pageantlike music-drama recounting
his life and times, beginning with the Montgomery, Ala., bus boycotts and ending
with his assassination in Memphis in 1968, at the age of 39. The production,
directed by Woodie King Jr., significantly expands the role of music from the
show's 1976 Broadway production. ''We Shall Overcome,'' ''His Eye Is on the
Sparrow,'' ''Precious Lord'' and ''Free at Last'' are among the most familiar of
the freedom songs, spirituals and gospel hymns interpolated into the documentary
text adapted by Josh Greenfeld.

The abundance of music helps give the play a Brechtian distance and
monumentality. It also underscores the role of the church in Dr. King's crusade
and of black church music in his oratory. His most famous invocations - ''I have
a dream,'' ''I have been to the mountain,'' ''Mine eyes have seen the glory'' -
were hymnlike catch phrases that became recurrent motifs in cascading emotional
exhortations. Bruce Strickland, who plays Dr. King in the revival at the New
Federal Theater, has obviously studied recordings of his most famous speeches,
for he re-creates in detail their rich soaring cadences.

Dr. King's speeches are the carefully spaced high points of a play that offers a
straightforward chronology of his public life, interspersed with a few short
family vignettes. An ensemble of four actors portrays other black civil rights
leaders, demonstrators, members of Dr. King's family, white Southern bigots and
John and Robert Kennedy. Many scenes are accompanied by slides of events, or of
appropriate scenery, projected onto three panels at the rear of the stage. Among
the events the play recounts are Dr. King's trip to India and his impressions of
poverty in Bombay, his winning of the Nobel Peace Prize and his controversial
opposition to the Vietnam War. ''I Have a Dream'' forcefully reminds us of the
huge personal risks involved in civil rights activism in the 1950's and 60's.
Dr. King's home was bombed. He was arrested many times and once was held in
solitary confinement until President Kennedy intervened after a desperate call
to the White House from Dr. King's wife, Coretta.

''I Have a Dream'' tells the King story clearly but not very dramatically. The
production is static and the acting wooden. While Mr. Strickland recaptures much
of the power of Dr. King's oratory, he fails to project substantial personality
into the everyday Martin Luther King Jr. The idea of using gospel and freedom
songs as a sort of Greek chorus is promising, but the individual singers in the
show lack the vocal resources to make the music soar. It shouldn't be so - the
music and oratory ought to be interwoven into a stirring celebration.

But despite the crudeness of the production, one comes away from ''I Have a
Dream'' sobered, remembering words spoken early in the show: ''If a man hasn't
discovered something he would die for, he isn't fit to live.'' Road to Freedom I
HAVE A DREAM, adapted by Josh Greenfeld; directed by Woodie King Jr.; musical
director, Lee Coward; set design and slides, Ina Mayhew; costume designer, Judy
Dearing; light designer, Richard Lew; stage manager, Malik. Presented by the
Henry Street Settlement's New Federal Theater, Mr. King, producer. At 466 Grand
Street. Soloist and ensembleDwight Witherspoon Rosa Parks, deranged woman and
ensemble Diane Weaver Bus driver, John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy and ensembleJames
Curt Bergwall Martin Luther King Jr.Bruce Strickland Ralph Abernathy, Martin L.
King Sr., A. Phillip Randolph and ensemble Herman Levern Jones Coretta Scott
King and ensemble Chequita Jackson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
